*


DIO


A





A 














ading Plant)



2
AD
BUN




(Painting by Marcelino Sanchez)


gadla kor
Wosl anullung
P
just having a good time
swinging and smoking.
Well yes, Chesterfield.
Thoy Satota


all you could asl for


THEY'RE MILDER .. . THEY TASTE BETTE!


1 1938 LrecETT & MVERS TOBACCO CA


15


A


September 7, 1933


PAGE 1


Coa PthtiO
Of MIo Ola Oruer


An Interview With Gen. Jose Alejandrino
By Federico Mangahas


Gen. JOSE ALEJANDRINO


y HEN a person
is very young,
he is usually
very sure and very
wrong. This may be
said of any young
generation so-called in
any historical period.
The reason is simple
ignorance.
Thus today, unless
one desires to get
worked up for a speci¬
fic public effect, a
young person is apt
to regard men of an
earlier epoch as creatures a trifle comic and sad
in the very reverence in which they are generally
held in public for ceremonial occasions. One only
has to observe the reactions of the younger elements
in a crowd on occasions when General Aguinaldo
and his veterans go out to help celebrate a nation¬
al holiday to find out how common the attitude.
Fortunately for the young, ignorance is not a
permanent condition beyond hope of change. It
speedily gives way to opportunities of knowledge
in the direct contacts one makes with the objects
of gross misunderstanding.
General Jose Alejandrino, a surviving veteran
of the Philippine Revolution and the subsequent
Filipino-American war, and a representative object
of such misunderstanding, can be most helpful in
revising a young person’s attitude toward that past
the virtues of which have largely been embalmed
only in exaggerated rhetoric.
In his La Senda del Sacrificio, an English edi¬
tion of which is due to come out soon, the general
recounts his memories of the days before, during,
and after the Revolution in a manner that the read-
er will find salutary in revising an attitude such
as was mentioned above. In recalling his associa¬
tions with that group of which Rizal was the out¬
standing light during his student days in Europe,
with those men by whose side or against whom he
fought, he vouchsafes the reader a rich sheaf of
intimate glimpses of men as human beings, as fol¬
lowers and as leaders, certainly illuminating in
checking up on the actions of figures of today.
Notable qualities to be noted in the memoirs of
the general are a stubborn independence of crite¬
rion, an eye for illuminating intimate detail, and
an irrepressible sense of humour seldom to be met
with in the writings now available about the days
of the Revolution.
In the chapter on Rizal—General Alejandrino
acknowledges a good deal of his ideals to Rizal—
the general speaking of student days in Europe re¬
calls that there lived in France at the time a famous
abbe, who was a distinguished member of the fa¬
culty of theology at the Sorbonne. This abbe was
Ernest Renan, later a doubter, author of the fa¬
mous Life of Jesus, in which book the life of the
Master was treated in a way radically different
from that of other writers.
According to Rizal, says the general, Pope Leo
XIII’s opinion was sought on the writings of Renan.


The pope was reported to have said in this connec-
tion:
“If Renan is sincere in his doubts he deserves
the gratitude of every good Catholic—for he has
done more for the Catholic church than our high
prelates, who have been lying in a state of lethargy,
because of the blind faith of the church followers
in her fundamental dogmas. The serious doubts
have aroused the prelates from their lethargy and
galvanized their intellect. In their eagerness to
refute the doubts, the primates of our church were
compelled to make intensive studies."
To which Rizal, according to the general, added
that the lesson to be derived from the little story
is that flattery produces mental coma in many men,
but well founded criticism galvanize their intelli¬
gence and spur them to action.
This is a principle that has been consistently ex¬
emplified by the general in the writing of his mem¬
oirs and his political career up to his retirement
within recent years. “If,” he says, "in my political
career I have always been on the side of the op-
position and if in my appraisal of the public acts of
our leaders I have at times used strong language,
it is because I have merely followed this teaching of
Rizal."
There is a certain satiric vein in the character
of the general which prevents undue sentimentaliz-
ing over things and men of the past such as is to be
seen in the attitude of many people who find refer¬
ence to the past a speedy way of stirring up the
patriotic spirit in others. No man is more eager to
acknowledge his weaknesses especially before others
have had a chance to point them out to him. Thus
he was not ashamed to admit in his memoirs of oc-
casions when he and his companions had run away
from the battlefield by reason of certain compelling
circumstances. A high Filipino leader today, ac¬
cording to the general, likes that part best of all,
presumably for what it reminded him of similar
experiences in the field.
If one must have an appraisal of General Agui¬
naldo different from that of a prejudiced genera¬
tion that could not appreciate his sacrifices, one
must go to General Alejandrino or his book to see
a much maligned man given justice without disre¬
garding the patent faults of the president of the
first Philippine Republic. Once asked why General
Aguinaldo, like himself, would not do anything to
rectify the many damaging stories being circulated
about him regarding his integrity as a leader,
General Alejandrino remembered the dictum of
Lincoln:
“If I were to try to read, much less answer, all
the attacks made on me, this shop might as well
be closed for any other business. I do the very best
I know how and I mean to keep doing so until the
end. If the end brings me out all right, what is
said against me won’t amount to anything. If the
end brings me out wrong, ten angels swearing I was
right would make no difference."
It is an attitude like this that can do much to
enable the young to appreciate the stolid indiffer-
ence of old men in the face of public misunderstand-
ing.


PAGE 2





September 7, 1933


ARE YOU PROTECTED


A RAUR.


OINE of the cogs in your scheme of pro¬
se viding for the fufure should be a program
of building up profection and security for your
family through insurance. Not only does if
establish security for your family in the case
of your death but it also means a fund saved
and available in cash when you need it.
Endowment and Life Plans:--
Embodying


Double Indemnity Accident Benefit
Total Disability Benefit


Extended Insurance and
Other Standard Feafures


BOARD OF DIRECTORS:—


MIGUEL UNSON
President
WENCESLAO TRINIDAD
Vice-President
JOSE DE LEON Y JOVEN
Treasurer
EULOGIO RODRIGUEZ
Secretary
LEOPOLDO R. AGUINALDO
Director
VICENTE VILLANUEVA
Director
FULGENCIO BORROMEO
Director


ARSENIO N. LUZ
General Agent
HIPOLITO BARRENENGOA
Assistant General Agent and Agency Manager
Natinnal
Ltte
Anauranre On.


Office:—REGINA BUILDING
Escolta and David
P. O. Box 676
Tels. Home Offices: 2-32-29—


General Agency 3 2-39-07


2-39-08


- cut this coupon -
ARSENIO N. LUZ, General Agent,
NATIONAL LIFE INSURANCE CO.,
P. O. BOX 676, MANILA."
Sir:
Please send me complete information
about the policies of the NATIONAL LIFE In¬
SURAnce Co, without any obligation on my
part.
Name



Address


Maa a ag a ma maag a na man Pag ana na ana na MO


September 7, 1933


PAGE 3


THE NEW STUDENT SPIRII


—TUDENTS have recently come into the limelight. They have
) come to realize that they are a part of this nation’s people,
directly affected as the rest by any development, such as the HHC
law, which affects the country’s future, and thus have stirred and
made themselves heard. They not only have their opinion on the
independence act, but insist that this opinion be known and un¬
derstood. Hence student demonstrations for and against the law.
There are, of course, those who would poke fun at this new
phase of student activity, condescending to notice it only because
the whole thing is amusing. It is looked upon as no more than
a harmless expression of juvenile enthusiasm and love for dis¬
play. It is, for example, supposed in certain quarters that the
students are now basking in the glory of a newly found impor¬
tance—but an importance created merely by the willingness of
local politicians to court student favor.
It would be unfortunate should our students feel disheartened
at the thought that their honest efforts to interest themselves in
the future of their country are not meeting with enough encourage¬
ment. There are those who, forgetting their own youth, refuse to
believe that young people are capable of laying aside frivolities
and interesting themselves in serious matters. There is more
senility than sense in this.


In a country like ours—still steeped, in spite of tremendous
progress, in superstition—where the older generation as a rule
has no more than elementary appreciation, if at all, of things
political, economic, and social, it would be a calamity indeed
for our students, with their superior understanding of things, to
refuse to be interested in vital national affairs like a question
involving independence. Even allowing for the tendency of youth
towards rashness, for lack of experience, as between students of
college and even high school ranking and the mass of the ignorant
who are hardly better than illiterates, one may safely follow the
lead of the mentally, if inexperienced, trained young men and
women.
Our country’s hope for better government (for we need a
better government reasonably free from inefficiency and graft)
lies in the idealism and better training of our younger people.
Theirs is the only spirit, for none other is available here to-day,
that can push the country better to further and more lasting
progress.
Our students should make themselves felt more. By their
good behavior: orderliness, prudence, they have shown themselves
fit to help in the weighty task of pulling this country of ours
forward.


PAGE 4


September 7, 1933





THe WVLLR On the POLTSSTRONI


15 years, that Quezon agreed that
no better independence bill than the
HHC act was obtainable, and that
Quezon stated measure would be
accepted by the legislature and the
people.
Sabido further disclosed that Sen.
Key Pittman stated in the presence
of Quezon that if the independence
bill was rejected, no independence
legislation would be discussed in
congress within the next 10, 20, or
40 years, if at all. At this point,
Quezon Lieutenant Delgado object¬
ed, called the Pittman statement
hearsay, but Roxas hastened to the
aid of Sabido, declared it was no
hearsay, for the statement was
made in his presence, promised Del¬
gado he (Roxas) was ready to give
documentary evidence to prove his
point.
Tirona followed Sabido. Then as
the new majority had apparently
had enough of the Osrox shelling,
the house adjourned.
The senate was unusually sedate
to-day. Osmena issued a statement
(outside of the senate) that the
plebiscite idea was Quezon’s, and
that when he came out for the same
idea, he had in mind such a plebis¬
cite as would involve only accept¬
ance or rejection of the HHC law.
The subject of speculation now is
this business of giving the women
the right to vote on the plebiscite.
Popular suspicion is that a lot of
juggling is going on, the intention
being to corner the female votes.
It is believed that the women would
get the vote if they could be induced
to vote a certain way. Otherwise,
no vote.
The majority, after a caucus, de¬
cided to bait the women, to give
them the privilege to vote in the
projected plebiscite.


Reading censure in the resolution,
the Osrox men saw red, blazed
fiercely at the majority. Especial¬
ly offensive to Osrox men is the sec-
ond proviso of the resolution.


his


Part of the crowd that gathered for the mission group in San Miguel, Bulacan.
address.


Inset shows Senator Sergio Osmena reading


At the Osrox rally in Sta. Cruz, Laguna. Inset shows Representative Manuel Roxas delivering a speech.


Anqust 29, 1933
TO easy sailing is in sight for
the new majority’s plebiscite
IN masterpiece. Osrox sure of
defeat, is nevertheless fighting
every inch of the “bloody” terrain.
Unusually spirited and bitter was
to-day’s house encounter, with
Roxas leading the house Osrox
forces. It was the majority bloc’s
resolution calling for the holding of
a national plebiscite on the HHC
bill which furnished the fireworks.
Resolution reads:
" Joint resolution providing for a
plebiscite prior to action by the Phil-
ippine Legislature on the acceptance
or rejection of the Hare-Hawes-Cut-
ting act.
“Whereas, all the members of the
present legislature have been elected
under a mandate to work for an im¬
mediate, complete, and absolute inde¬
pendence of the Philippine Islands;
“Whereas, the Hare-Hawes-Cutting
act does not provide for immediate,
complete, and absolute independence
and the provisions thereof are not in
accord with the specific instructions
sent by the Philippine legislature to
the ninth Philippine commission, and
“Whereas, in accordance with the
true principles of democracy, no ac¬
tion should be taken by the agencies
and servants of the people contrary to
the latter’s express mandate without
first obtaining the people’s sanction
thereof:
Now, therefore, be it
“Resolved by the senate and house
of representatives of the Philippines
in legisiature assembled and by the
authority of the same;
“That a plebiscite be held to find
out the actual desire of the Filipino
people before the Philippine legislature
takes action on Hare-Hawes-Cutting
act.


stressed the inconsistency of the
majority, that of Quezon, especially.
He declared that Quezon approved
the Hare bill which provided indep-
endence in eight years and required
the retention by the U. S. of naval
and military reservations. Also
cited was Quezon’s approval of a
senate bill giving independence in
15 years.
No less spirited was Sabido’s
firing. Sabido not only talked but
made sensational disclosures tend¬
ing to show that what the legisla¬
tive mission accomplished in Wash-
ington had the sanction of Supremo
Quezon. Cables, confidential in na¬
ture, were disclosed showing that
Quezon approved independence in


So aroused were the Osrox
minority that they consumed the
whole of to-day’s session in de¬
fense of their stand, in assault upon
majority attitude. To fiery Roxas,
Sabido, and Tirona, even potent
majority listened, could do no more
than explode feeble retorts.
Roxas led the Osrox attack:


"I object to the second proviso (of
the resolution) which states that the
law is not in accord with the specific
instructions of the legislature to the
mission. Indirectly, it accuses the mis¬
sion of violating specific instructions
in accepting the law. The mission was
sent to the United States not to work
for immediate independence but for
tan early grant of independence'...
Roxas, in the course of his speech,


September 7, 1933





PAGE 5


August 30, 1933
T HE business in the house today
proved to be a continuation
(although something of an anti¬
climax, the Osrox big guns being
silent) of yesterday’s fray over the
plebiscite resolution which the Os¬


Dean Maximo M. Kalaw: lambasts Que¬
zon again.


rox gladiator of the day was Mi¬
samis Oriental’s Vamenta, who ac¬
cused the new majority of irres¬
ponsibility, warned them to be more
careful in the exercise of their pow¬
er based on their number. But the
new majority was not without its
champion. Rep. Adduru, speaking
in favor of the resolution, maintain¬
ed that the mission disobeyed in¬
structions and that it was the desire
of the people to obtain immediate,
absolute, and complete independ¬
ence.
The senators have evidently got-
ten tired of oratory or are storing
up energy for coming outbursts,
for inside the senate chamber things
were so quiet one would think the
senior legislators were in church.
But in a caucus held by the new
majority, things were not so quiet,
with Quezon entertaining his
cohorts with his deadly marksman¬
ship—at the expense of, of course,
the minority.
Quezon might have sensed that
the ferocious onslaught by the Os¬
rox in the house on August 30 was
telling on his soldiery, and to play
safe, herded them in caucus, and
explained matters. Quezon admitt-
ed the plebiscite idea was his but
stated that he was led to come out
for it because of the Osrox chal-
lenge (delivered in Iloilo). He
denied that his famous Formula
No. 2 (providing independence in
10 years) has any resemblance to
the HHC bill except in the matter
of the transition period, revealed
that he had a letter of Commission-
er Osias openly admitting the mis¬
sion did not work for a shorter
period of transition as the mission-
ers feared that such a move might
invite presidential veto.
Still for the plebiscite, the sen¬
ate president indicated he desired to
see it pushed through but warned


that dilatory tactics might result
in the abandonment of the plebis¬
cite idea and the adoption of the
convention proposition.
Leader
Quezon, however, made it plain that
he would oppose action by the leg¬
islature to act on the law as this
would deprive the people of a chance
to be heard.
To newspaper men the Cebu so¬
lon, Osmena, openly admitted he is
in favor of giving the fair sex a
chance to vote on the bill, but
placed himself on record as against
the majority plan of imposing a
cedula tax on women, declaring that
it is immaterial in the exercise of
the women’s right to take part in
public affairs.
August 31, 1933
RACTICALLY nothing was
done this day toward arriving
A at a definite decision regard¬
ing the HHC bill. Tycoon Quezon


was busy ironing out differences
between the senate and the house on
the budget problem. Evidence of
growing interest in favor of wom¬
an suffrage was noticed in both
houses. On the floor of the house
the solons listened during the morn¬
ing and afternoon sessions to Ca¬
vite’s Tirona, who ably defended the
acts of the mission.
On the other hand, the senate ad-
journed almost immediately after
calling the roll. Presiding Officer
Clarin named three members to re¬
arrange the senate rooms, while the
secretary announced that Senator
Belo had filed a bill seeking to en¬
franchise the women.
Cebu’s Don Sergio handed out a
press statement expressing prefer¬
ence for the plebiscite over the na¬
tional convention. Commissioner
Osias came out with a statement
controverting the caucus speech of
Quezon and challenging the senate


head to make a real exposure of all
the true facts relative to the com-
munications between the mission-
ers and the local leaders.
Said Osias:
“I take it that Senate President
Quezon considered a short period (re¬
ferring to Quezon’s announcement that
he has in his possession a letter from
Resident Commissioner Osias report-
ing and admitting that the mission
did not insist on a shorter transition
period, fearing that a shorter period
might be vetoed by the president)
‘too short, too violent.' If not, why
did he write Senator Hawes to make
the period in the Hawes-Cutting bill
of 1930, ten years instead of five?
Why did he advocate a ten-year period
in his official report to the Philippine
legislature in 19312 Why did he write
Commissioner Guevara and myself in
a letter on September 18, 1931, re¬
commending a change from five years
to ten years?
"And while we are on the subject
of unearthing, why does not Mr. Que¬
zon please unearth:
(Continued on page 63)


Do you still remember Charlie Chaplin
in the “Gold Rush” — when faced by
starvation he was forced to eaf a shoe?
Saturday's Tribune
carries this news—


Captain of “Ethel Edwards” Says Hle
And His Men Owe Their Lives to Shoes


Shown above: Capt. Ames, second from right, standing, with the
other officers and crew of the m.s. “Ethel Edwards”


The general belief that shoes
serve nothing but provide footwear
is held erroneous by Captain C. A.
Ames, master of the motorship
Ethel Edwards, who together with
his crew of 23 men were saved
from virtual starvation at Banta¬
yan island near Cebu with the help
of a few pairs ofehoes..


Shoes!


Shipments were made to Sy Chilo & Co., Chua Siong, and Kam Yu Tong of Laoang.
Samar—on the ETHEL EDWARDS, voyage 61 Out dated July 31st, 1933.


ESCO SHOESTORES


615 Escolta and 333 Legarda


PAGE 6





September 7, 1932


of the crowd of 5,000 which saw Filipinos of Chicago dance the "surt
on the stage in the background.


e World's Fair—
ilippines Day there.


The performers are seer


Philipoines
Day at the
WONOS Pdin


By R. BALTAZAR RONQUILLO
Chicago Correspondent of GRAPHIO


ACK of funds prevented the
Philippines from being
Eadequately represent¬
ed with exhibits at Chicago’s
World Fair—A Century of Pro¬
gress; from putting up, for in¬
stance, a pavilion such as gave
us tremendous publicity at the
French International Colonial
Exposition. Nothing daunted,
however, "Mabuhay” James King
Steele, executive secretary of the
local tourist bureau, tried his
best to inject a Philippine touch
into the World Fair. One result
of his efforts was the Philippines
Day, about which one of our
Chicago correspondents tells us
in the following article.
S the old song could be
paraphrased: “We say Ma¬
A
buhay—Under our blue sky—
When our friends sit by...
Five thousand guests "sat by
and joined "Mabuhay” James King
Steele and his chorus of fifty select
voices in singing that peppy song.
Their voices reverberated over the
dome of the Travel and Transport
Building. This was on the occasion
of Philippines Day in this “city
within a city” known as the World’s
Fair.
Believe it or not, "Mabuhay
Steele put over big a show that was
generally thought would turn out
to be common-place. For there are
many of these "special days" going


on in the Fair all the time, so that
visitors are apt not to give them a
particular hearing. And when a
Philippines Day falls on the same
date as a French-Canadian Day, it
is safe to conjecture, basing guesses
upon the law of averages, that the
big will take the greater portion of
the spoils.
But if the French-Canadians
had an edge in number, the Filipi¬
nos of Chicago had the generalship
supplied by the inimitable "Mabu¬
hay” Steele, whose ways of publi¬
city are a class in themselves. So
that when it came to a show-down,
the Philippines was first in the
calendar of activities, first in at¬
tendance, first in the richness and
color of its presentations, and first
in the rank and caliber of the men
invited as its special guests.
Floyd Gibbons was there, and so
was Vincent Lopez. And these are
just two of the notables that occu¬
pied the front lines. For there were
also Rufus C. Dawes, president of
the World’s Fair, Harry S. New,
U. S. Commissioner to the Fair,
Major-General Frank Parker of the
U. S. army, Rear-Admiral Wat T.
Cluverius of the U. S. navy, Mayor
Edward J. Kelly of Chicago, Yoshio
Moto, consul in Chicago for Japan.


the Chinese consul in Chicago, and
Burton Holmes, traveler and lectur¬
er of international reputation.
The program commenced with
the singing of the Philippine nation-
al anthem, followed by the hoisting
of the Philippine and American
flags after a brief ceremony con¬
ducted by President Dawes. This
was the second time that the Philip-
pine flag was hoisted officially in Il-


Rufus C. Dawes, president of Chicago's
World Fair—A Century of Pregress,
photographed as he spoke by long dist
ance telephone to Governor-General Frank
Murphy on Philippines Day at the Fair.


linois, the first being that on the
occasion of Mr. Steele’s first visit
to the Fair last Fall, when he first
broached the idea of a $200,000 ap-
propriation to put up a Philippine
pavilion. Whereas at its first hoist-
ing, the Philippine colors were
viewed by officials of the Fair and
a squad of soldiers that comprised
the flag’s guard of honor, its sec-
ond hoisting was viewed by
thousands of visitors who saw for
the first time the flag of the Fili¬
pinos. Immediately after the flag
was hoisted, an old man, slight of
frame and with gray hairs, came
trudging to the rear of the platform
and whispered to your correspond¬
ent that he was delighted to see the
Philippine flag once more. He had
been wounded by its brave defend¬
ers. Said he, further: "I am with
you in your struggle for freedom.
The formal ceremonies over, folk
dancing followed. And what folk¬
dancing that was, rendered by the
Filipino women of Chicago! They
are marvelous. All the grace and
color and charm of their sisters in
the homeland they have. Some
were dressed in the formal Filipina
costume, others in balintawak, some
danced the “carinosa," others the
"surtido."
Floyd Gibbons remarked, “It’s
really your women that possess the
butterfly costume.” Vincent Lopez,
the music master of America, liked
the costume so well that he posed


September 7, 1933


GRAP


PAGI


for a picture with Mrs. Beatriz de
Ronquillo. And he went further as
to inquire where he could buy a
terno of the "glorified costume.”
The men, on their part, displayed
the barong tagalog. They danced
in it, and like the women, had their
share of public commendation. But
of your correspondent, a young lady
visiting the Fair from Reno, Ne¬
vada, inquired if it would not be a
better idea to "wear a necktie with
the costume and tuck in the lower
portion of it"!
But let me continue my story. In
addition to the folk dances, there
were folk songs in the dialects, ren¬
dered by native artists, of course,
much to the enjoyment of the
crowd. Then there were demonstra-
tions of how to play the "yo-yo" by
two of the best performers among
our boys in Chicagoland. As they
performed, they were accompanied
by guitar music. Then there were
a Moro dance and a "fandango."
both of which were received en¬
thusiastically by the audience.
The forensic part of the program
was supplied by “Mabuhay” Steele,
who spoke of the Philippine parti¬
cipation in the Fair. In glowing
terms he lauded the achievements of
the Filipinos during the last 35
years of American occupation. He
laid stress on the commercial and
industrial importance of the islands
as the center of a world trade that
is gradually shifting from the At¬
lantic to the Pacific side. Mr.
(Continued on page 63)


Mrs. Bacalzo and Mrs. Dacanay and their partners dancing the “carinosa” during the Philippines Day at the Chicago World's Fair.


A ROTIRLBRORDMIITAID
BOTICA BOlE, the makers of the popular health builder BOIE'S
EMULSION, want all the children in the Philippines to parficipate in
their new campaign for this excellent fonic.


—DURING THE PRESENT MONTH OF SEPTEMBER FOR EVERY
BOTTLE OF BOLE'S EMULSION PURCHASED, YOUR DRUGGIST
WILL GIVE A TOY CONSISTING IN A FOURTEEN INCHES COD
FISH WITH ITS FISHING POLE AND CONTAINING A VERY IN¬
TERESTING STORY CALLED "FROM NORWAY TO THE PHILIP-
PINES"
If you have children or young brothers or sisters, don’t miss this
opporfunity! An interesting toy with an educational story on it AB-
SOLUTELY FREE!
BOIES EMULSION IS SOLD BY ALL DRUG STORES IN THE
PHILIPPINES AT ONE PESO A BOTTLE LASTING TWO WEEKS.


ASK FOR THEM


AT ALL DRUG STORES


PAGE 8





September 7, 1933


Igorots Halt Gold Rush
While Feverish Speculation In Gold Stocks Was Gioing On In Manila,
Prospectors Had Some Trouble With Natives In The Mining Regions


Appointive Solon Hilary P. Clapp: first
in Manila to hear of trouble in the gold
region of the Mountain Province.
ENOPPING off in a way the
spectacular story of the local
Igold boom, came the report
that trouble had started somewhere
in the seat itself of the precious
metal. The incident, which tem-
porarily put a scare into the hearts
of local stock market speculators,
concerns a bunch of Igorots who
evidently did not like the idea of
a certain group of operators stak¬
ing claims near Bontoc.
A woman seems to be at the bot-
tom of the trouble, denied consis¬
tently by government officials but
played up big in the papers. The
J. A. Montinola & Co., it seems,
staked 90 claims near Bontoc, but
the Igorots pulled out the stakes
the following day. Like the Indians
of the pioneering days in America,
the Igorots do not wish to relin-
quish the lands which they believe
have always been theirs. Seeing
some persons working near the
Bontoc mine area, the Igorots, re¬
ports state, drove them away by
force.
On August 30, two workers
gathering samples were attacked
by Igorot women. The constabula¬
ry rushed to the place. Lieutenant
Carandang, with one soldier, ven¬
tured around the seat of trouble,


but 300 irate Igorot men and wom¬
en gathered about them. Reserves
were summoned, but still the na¬
tives were defiant and agressive,
threatened the workers.
Officer Carandang intervened.
This infuriated the natives. They
turned on the soldiers who, on or¬
ders from their leader, firmly held
their ground, though without re-
sorting to the use of arms.
Chasing one of the laborers, an
Igorot woman, Ingawa, tripped,
hurt herself. Whereupon the Igo¬
rots accused Laborer Sanchez of
having pushed the woman, at¬
tempted to mob him. To protect
the laborer, Officer Carandang
conducted him safely to the con¬
stabulary headquarters. The Igo-
rots attempted to attack the bar-
racks, but Officers Car-  dang
and Villalobos pacified them.
Suspected of having instigated
the natives to attack are some of
the educated Igorots who are said
to be interested in the disputed
claims. Particularly are the na¬
tives suspicious of the constabula¬
ry, whom they think are siding
with the mine claimants.
The Bontocs, reports state, claim
that the whole region belongs to
them, hence their opposition to the
mining operators staking claims
in the vicinity.
The story of the trouble first
reached Manila in the form of a
telegram relayed to appointive So¬
lon Hilary P. Clapp. It came in
the midst of an exciting gold mine
stock buying and selling.
Non-Christian Tribes Director
Guingona dismissed the story with
a shrug of the shoulders. “There’s
no trouble such as the papers have


reported,” he said. “The papers
have exaggerated matters.”
Benguet Consolidated’s Judge
Haussermann expressed doubts as
to whether such troubles could oc-
cur these days. “I have known the
Igorots for years,” said he. “They
are a peaceful people. Unless
claimants place stakes on private


lands, there will be no trouble.”
And then he read from the Phil-
ippine mining law:
“So far, only lands of the pub¬
lic domain, as distinguished from
private lands, containing valuable
mineral deposits, are subject and


open to exploration, location, and
purchase, under the provisions of
the mining laws.... Public lands
entered and occupied as agricul¬
tural lands, but not yet patented
as such, can not be worked out for
the minerals they contain, unless
the applicant pays to the govern¬
ment such additional sum or sums


as will make the total amount paid
for the mineral claim or claims, in
which such deposits are located,
equal to the amount charged by the
government for the same as miner¬
al lands."
‘If the claimants violate this
provision of the law, then of course
there is bound to be trouble."
What apparently made the inci¬
dent outstanding was the fact that
the people have become gold-mind¬
ed lately. With the report that gold
veins of considerable value have
been struck in the Mountain Prov-
ince, the people began to wonder
whether they might not also be¬
come rich overnight like those
persons who struck it rich in the
early gold rush days in America.
Local gold stock prices started
sky-rocketing several months ago,
despite the ban on gold production
by President Roosevelt. With the
lifting of the ban, believed to have
been influenced in a way by the in¬
sistent demands of local "gold
men,” the Manila stock exchanges
last week experienced one of the
most exciting periods of trading,
with prices shooting upward to un¬
precedented levels.
Stocks selling at 10 centavos
two years ago suddenly went up to
(Continued on page 57)


While there was trouble in the gold region, exciting speculation in gold stocks was in pregvess in Manila. The above picture
shows the Manilo Stoch Exchange during a rush day this week.


Igorot vendors in the Baguio market. Judge Haussermann, wha may well be called
the local “gold king," says that Igorots are peaceful, will make no trouble unless their
rights are infringed upon.


September 7, 1933





PAGE 9




O SNOI
le EEIOLS


Going To College Is Expensive Enough These Days,
What With More Intricate Courses, But The Extra¬
curricular Expenses Run Up The Bill Further Still


Rosario D. Llena, former muse of the
callege of liberal arts of the National Uni¬
versity. Being a muse is just one of her
extra-curricular activities as a college
student.
great deal has been said
about the mounting cost of
Ahigher education. People
there are who aver that it takes
now at least twice as much to
send children to college as in
“the good, old days," meaning
those days when college courses
were less intricate and books less
numerous and extra-curricular
activities limited. And it does not
take a statistician to find out
that part of the cost of higher
education, if not the bulk, goes


into the maintenance of the social
life of students that has come
into prominence during the pre¬
sent era.
"All work and no play makes Jack
a dull boy." This popular saying
describes fairly well the sentiment
behind the switch from the strictly
academic system of the past to the
present order, which combines stu¬
dy with play in most seats of learn¬
ing, particularly in the United
States. Thus, extra-curricular ac¬
tivities have become identified with
the education one obtains from
these institutions of learning.
And what are the extra-curricu¬
lar activities of students? Suc¬
cintly, they are associated with cam-
pus politics, dances, parties, ban¬
quets, outings, fraternities, sorori¬
ties, college fairs, college days,
benefit shows, etc.
In a canvass of local universities
by a  representative anent
extra-curricular activities of stu¬
dents, some highly interesting facts
concerning the financial side of
these activities came to light. At


this juncture, mention should be
made of the fact that representative
types of students were seen, from
those who take part in extra-curri¬
cular activities because they simply
must do so, to those who do so in a
rather big way.
Because it is evidently the most
expensive of extra-curricular acti¬
vities in our universilies, let us
start with campus politics. Campus
politics embraces a rather big field,
but we will limit ourselves to the
yearly races for the occupancy of
two of the choicest posts within the
reach of students: the presidency of
the student council and the editor¬
ship of the college paper. Let us
start with the state university.
The present president of the stu¬
dent council of the University of
the Philippines, Ramon Enriquez,
popular electrical engineering stu¬
dent admitted that he spent ap-
proximately P200 during the time
immediately before and after he was
elected. The campaign expenses
netted him P60.00, while the celebra-
tion party he threw immediately


CELlECE)


Extra-curricular activities are becoming something ot a
to "mix" in college.


racket—one must shoulder the expenses they entail if he or she is


Top. Nora Diokno, prominent sacialite
and popular University of Santo Tomas
co-ed; middle, Vicente C. Roco, president
of the student council of the National
University; and bottom. Carmen Cruz,
popular co-ed of the National University.


after he landed the presidency
cost him P118.00.
In the case of Edmundo Cea,
president of the student council of
the University of Santo Tomas last
year and at present a senior law
student of the same university, his
pre- and post-election expen, es cost
him a cool P100.00, P40.00 of which
went into campaign expenses and
the rest in “treating” those who
worked and voted for him. As for
Vicente C. Roco, president of the
student council of the National Uni¬
versity and ranking education stu¬
dent of the same institution, he cal¬
culates that his elevation to the
choicest seat in his university has
so far (election campaign and
“blow-out” expenses are not the on¬
ly ones the president of a student
council has to shoulder) already
drained his pocketbook to the ex¬
tent of P20.00.
Coming to another choice seat in
our universities, the editorship of
the college paper, we find that the
state university again leads in the
matter of election campaign ex¬
penses. Arturo M. Tolentino, who
is No. 1 man in his class (he is a
senior student in the college of law,
U. P.) besides being the editor of
the Philippine Collegian, student
organ of the university, orator, de¬
bater, writer, "strong man," settled
(Continued on page 45)


PAGE 10





September 7, 1933


NE who saw the light of
day and passed his boy¬
heod in the country, but
who, by force of circumstances,
has to endure the dust and bustle
of city life in later years, will
find himself somewhat of a Rip
Van Winkle when he returns for
a visit to the old home town. For
he will find plenty of changes.
Favorite trees have been felled
to give way to new houses. A
straggling Chinese store now
stands at the corner in place of
the spreading mango tree. The
muddy lanes of long ago have
been transformed into clean,
well-lighted s tre ets. Familiar
faces are no more. Old land¬
marks have disappeared to make
room for the new order of things.
It is progress, progress every¬
where.
Yet, paradoxical as it seems, a
thing which our towns had long
before Dewey steamed into Manila
Bay and which constitutes one
phase of all progresssive movements
the world over, was eradicated when
we began to metamorphose the
sleepy towns into bustling commu¬
nities. And that thing is the public


playground—the plaza of the town.
Going back to our stripling years,
we remember that between the
church on one side and the muni¬
cipal building on the other were two
hectares or so of public property,
which, rightly or wrongly, we used
to call the plaza. It was a fairly
big area, an "eyesore" to a land¬
scape gardener, perhaps, but afford-
ing, nevertheless, enough room for
athletic games, mammoth meetings,


or whatever group activity the town
might undertake. In many places,
half of the space was owned by the
church, and the other half, by the
municipality. But whoever owned
it, this plaza, crude as it was, was
the center of town life. From sun¬
rise to sunset, the plaza was alive
with legions of healthy, happy,
screaming children, playing baseball
and basketball with their home¬


made equipment. There they would
fly their kites, play group games,
and run around to satiety and in
careless abandon. On Sundays,
teams from neighboring towns
would drop in to try their luck with
the cream of local performers; and
the plaza would be crowded to the
very trees with interested specta¬
tors. The writer can still recall
those days of 1911 and 1912.
When baseball teams from Cebu


City would invade our place to cross
bats with the crude ball tossers of
the locality, all activities in the
town stopped. All the roads would
lead to the plaza—and to the branch-
es of the surrounding talisay trees.
But not only that. Do you re-
member? We used to pass our
after-supper hours on the plaza to
indulge in a little wrestling, hide¬
and-seek, “tubigan," and other


games. And when the moon was
out in full glory, the activities ex¬
tended far into the night, softening
down at bedtime hour into the live¬
ly twaddle and impromptu display
of argumentative powers by the
tiangue politicians of the place.
Caressing their roosters, these town
luminaries would sit on the grass
in a circle and, between puffs,
thresh out the problems of the day,
from gambling and farming down
to politics and religion. So it was
that when anybody felt like giving
his limbs some workout, or wanted
to idle some hours away in healthy
recreation and profitable chatter
with friends, all that he had to do
was to proceed to the plaza in the
afternoon or in the evening. Com¬
pletely crude and barren, without
any artistry in its arrangement, the
old plaza was, nevertheless, a com-
bination playground and social cen¬
ter. This was in olden times.
Now, if you happen to go back
to the old place, you will heave a
sigh of regret on finding out that
the dear old playground has gone
“the way of all flesh.” The little
space that is left, if at all any is
left yet, is that which belongs to


Rich In Humor And Sentiment—And Sense—Is This
Timely, Essayistic Lament For A Cherished Institution
That Has All But Passed Away


September 7, 1933





PAGE 1I


the church. For it seems as if our
town officials have become so ad¬
vanced not only in the ways of gov-
ernment but also in the aesthetic
arts that now they want almost
every corner of the town to brighten
up with shrubbery and flowers.
The old playground has been turn¬
ed into a park, with violet hedges
around. The ubiquitous bandstand
is there in the middle, like the
crowning glory of some great
achievement, even if it only serves
as the rendezvous of the lounging
philosophers of the locality. Of
course, the glorious figure of Ri¬
zal rises prominently in the midst
of a rolling green, with the familiar
cloak and the pair of books in his
hands, on a seemingly eternal guard
duty. To climax it all, the town’s
open-air dancing pavilion unrolls
itself in one corner under the guise
of a tennis court. Beautiful, no?
The presidente and the concejales
will certainly be happy for having
gone this far in the local Burnham
plan. In fact, we, too, often fall
into some sort of boasting when we
happen to talk with our friends
about the place where we were born.
But our pride for the old home
town would be more were it not for
the fact that our town moguls have
completely forgotten to provide the
community with another play¬
ground in place of the old. The
thing we used to know as the plaza
has become a memory. Take a bus
and travel. Pasay, Paranaque, Las
Pinas, Santa Rosa, Cabuyao—just
to cite a few examples along the
Manila South Road—have hardly
enough public space for two basket-
ball courts. The public of Las Pi¬
nas and Paranaque use the church
patios for their athletic activities.
Then, one time we played indoor in
Caloocan. And where did we play?
In the rice-fields—as full of ups and
downs as a flapper’s coiffure has
waves! Yet, Caloocan has a big,
beautiful garden in front of its
presidencia!
But let us go on. Except-
ing the school grounds, Malolos has
absolutely no open space for play
purposes, unless it be several min¬
iature basketball courts squeezed in
between its teeming houses. In Pa¬
nique, Tarlac, we did not even see
a basketball court outside of the
school’s; but you see, this big pue¬
blo prides itself on having a public
square. The case is the same in
Guagua, Pampanga, and in many
other towns. In Jaro, Iloilo, so says
a friend of ours, the old athletic
ground is now all abloom with orna¬
mental plants to delight the eye. In
the writer’s province of Cebu, the
problem assumes a most serious
proportion. All around this island
empire the park-tennis court craze
has reached such a stage that only
church grounds are left open. In
our own town, the only open space
that remains is the site for the pro¬
posed market, and there the towns-
people congregate in the afternoons
to play volleyball. When the market
is finally built, I guess we shall
have to transfer our athletic activi¬
ties to the seashore! And that’s the


silent menace today in this coun¬
try. From Aparri to Jolo, the pro¬
blem is the same.
But people will always find in
play activities a delightful outlet
for excess energy. With the old
plaza transformed into a horticul¬
tural paradise or into a market¬
place, the children sought the co¬
(Continued on page 50)


Beautiful, this Cebu plaza—but is it as “human" as the plazas of old?


DIDNT YOU FORGET
TO BRUSH YOUR TEETH?


Use Colgate's
to avoid unpleasant breath


NIEVER be guilty of unpleasant breath! Decaying food parti¬
INcles between the teeth is a common cause. Colgate’s flushes
away these food particles—reaches the crevices between the
teeth that even a toothbrush doesn’t reach. And its fragrant pep-
permint flavour refreshes the mouth—leaves the breath sweet.
Remember also—Colgate’s contains a fine
polishing ingredient used by dentists to give
teeth sparkling beauty. That is why it whitens
and beautifies your teeth.


Immediately after you get up in the morning
and just before going to bed, brush your teeth
with Colgate’s creamy foam. Use a rotating
motion from the gums toward the grinding
surface. Rinse your mouth thoroughly. It will
keep your teeth clean, beautiful, and will leave
your breath fragrant.
Buy a tube today. Use it for 10 days. Then
notice the greater beauty of your teeth.


HBa d
HEreantha
is often caused by
decaying food par¬
ticles lodged be¬
tween the teeth.
Colgate’s corrects
this condition.


RDC-13


SAVE MONEY—DO NOT DELAY!
Your dealer still has a few special deal packages. Obtain two
large tubes of Colgate’s Ribbon Dental Cream and a P.80
Colgate toothbrush — a total value of P1.80 — all three for less
than P1.00.


PAGE 12





September 7, 1933


A Filipino Invents
SUBETOON
—Which May Do Particular Good Locally By Developing Our
Neglected Fishing Industry


—HE whole year round, there
is a tremendous demand
I for fish in the local market.
This fact is a sufficient guaran¬
tee of the potential possibilities
of fishing as an industry in the
Isiands, ana that it could be dev-
eloped into one conducted in a big
commercial scale. But unfor¬
tunately, no serious attention
has been directed towards its
exploitation. Our fishermen are
content with the use of crude
devices and are giving no thought
to the expansion of their trade.
The periodic appexrance of Ja¬
panese fishermen in Philippine
waters in well-equipped fishing
boats and other equipment of a
scientific nature, have failed to
awaken a competitive sense in
our fishermen. To date, they
have not really profited by the
example of the Japanese.
Not all of us have been indiffer¬
ent to the development of the local
fishing industry, however. While
we have been lagging behind other
countries in this particular activity,
the Philippines may yet control the
fishing industry of the Orient, or
even the world, for that matter.
Lieutenant Eleuterio S. Yanga, of
the United States army in the Phil-
ippines, has announced the perfec-
tion of an invention he has called
the Luminous Automatic Submarine
Trap, which he promises will revo¬
lutionize the fishing industry of
the Islands and out-rival other dev-
ices of the kind heretofore known
to the scientific world.
A soldier by profession, Lieut¬
enant Yanga is nevertheless essen¬


tially a mechanic. When he sailed
for the United States a year ago,
he had in mind a two-fold purpose:
to acquire more knowledge of mili¬
tary sicence and tactics,
and to complete his in¬
vention, with the result
that when he returned
to the Islands a few
days ago, he not .only
came back a better
soldier, but also a more
than promising inven¬

tor with his pet device
 
safely tucked in one of
2
his trunks, already pa¬
P
AH
tented.
The Luminous Auto¬
matic Submarine Trap,
is operated by only one

man. After providing

the trap with the neces¬

sary bait and illumina¬

tion, all that the own-
er has to do is to drop
it out at sea or at any
other fishing place de¬
sired. The trap can
as sinking weight is all the chamber (1). (26) The weight.
dissolved.
The trap may be made of any¬
thing, the inventor says, but steel
or concrete is preferable because
those can withstand water pressure
better than any other material.
While wood or bamboo can also be
employed, traps made of such ma¬


terials should be used only in shal¬
low waters as they may collapse if
sent down to a considerable depth.
Again, the trap may be built of


Perspective view of the invention in operative position.


The above sketch shows the vertical section of the
trap. (1) The main chamber, the side malls of which are
stay under water fOr perforated. The fish enter through the onenings (4). (5)
The conically shaped structures provided with pointed
any desired length of eads te prevent the escape of fish trapped. The electric
time, and by means of light (2i) guides the fish to the cage at the top of the
chamber, which they enter through the opening (7) and
an automatic device, it wire structure (s). Air and water compartments are
can float to the sur- provided below the chamber (1), and strengthened by
braces which are provided with openings (12). Air is in¬
face of the water troduced into the compartment (11), through a pipe (15),
when the chemical used and water enters through the intercommunicating pipes
(13 and 45). (17) The buoyancy compartment just above


any size, depending upon the needs
of the individual. Deep-sea fishers,
for instance, will have to construct
huge traps, as water animals in
mid-ocean assume enormous pro¬
portions. Lieutenant Yanga asserts
that a trap for deep-sea fishers can
be made as big as a house
— Or
church, if need be—so that all kinds
of water inhabitants could enter
the trap. Shallow-water fishers, on
the other hand, may construct
smaller traps, as it is only small
fishes that usually abound in shal¬
low waters.
Explaining his invention in de-
tail, Lieutenant Yanga said that
every part of his device is most
simple and practical. Placing an
electric light inside the trap, for
instance, is only putting into prac¬
tice the popular knowledge of the
fact that fish are readily attracted
by light. The light will be as ef-
fective in attracting fish as the bait
itself that is inside the trap. The
conically shaped receptacles located
on the walls of the trap are con-
structed in such a way that when
a fish gains entrance, it cannot pos¬
sibly escape through the same pas¬


Lt. Eleuterio S. Yanga, inventor of the
Luminous Automatic Submarine Trap.
sage. The walls are perforated with
holes to provide fish from the out¬
side a good view of the light and
bait in the trap. The presence of
fish (those already trapped) inside
will also lure those still at large.
As shown in the diagram, accom-
panying this article, of the vertical
section of the invention, a buoyancy
compartrient is provided for, to al¬
low the trap to float to the sur¬
face of the water at a predestined
time. That is, after the material
(the inventor suggests salt) that
has been serving as weight has been
dissolved. At the top of the air
compartment is a wire cage to
which the fishes are Turther en¬
ticed through an opening just above
the main chamber of the trap, and
in which cage the fishes remain
closeted until they are removed
therefrom.
The presence of the electric bulb
in the trap does not presuppose
electric connection from the outside.
Batteries installed in the trap it¬
self may constantly supply the cur¬
rent needed. And there may be as
many bulbs as the size of the trap
demands. For a small one, a tiny
bulb will be sufficient, but for a
trap of, say, four meters square,
some three or four bulbs may be
(Continued on page 63)


September 7, 1933





PAGE 13


MCCORMICR-
DEERNG CURN URINDER
Our line of corn grinders includes all
sizes and types for every requirement. The
MCCORMICK-DEERING Type C Grinder
which is illustrated here is recommended
for grinding corn for “Arroz de Maiz.”
The Type D which is similar in construc-
tion as the Type C, is equipped with a spe¬
cial attachment for grinding shelled corn,
corn on the cob, and all other small grain.


MCCORMICK-DEERING
One-Hole Sheller
All-Steel Construction


Some rice mill owners will find it profitable to
have these corn machines combined with their rice
mills. Write us for full information.


INTERNATIONAL HaRVESTER COMPANY
OF PHILIPPINES
154 Marques de Comillas,
MANILA
BRANCHES AT
Iloilo—Bacolod—Cebu—Davao—Legaspi—-Tacloban—S. Fernando. Pamp.


SHLLE
DEI ORE
OOO
A MCCORMICK-DEERING Corn Sheller
Does Fast and Clean Work
great many corn producers sell their
A corn unshelled due, in most cases, to
the difficulty and the time required in shell-
ing by hand. Selling corn this way is un¬
profitable and consequently corn production
is unnecessarily limited.
Shell before you sell your corn. This
will enable you to get more money out of
your product.
No matter what your shelling needs may
be, you can find the right equipment in the
MCCORMICK-DEERING line. The MCCOR-
MICK-DEERING one-hole sheller is the ideal
size for all corn producers. Constructed of
steel throughout and equipped with a fan,
this popular sheller will give you satisfactory
and uninterrupted service for many years.
With this machine you can do fast and clean
shelling. It can be operated by hand or by
a small engine.


MCCORMICK-DEERING Corn Grinder
Type “C" 8”
For Grinding Corn for “Arroz de Maiz”


I
N
Na OOIVAIOR DEERINO


CORN SHELLERS
CORN GRINDERS


PAGE 14





September 7, 1933


HINTS ON
Learnino to Pole Vault
—From One Who Is The Leading
Local Exponent Of That Sport
By MIGUEL SUJECO


SUJECO'S ATHLETIC RECORD
1922—First place in pole vault, Bulacan provincial meet. Broke the
record in the Central Luzon meet held in Pampanga. Tied for
first place in the interscholastic meet in Manila.
1923—Droke his former record in the Central Luzon meet. Won first
place in the interscholastic meet, Manila.
1924—First place in the carnival championships.
1925—First place in pole vault and in broad jump, Central Luzon meet.
First in pole vault in the interscholastic meet in Manila. Second
in the national championship. Second place in the Olympic
championship held in Manila.
1927—Broke the Central Luzon pole vault record. First place in both
the interscholastic meet and the national championship. Member
of the P. I. Olympic team sent to Shanghai.
1928—First place in pole vault national championship beating Arceo of
Pampanga and Asuncion of the U. S. Army.
1929—First place in pole vault in the national championship as an
“Unattached.”
1930—First place in pole vault in the national championship. Member
of the P. I. team sent to Tokyo, winning second prize.
1931—First place in pole vault in the national championship, represent-
ing the bureau of education.
1933—First place in pole vault in the national championship, breaking
the Philippine record with a jump of 12 feet.
Sujeco jumped 12 feet and 6 inches in the Tokyo Olympiad in
1930.


— VER since I won the na¬
 tional pole vault champion¬
Ighip during the carnival
season, I have been asked by
people questions which I consider
more difficult than vaulting over
a bar. For instance, I have been
asked whether I could win first
honors in the coming olympics.
Who can tell about that for sure?
I have set my heart on winning
next June, but so have, I suppose,
the Japanese and the Chinese pole
vaulters. So, “May the best man
win!" as good sports say.
There is one thing, however, that
I am sure of—that I have been
vaulting better this year than ever
before. I am only 26, but I have
four seasons of Olympic service be¬
hind me already, 10 years of hard
grind against the best pole vaulters
in the Far East. If experience
counts at all, then it’s a cinch that
Ill get a place next year.
I improve my records through
hard, consistent practice. I read
books on this favorite event of
mine. I make it a point to exercise
every morning, especially paying
attention to my arms. Flying rings
and bar-bells always keep me in
trim.
Just as movie fans have favorite
stars, I have my own favorites in
the realm of athletics. They include
Carr, Miller, Lee S. Barnes, and Ni¬
shida, the Japanese whom I expect
to meet again next year. Nishida
is the present champion of the Far
Top to bottam—Left. illustrations Nos.
10, and 11.


East. At Los Angeles last year, he
jumpad to 14 feet, forcing Miller
to do his best to win. Miller won
first place with a jump of 14 feet
and 1 inch.
It might be of interest to sports
fans to know that Nishida has been
responsible to a large extent for the
great improvement I have made in
pole vaulting. As far back as 1925,
my second time in the Olympics, I
attempted to master the form of
Barnes and many of the other
world’s leading pole vaulters, but I
could not. Then, in 1930, in Tokyo,
after finishing second to the great
Nishida, the Japanese champion,
good sport that he is, taught me the
very form I had long wanted to
learn. It was merely a matter of
mastering the proper hand-slide, but
this same method has greatly revolu¬
tionized my vaulting. With it I
have been able to break my own
records.
I started pole vaulting several
years ago when I was in the fifth
grade in San Miguel, Bulacan. Pre-
viously, I was interested only in the
dashes. But when one day I saw the
seventh graders vaulting with a
pole, I went home that same day
and prepared a pole in our back¬
yard. My teacher, Mr. Maclang,
gave me a few pointers, and soon
I was proficient enough in the event
to be able to claim the school cham¬
pionship. That was in 1920.
Two years later, I broke the Cen¬
tral Luzon record, once held by Di¬
1. 2. 3. 4, and S: right, Nos. 8, 7. 8. 9.


September 7, 1933





PAGE 15


zon, with a jump of 10 feet. The
following year I was a member of
the Philippine Olympic delegation
to Osaka, but I got no place in the
event. In 1930, my fourth Olympic
trip, I landed second, with Nishida
capturing first honors. This year,
I broke the Philippine record with a
jump of 12 feet, 6 inches.
Those who would like to get va¬
luable pointers on pole vaulting
will, I believe, find the following in-
structive notes recommended by the
Philippine Amateur Athletic Fede¬
ration of immense help during prac¬
tice hours:
(a) Hold the pole at your right
side with the front end of the pole
elevated and pointing straight
ahead.
(b) From the vaulting box meas¬
ure 55 feet. This is check mark
number 1. From this point measure
36 feet. This is check mark num¬
ber 2. Stand with both feet together
behind check number 2, holding the
pole as in illustration No. 1. Step on
your left foot and take 8 moderately
long strides. This should bring the
left foot to check mark number 1.
From this point, gather speed, and
8 regular sprinting strides should
bring the left foot to the take-off
mark. During the run keep your
body facing straight ahead and the
pole elevated slightly but pointing
straight ahead. The arms swing
back and forth very slightly with
each stride.
(c) During the last stride, just
as the left foot is about to hit the
take-off mark, the lower hand is
slid upward and grasps the pole


a turning motion with the body un¬
til the chest faces downward. (Illus¬
tration 7.) During these move¬
ments, the legs are kicked out and
upward, and as the body crosses the
bar, a vigorous push is made up-
ward and away from the pole. (Illus¬
trations 8 and 9.) This movement
enables the jumper to land facing
the bar. (Illustration 10.) In illustra¬
tion 11, the jumper is shown land-
ing with his right side towards the
bar, which was probably due to in-
ability to bring the feet under the
body when the final push was made.
Pointers On Training
(a) Practice to acquire the cor¬
rect form by going over heights
which do not require great effort.
In the practice for form, concen¬
trate your mind on the proper move¬
ments of the swing, pull-up, turn of
the body, and the push-off.
(b) Go through the run several
times a day to master the take-off.
(c) Vault six to seven times a
(Continued on page 50)


TOW you can have the first and original cosmetique —
N COLGATE'S FLORENTINE COSMETIQUE—for only
10 centavos per stick. Men, there is no reason nor need
for you to buy imitations or counterfeits of this quality
product today.


our MICEelo


Miguel Sujeco, author of the accompanying article, “shot" by the cameraman in the
act of paulting over the bar.


close below the right hand. (Illus¬
tration 3) At about the same time,
both hands holding the pole are
thrown as high as possible above the
head as the end of the pole is thrown
into the hollow of the vaulting box,
and the left foot leaves the ground
with a spring. (Illustration 4) As
the left foot springs from the
ground, swing the right leg up-
wards. (Illustration 5.) With arms
straight hanging to the pole, swing
past the pole as far as and as high
as possible. (Illustration 6.) As
the feet come near the bar, draw the
knees up so that the feet will not
strike the bar. When you are at the


end of the swing, pull upward with
the arms and at the same time make


INO W-
OEO UEIVIATOS


COLGATE'S FLORENTINE COSME¬
TIQUE comes to you in a clean outer wrapper,
and since it is greaseless, you will not find
your pocket soiled after using. Its firmness is
retained at all times in spite of climatic condi¬
tions, and you need not fear that it will turn
rancid.
By using COLGATE'S FLORENTINE
COSMETIQUE, you have the low cost way of
keeping your hair well groomed and in place.
Its delicate perfume will delight you.
WARNING! Avoid Imitations—Demand


FLORENTINE COSMETIQUE


TERE they come! Pounding hoofs. Jockeys molded
into glistening, rhythmic backs. The fight for
the pole. The thrill of the finish. The delirious an¬
tics of a race-mad crowd. You can catch them all in
motion for very little cost indeed, with the new


CINE-KODAK BIGHT
Cine-Kodak Eight’s new
principle makes one foot of
film go as far as four. And
the low price of the 20 or 30
scenes possible to each roll
of film includes the cost of
finishing.
Cine-Kodak Eight cuts
home movie costs in half.
Ask for a demonstration at
your Kodak dealer’s.


SPI


KODAK PHILIPPINES, Ltd.
434 Dasmarinas, Manila


PAGE 16


 AA





September 7, 1933


Ralph Barton, famed and wealthy art¬
ist: calmly committed suicide "because
I om fed un with inventing devices for
getting through twenty-four hours a
day."
New York city editor was
recently asked by a wom¬
A an, over the telephone, if
he wanted the story of a suicide.
Naturally, he wanted to know
what the suicide was. “Here it
is,” came the agitated voice from
the other end of the wire, and
forthwith the mysterious in-
formant gave her own name and
the manner of her intended self-
destruction. A moment later,
hotel employees heard the crash
of her body in the courtyard.
This incident brought out into
bold relief not only the tendency of
would-be suicides toward exhibition¬
ism but the growing number of per¬
sons to whom “voluntary self-des¬
truction has seemed the only answer
to the crushing riddle of existence,"
as Henry Morton Robinson puts it
in his article on suicide which first
appeared in The North American
Review. From time to time we
hear of people, adult and adolescent,
rich and poor, who give vent to
—that final act of despair,” thus
contributing to the increase of the
suicide rate. That rate, which has
considerably increased, ranges from
3.3 per 100,000 in the Irish Free
State to 34.5 in Austria.
According to Dr. F. L. Hoffman,
statistician, in The Spectator, an
insurance publication, approximate¬
ly 23,000 took their own lives in
1932 in the United States as against
20,088 in 1931. The rate for 100
American cities rose from 20.5 per
100,000 in 1931 to 21.3 in 1932, the
highest figure ever reached in any
previous year with the exception of
1908, when the rate was 21.5. At
the top of the funeral list stands
Davenport, lowa, with a rate of
50.3. At the bottom is Troy, New
York, with a rate of 1.3. Comment-
ing on the peculiar fact “that the
balm which the Pacific coast offers
to those sorely wounded in body
and spirit seems unavailing,” Dr.
Hoffman said: “Year after year the



ROM


That Is The Question Many Are Asking In View Of The Increasing
Number Of Those Who Snuff Out What Is Supposedly Their Most
Precious Possession — Life


Pacific coast cities show higher
rates, as to which no satisfactory
explanation has yet been forth-
coming."
In the list of ten American cities
with the highest suicide rates in
1932 are, besides Davenport, Sacra¬
mento, California, with 43.1; Seat¬
tle, Washington, 42.0; Cedar Ra¬
pids, lowa, 41.5; San Francisco,
California, 39.9; San Diego, Califor


Ivar Kreuger, wizard of finance, match
king: the very actipities that placed him
high toppled him down—to death dealt
by his own hand.
nia, 38.4; Omaha, Nebraska, 36.5;
Denver, Colorado, 36.3; Portland,
Oregon, 35.4; Tacoma, Washington,
32.1.
Of the five largest cities all show-
ed a rise in suicide rate except Chi¬
cago. In Chicago there were 597
suicides in 1932 as against 618 in
1931; Detroit, 311 suicides in 1932
as against 300 in 1931; Los Ange¬
les, 398 suicides in 1932 as against
345 in 1931; New York, 1,595 in
1932 as against 1,500 in 1931; and
Philadelphia, 353 in 1932 as against
330 in 1931.
Another interesting fact is the
preponderance of male suicides
over female suicides. According to
official death statistics more than
three times as many men as women
resort to self-destruction every
year.
The epidemic of voluntary self-
destruction is not confined to the
United States, by any means. The
countries of Europe are also affect¬
ed by it to a larger or lesser degree,
as the case may be. Japan, land of
hara-kiri, has been recently agitat¬
ed by a suicide wave. On Oshima
Island, fifty miles southwest of To¬
kyo, is located Mt. Mihara, known as
Japan’s suicide mountain. Into the
1,000-foot crater of the volcano
fifty-five young men and women
hurled themselves within three


months, beginning last February.
The Philippines, it can be said, has
also been touched, although lightly,
by the epidemic. Almost daily we
read of men and women "slitting
the tedious thread of life," by
throwing themselves into the river,
blowing their brains out, taking
poison, etc.
The growing number of suicides
has given rise to several perplexing
questions. What is the cause of the
increase? Why are there suicides?
What causes suicides? Why do
wealthy and intelligent people com¬
mit suicide? Why are there more
male suicides than female suicides?
Can suicides be remedied?
“Suicide is the result of a pecu¬
liarly modern disease," explained
Henry Morton Robinson in his ar¬
ticle, Why Suicide? “For centuries
man has been busy transferring the
center of importance from the gen¬
eral group—the guild, the church,
the tradition—to his own specific
soul. In this process of transfer he


Influential, well-to-do, said ta be hap¬
pily married, Paul Bern was known
as the kindest man in Hollywood for
having helped so many—sometimes to
stardom. And yet, he killed himself.
has picked up'the germs of a psy-
chic malady. This malady, taking
such recognizable forms as autobio¬
graphic novels and the chiseling of
architects’ names on corner-stones
(who knows the architect of Rheims
or Chartres?) can flourish only in a
world that assumes the individual
to be the important thing, hymns
his particular worries and glories,
and encourages him generally to
exalt his horn among men. The
exaltation of that horn is the his¬
tory of Western individualism."
“The insanity and suicides of our
age proceed from a single cause;
our failure to assume the stature of


maturity, even while we make piti¬
ful pretensions to its rights, exemp-
tions and strength,” further wrote
Mr. Robinson. “It is as though a
dwarf or a paralytic were to don the
armor of a knight; the burden of
carrying those axe-proof plates
would overtax the strength of any
one but a true knight, and the pre-
tender’s collapse would be swift at
the first onslaught of the foe.
“It is customary nowadays to
blame the economic depression for
the increase in suicide. But the de-
pression is the cause of suicide on¬
ly in the way that the assassination
of the Austrian duke was the cause
of the world war. Actually, the
cause of the present epidemic of
suicide is not the depression, but
the psychic greensickness of which
the depresson itself is but another
symptom. This emotional green¬
sickness is a frustrated yearning
for security from some quarter
outside ourselves."
Marian J. Castle explains, in an
article which first appeared in a re¬
cent issue of Forum, why “the up-
per classes resort to suicide" by say¬
ing that suicide is “the ultimate
recourse of the pampered for dodg-
ing reality and responsibility. Peo¬
ple who may be said to have real
cause—who are entitled to commit
suicide, seldom do so.” As to the
preponderance of male suicides over
female suicides she explains this by
stating that “the real reason is that
their (the women’s) very preoccu¬
pation with life keeps their thoughts
turned outward. It is hard to be an
introvert with a husband and sev¬
eral children demanding love and
comfort and sock-darning and dish¬
washing.”
(Continued on page 63)


Romed
As one
nvis
a
Jont caabanoi
Jnliet, woho are amons
suicides in fiction.


September 7, 1933





PAGE 17


Find out for yourself how PEDRO MATIPID succeeded
in life with the help of an Insular Life policy. The coupon
brings free information.


EQUALITY—JUSTICE
N
T
TLLL

SECURITY—PEACE OF MIND


ENRICHED—PROTECTED


GELEIA


INSULAR LIFE BLDG., MANILA


I wanted to enjoy
life. No worries for
me!


I never saved any¬
thing. Not even to
buy my own home.


My children worked
in the field. No
schooling.


I am getting old.
Am unhappy and
worried about my
family’s future.


From my first sala¬
ry I saved some¬
thing, later I bought
a home.


Then I took out a
Life In surance
Policy from the
Insular Life.


My children were
e du ca t e d by
Educational
Insurance.


I am happy. I re¬
ceive mon thly
checks from my
matured policy. No
worries!


DIDRO MATIDID
SIADTED FBOM
THE BOTTOM-
BELEVED IN LIFE
INGURANCE-SAVED
FOR THE FUTUDE.
NOW AGED 60-
STILLGOING OTDONG


JUAN BULARSAK


SIADTED WILL
NEVED SAVED¬
SDENT ITALL.
NOW AGED 60
STILL LOOKING
TOR A JOB


IVOU HAVE CEDIAININI
IDONE WELL IN LIFE T
THOW DID YOU DO 17?


HARD WODK AND
REGULAD SAVINGS L
HELDED ME SUCCEED
LET ME L
TELLYOUI



BEUNION IN
ANEA


JUAN'S STORY OF HIS LIFE


PEDRO RELATES HIS PROGRESS


PAGE 18





September 7, 1933


OA
A


By BENVENIDO N. SANTOS


PUNG Sabi lived in a small
broken-down nipa house
 A near the little church. To
the west, far beyond the
church, the winding trails crawled
lazily downward among broken
twigs and bending grass, and paus¬
ed where the dusty provincial road
began. Behind the house stretched
the seemingly unending fields of
swaying sugar canes, grating mono¬
tonously in the uneven sweep of the
winds. The front window overlooa¬
ed a winding path which cut
through the hillside down to the
river bed. In the moonlight the
river flowed along like so many li¬
quid silver; and at midnight, it had
a solemn voice.
Dimly outlined against the twi¬
light sky, the wooden cross atop the
ancient church seemed like a paint¬
ing in the sky. At dusk the church
bell rang, and even those in the re¬
motest fields who could only hear the
faint echo of the ringing bell paused
in their belated labor, turned their
eyes to the West, and bowed their
heads as they murmured words of
prayer.
Apung Sabi, oftentimes alone in
the house, also turned her eyes to¬
ward the distant cross, and prayed;
and one by one her children and
grandchildren gathered about to
kneel and pray with her. Then,
they kissed her hand, and she bless¬
ed them with, “God help you.”
Sometimes, she told them after
they had all kissed her hand, "If
your father were only alive, I would
not be alone to give you God’s bles¬
sings."
It was many years ago when
Apung Sabi’s husband died. Milio,
now married, and his wife, now on
the family way, were yet children
then; Badong, the eldest, was not
yet married to Goria.


A few months after Apung Doro’s
death, Apung Sabi came across the
picture of a group of people sur¬
rounding a dead relative in Sta.
Cruz. She recognized her late hus¬
band in the group. It was the old
man’s only portrait. It must have
been taken several years before he
died. Here Apung Doro was robust,
and not yet very old. The head was
inclined a little bit to the left, a
habitual, characteristic posture. He
was wearing a clean, white camisa.
He was barefooted. His feet looked
big and dusty. Apung Sabi even
noted a smile in those pair of slant¬
ing eyes, and she had many memo¬
ries.
For many years they had lived
together—suffering, toiling, laugh-
ing through the years. Hand in
hand they had known the joys and
the sorrows that only youth could
give. Together they had grown to a
peaceful old age. That was why
when Apung Doro died, she felt as
if she had lost a part of her life.
Her loss, she felt, had made the rest
of her life incomplete.
So Apung Sabi asked her son Ba¬
dong to make a frame of the finest
bamboo he could find for the pic¬
ture. Then they hung the framed
portrait near the picture of the
bleeding Christ.
NE day, Apung Sabi went down
O to Sta. Cruz. There, she saw
the picture of the late child of
Aling Sepa. It was a fine solo en¬
largement in a frame of decorated
wood. According to Aling Sepa,
this picture was made out of a
group portrait. Apung Sabi could
hardly believe it.
“Do you mean to say that this
large picture was only copied out
of a group picture?” she asked.
Aling Sepa showed the incredu¬
lous woman the group picture out
of which the solo enlargement was
made. It was the picture of the
child with his classmates in the
third grade, taken just in front of
the school house.
“There is my son," and Aling
Sepa pointed at a boy sitting next
to the teacher. The child had a
mischievous look on his face.


Apung Sabi looked at the large
picture, and then at the small one,
and stared, amazed, at the enlarged
reproduction. Only then did she
believe what Aling Sepa had been
telling her.
“It is wonderful how they do it,”
Apung Sabi marvelled, and, after a
pause, added: “I wonder if the same
thing could be done for my late
husband’s picture.
Aling Sepa said it could be done.
“But how?” Apung Sabi wanted
to know. She could not go to the
city herself. It was so far away.
She knew nobody there. She could
not speak Tagalog. She was afraid.
But she really wanted to have a
solo enlargement of the picture of
her late husband.
“Tonio can help you," Said Aling
Sepa.
Tonio was a nephew of Apung
Sabi. He was the son of her first
cousin, Mang Julian. Tonio often
went to the city.
“But it costs much,” Aling Sepa
warned Apung Sabi after a while.
Apung Sabi didn’t seem to have
realized that at first. She was so
lost in her enthusiasm. Now, she
looked at the other woman as if she
had been surprised. She looked sad
and disappointed.
"How much do you think it would
cost me?” she asked Aling Sepa in
a low, quavering voice.
“It might cost you no less than
fifteen pesos."
Apung Sabi looked sadder, and
was silent for some time. That
amount was staggering. All the
years of her life, she had never
owned that much, no matter how
hard she had tried to save. It was
impossible, then. It could not be.
She had to be content with that por¬
trait of Apung Doro, now hanging
on the dilapidated nipa wall near
the picture of the bleeding Christ.
Back in the hills, Apung Sabi
told her children about the possi¬
bility of having the picture of their
late father reproduced in a solo en¬
largement. Her children were en¬
thusiastic about it. But when she
told them of the expense it would
entail, a silence fell upon the group.
“But suppose all of us try to save


and work harder," Apung Sabi
spoke at length in a low yet hope¬
ful voice, "maybe after many
months—maybe years—with the
kind help of God, we may be able
to save, that much. Don’t you think
so?”
Her children agreed to try.
The succeeding months found
every member of the family doing
his best to save. Milio, aside from
his daily work in the fields, even
cut the hair of his fellow laborers,
who paid him sometimes in money,
but most of the time in rice, vege¬
tables, and even livestock. These,
his wife sold in the lowlands, or to
their neighbors. Badong, who had
debts to settle, labored as he
had never worked before. Even his
thin, short wife, Goria, helped.
Also the children. Apung Sabi, in
spite of her advancing years, stayed
most of the time in the lowlands
of Sta. Cruz, where she worked as
a common tenant. She sold every
share she had. Even on Sundays
she worked. She cut grass, and
sold it to the passing cocheros. The
children often made fun of her,
but she did not mind them. She
had become blacker and thinner.
When, at last, they had saved the
necessary sum, Apung Sabi fell ill,
and she aged much during her ill¬
ness. It was as if ten years—ten
cruel years—had fallen on her thin,
blistered shoulders instead of two.
But Apung Sabi was not sad.
“Thanks to God,” she often said
during her illness, "we had saved
fifteen pesos before I got sick.”
The amount of fifteen pesos was
that obliging
given to Tonio —
nephew who lived in Sta. Cruz, but
frequented the city. He promised
to bring over the solo enlargement
as soon as it was finished.
It was Badong who had gone to
Sta. Cruz with the small group pic-
ture and the money.
"Did you ask your cousin to
take very good care of the picture,
Badong?” Apung Sabi asked as
soon as Badong arrived. She was
then lying on a mat, and had a very
high fever. It was dark outside.
Badong was wet.
“Yes, Mother,” Badong answered
Goria looked at the sky, and said
there might be a storm that night.
Apung Sabi murmured, "May
God bless Tonio," and she was
grateful her nephew would do that
much for her even if she was but
a poor, wretched renative, and she
spoke lengthily on her children’s
close relationship with Tonio.
After more than a month, Apung
Sabi got well. But she was no long¬
er able to work, or even move about
(Continued on page 45)


D IENVENIDO N. SANTOS excels in local color and char¬
y acterization. What Hamada, Borje, and Ligaya Victorio
Reyes have done for the natives of the Mountain Province;
Laya, Arguilla, and Anden for the Ilocos folk; Calalang, Pas¬
cual, and Retizos for the Tagalogs—Santos, with such as Pe¬
droche and Malay, has done for the people of the Pampanga
region. This is evident in
The Portrait,” one of the very best
stories to be turned out by the author of “The Man Who Knew
My Father” and “The Years Are Very Long.” Mr. Santos also
writes poems.


September 7, 1933





PAGE 19


PAGE 20





September 7, 1933


Atlantic City:
Americas Playaround
You Will Find No Traces Of Gloomy Old Depression There-
Instead, Yon Will Come Across Radiant Young Beauties


By A. B. AC-AC
Philadelphia Correspondent of 


 am spending a week at the
most beautiful beach in the
I western Hemisphere, that
in Atlantic City, New Jersey,
the world’s greatest playground.
While newspapers talk of econo¬
mic ills the world over; hunger
marches in supposedly the most
advanced countries, bankruptcies
here, there and everywhere; the
failure of crops in the most
scientific agricultural sections—
in this narrow strip of seaboard
frequented by thousands and
thousands of vacationists, there
is not the slightest sign of the
Depression. The rest of the world
may be unhappy and poor and
hungry but that is not the case
on this, the most gorgeously
decked boardwalk in the whole
Atlantic seaboard.
Here, on these sandy shores where


You will like it too
N


Society belles and screen stars
recommend
VE

660
SLOD
FACE POMDER


CLUB FACE POWDER
P. O. Box 198
pink
Please send me Box Medium 4 white
natural
club face powder for which I inclose here¬
with 34 centavos.


NAME .
ADDRESS


Happy children abound in Americo's
playground—Atlantie City. Above, J. A.
Edlagan, a Pinoy, with some American
tots.
the mighty ocean’s angry waves
continuously roar, there is no finan¬
cial collapse, there are no hard
times, no human sufferings—if we
may judge conditions by the aspects
and behavior of the people we see
around. The faces, so far as one can
gather, are happy and carefree. Cer¬
tainly they look well-nourished and
gay. It is a pleasure to watch these
people frolic around and about by
the thousands,—young and old
alike happy as they bathe in the
briny water that surges inland one
after another in big, foaming waves
that bring them forgetfulness and
fun. These people here are really
happy!
The weather at this time of the
year is scorching hot,—96 degrees
in the shade. The water is just
ideal for bathing. You can stay the
entire day in the surf without feel¬
ing chilly at all. I’ve always wanted
to be in a big crowd and watch peo¬


ple, and here I am feel¬
ing humbly small in¬
deed among countless
men and women and
children, all smiling
and seemingly without
a care or worry in the
world.
And these girls
and young women
that you see here are certainly
worth noticing. In fact, you can’t
help noticing them because they all
wear such distinct and vivid colors.
You have no idea how red a red
bathing suit can be, or how yellow a
yellow one, and how white a white,
until you have seen these bevies of
American beauties against a back¬
ground of gray sand and blue water
—ranging all the way from fairly
good-looking to veritable "knock-
outs," of superb carriage, with a
ready smile and a friendly glance.
You promenade along the board-
walk in the evening and you meet
the same variety of colors displayed
lavishly in women’s attires. Red,
blue, yellow, lavender—every con¬
ceivable color. These girls here are
more than an optical delight: they
arouse within you a greater variety
of emotions than are conjured, say,
by an incomparable landscape seen
by moonlight, by a majestic storm
at sea, a multicolored sunset, or any
of the superb manifestations of Na¬
ture.
The colorful tones of a magazine
cover or illustration that you often
see are not merely the optical illu¬
sions or the extravagant imaginings
of artists. They have their counter-
parts in actual flesh and blood—
only their originals are even more
beautiful. Helen of Troy would find
plenty of competition here if we
could only bring her back to life.
And I am not sure that she may not
be forced to take a back seat. I
never saw the Trojan Helen, nor
even her picture, but I have seen
here what artists of today would
willingly call “The Modern Helen."
And for my part, as far as beauties
are concerned, I am perfectly satis¬


Some American friends of the author tahing
at the famous shore in Atiantic City.


fied that I am living in this age and
generation.
Speaking of rhythm and grace,
you should see these girls—not all
of course, but quite a good many of


 LEVY E
 Posox 189


Ideal lropical tonic
Babusicancanan
ing molhers, lh grow¬
WAgdald ind ile or
a valescent. Buildsap-
PLLAM ME
g resislance inalhletes —
Manili E


A. B. Ac-ac, author of the accompany¬
ing article, photographed with his cousin,
J. A. Edlagan, in Atlantic City.
them. Mother Nature must have un¬
derstood perfectly the needs of men
when she devised a universal stand-
ard of beauty and embodied them
in the most perfect creation of
God—WOMAN!


FPSCAUSE I LOVE YOU
E MADE


WJLOV
R


EASY


For Bachelors, Ladies, Sweethearts, and the
Married. BECAUSE I' LOVE VOU contains
78 chapters such as First Love, How to Win
Favor of Ladies, Popping the Question, Eti¬
quette, Love Letters, How to Begin a Court-
ship, Conjugal Felicity, Married Bliss.
Get this complete book at once.
BECAUSE I LOVE YOU sent POSPAID
for enly PO.8O. SEND STAMPS Or MONEY
ORDER to
GENERAL SUPPLY CO.
Box 620-G Manila


September 7, 1933





PAGE 21


How They Portray Love
Its The Male Stars Love-Making That Is Analyzed
Now In This Follow.Up To Last Week's
Movie Article


y AST week, five different love
"expressions," as portrayed on
D the screen by leading feminine
stars of Hollywood, were described
by Hilary Lynn, said to be authori¬
ty on the subject. Intrinsically of
little value in actual life because
each person has, by nature, his or
her individual way of reacting to
man’s most exalted passion, the ac¬
count was nevertheless interesting
at least for its own sake. After all,
what we see on the screen amuses
us, the knowledge of its being only
"made" notwithstanding.
To give the man’s side of it, the


same authority also described how
five actors make love to their he¬
roines. This time, Lynn selected five
different types of men who depict
distinct ways of love-making. Think
whatever you will, at one time or
another, if you are a rabid theater¬
goer, you immensely enjoyed looking
at those sweeping scenes of ro¬
mance wherein any of the following
five electrified you with the power
of his love in terms of caresses for
his leading woman.
Maurice Chevalier
To him love is a game. Some¬
thing gay, charming, debonair.
Something to sing about, not to
agonize over. Maurice does not in¬
dulge in passionate embraces and
long drawn out kisses. Ladies do
not swoon in his arms. Maurice
woos them with the piquancy of his
personality—not by the stormy
depths of his ardor. He caresses
with his eyes, with delicious little
facial grimaces—and overcomes his
willing victims by the insinuating
delight and force of his charm.


Watching him on the screen one
gets the impression that just being
in love and not woman herself that
is the important thing to Maurice.
Whether she happens to be Fifi,
Mimi, Nanette, Violette, Mitzi, or
Louise isn’t vital, so long as she’s
young and pert and fair. Given the
stimulus of a pretty face, falling in
love is almost automatic with the
gay Parisian. His is the attitude of
the completely unself-conscious, con¬
fident, questing male. He takes love
lightly, in his stride. And being a
Frenchman, he finds it an amusing,
lilting musical comedy affair, in


which couples forever make love,
and laugh under the chestnut trees
in the Bois!
Leslie Howard
With him, the spiritual element of
love always dominates. In his
caresses there is much more frail
tenderness, of worshipful adoration,
than of engulfing passion.
One recollects the quiet way he
has of looking at his beloved, as if
he wished to photograph her image
on his mind and heart and carry it
about with him forever. One ima¬
gines him brushing a woman’s hair
with his lips—delicately caressing
her fingertips. In his love-making
there are so many gracious nuances,
so many of the tiny tokens of af¬
fection and respect that women
ask mutely, but so seldom get, from
less subtle lovers. Half shy, half im¬
pulsive, Leslie Howard’s screen woo¬
ing indicates clearly that (just
Chevalier’s opposite) it’s the woman
herself who matters to him—not the
fact of being in love, nor the fleet¬
ing pleasure in making love.


Gary Cooper
To him love is an emotion that
gets you completely, and makes you
suffer.
Gary is always slightly indiffer¬
ent, sometimes even defiant, in his
attitude to his women, on the screen.
He’s wary, he’s fearful. Because he
knows that if he lets himself go,
it’d be a body-and-soul affair. No
half-way measures.
For Gary is essentially romantic
and essentially monogamous. You
feel that he’s saving himself for the
one woman. And when that woman
comes along, he gives himself up to
her with adoration.
But he’s remote and aloof. Ac¬
tually waits for the woman to take
the first steps. Remember “Moroc-
co" and “To-day We Live”?
In
these pictures, Marlene Dietrich
and Joan Crawford were the aggres¬
sors. He was the passive recipient
of their caresses—until he believed
in them.
Despite all his dominating physic-
al personality, despite all his de¬
fiance to women, Gary Cooper is al¬
ways the shy young boy afraid of
being hurt.
John Barrymore
He is the beau ideal of screen
lovers. Handsome, courtly, dashing,
he can effectively break down the
frail fortress of a woman’s resis¬
tance to him.
John is a fiery, impassioned lover.
A calculating lover, too. Every
word, every caress, is artful, deli¬
berate, conscious. He has coolly stu¬
died the whims and weaknesses of
women, and has developed a tech-
nique of love-making of the most
devastating kind. Note “Reunion in
Vienna” and “Grand Hotel."
A picture story may demand his
faithfulness to one woman. But by
the very insinuation of his glance,
by the connoiseurship of his em¬
braces, John’s carefully rehearsed


Maurice Chevalier: to him love is t
game—something to sing about, not to
agonize over.
love-making smacks of the Don
Juan. For the excitement and thrill
of the chase incite him.
Thus love becomes an intriguing,
diverting adventure of the senses.
To vanquish a woman is a bouquet
for John’s bumptious vanity. For
is not this Adonis of the Barry¬
mores the eternally arrogant, mas¬
terful male?
Clark Gable
His technique is brusque, direct,
almost savage at times. The ele¬
mental male who recognizes his
physical and spiritual hungers and
goes out spontaneously to satisfy
them.
His cruelty is never the cool, cal-
culating kind, such as John Barry¬
more’s might be. It is an impulsive
brutality, passionate and uncontrol¬
lable. He “treats 'em rough” be¬
cause it is his instinct to do so—the
instinct of the vigorous, self-asser¬
tive, conquering male.
But Clark has another side to his
amorous screen nature. He can be
gentle—in an awkward, embarrass¬
ed, inarticulate way. His kindness
is like that of a gruff St. Bernard,
roughly pawing at a baby kitten.
But it is a staunch gentleness that
gives promise of loyalty and devo¬
tion, despite the fact that Clark is
always far more at ease in the role
of the domineering lover.


Clark Gable and Marion Davies co-starring in a recent picture. Clark, in his love¬
mahing, is brusque, direct, almost savage at times.


BOLE


Corrects Diarrhea
Relieves Dysentery
BOTICA
BOLE


PAGE 22





September 7, 1933



Our SeCorla vyOrit S


CHAMPION


)


The Life Story Of That Ace Of Bantamweights Who
Is Known In Fistiana As Young Tommy
By SALVADOR L. OPAO


Seated: Young Tommy (Fernando D. Opao), his wife,
and their children. Standing: Tommy Sisoy (left), the
pugilist’s pal and torme, trainer, and Alfredo Opao, his where to-day has hung
brother.


Y TNOFFICIALLY recognized
as the bantamweight
O champion of the world,
Young Tommy, the Filipino sen¬
sation in American West Coast
rings for the past two years, may
be said to have virtually scaled
the heights that the immortal
Pancho Villa reached. Sports
writers concede that the only
thing that Tommy needs to annex
the world crown is to have the
official champion with him in
the ring, to rough it out for the
world’s title.
Young Tommy has disposed of
the ablest men of his weight in the
fight-market today, including Speedy
Dado, his countryman, once recog-
nized by the California State Box-
ing Commission as the world’s ban¬
tamweight champion. When later


he took the measure of
Rudolfo Teglia, Argen¬
tine champion, and sub¬
dued him by T. K. O.,
the boxing world began
asking why Young
Tommy should not be
recognized officially as
the world’s bantam¬
weight king.
No fighter in the
United States or else¬
up more impressive
victories to back up a claim to a
world title as has Young Tommy.
At present he has no more rivals
to conquer, with the possible excep¬
tion of Panama Al Brown, present
titlist. But Brown, it is held, is
evading a fight with Tommy to
keep the crown on his brow a bit
while longer. Brown lost to Dado,
it will be remembered.
It is a very interesting story,
this life of Young Tommy and his
career as a fighter. The boy, whose
real name is Fernando Opao, was
born in October, 1907, in Mambulac,
Silay, Occ. Negros. As a child, he
was very quarrelsome. His school
days were replete with mischief. He
turned classrooms into fighting
arenas. He did not care what hap¬
pened to him. He enjoyed fighting
against anybody. He delighted in
picking up a fight with whoever
came his way.
It was while in the third grade
that Tommy bought a pair of box¬
ing gloves. Thereupon, instead of


going to his classes, he fought with
his friends. His father, upon learn-
ing this, gave him a severe beating,
but this did not daunt him a bit.
The lure of the ring was irresisti¬
ble, and while still too young to be¬
come a professional boxer, he sailed
for Iloilo without the knowledge of
his father.
In Iloilo, Tommy told stadium mo¬
guls that he wanted a fight. Of
course, they only laughed at him.
Asked what experiences he had had,
he answered, “None.” He said he
wanted to fight because he felt like
fighting in the ring. That was all.
Amused rather than convinced, the
officials gave him a bout, and what
a fight it turned out to be! It
proved to be the sensation of the
evening. Tommy won that fight, of
course.
In quest of greater opportunities,
Tommy sailed for Manila. Unhap-
pily, his father learned of it and did
not lose time in fetching him back
to his home town. And so, for some
time, Tommy’s career in the ring
was temporarily put out of his
mind. However, with the opening
of the Silay stadium in 1921, his
ambition was again revived. It was
there that he met Tommy Sisoy,
later becoming his trainer.
After a little training, Tommy
appeared in the Fara-on Stadium in
Negros. He won his initial bout,
but what proved to be more signi¬
ficant was his bare-fisted fight with
Speedy Dado, a fight which the two
did not know then to be the begin¬


ning of a life-long rivalry.
After a year’s stay in Fara-on,
Tommy sailed for Iloilo, where he
trained under the management of


Young Tommy in Hongkong, with Ta¬
liba's Deegracias del Rosario.


Serafin de la Cruz. His rise was
phenomenal. During his short stay
in that city, he was able to subdue
all the good boys of his weight,
among whom were Young Suarez,
Atil Medriano, and Kid Cortez, the


Young Tommy wearing the belt sym¬
bolic of the fly and bantamweight cham¬
pionships of the Orient.


yOU'NG TOMMY is doubtless the most popular Filipino performing to-day in American rings, and this
at a time when such able Island mitt-slingers as Speedy Dado, Little Pancho, Ceferino Garcia, Va¬
YMias Miling, Small Montano, Lope Tenorio, Clever Sison, Cris Pineda, and Little Dempsey are all
leather-pushing across the big pond. Even when Dado was recognized as the world’s champion in Cal¬
iornia, Tominy was earning more money. And when the two fought again for the crown which Dado had
won from Tominy, the latter was still the favorite among the bettors. Tominy justified this by winning
back the California championship after a torrid tilt with his compatriot.
Tominy’s other victims include Newsboy Brown, from whom he originally wrested the California
bantamweight crown; Canto Robleto, Washington state champion; Midget Wolgast, world’s flyweight
king; Rudolfo Teglia, Argentine title-holder; Joe Tieken. Korean sensation; Little Pancho, fly and ban¬
tamweight champion of the Orient; and Baby Arizmendi, whom the California State Commission recog¬
nized as the world’s featherweight champion.
Tominy seems to have encountered the most serious opposition in Babe Casanova, Mexico’s cham¬
pion, whom he has fought thrice. Tommy lost the first bout, but won the second in decisive fashion.
Shortly after, the two were matched in Mexico City, which is over a mile above sea level—a fact which
handicaps those used to living in lower places. Dado, Tommy Paul, Fidel La Barba, Lope Tenorio, and
Clever Sison have all been defeated unexpectedly in Mexico City. In the case of Dado, Casanova was
also the stumbling block: he knocked out the Filipino in four rounds. Then a return bout was ar¬
ranged in California—and Dado promptly took revenge. But heedless of the Mexico altitude jinx, Tom¬
my met Casanova, for the third time, in the latter’s own country—and, for the first time in his career,
lost by knockout. As we go to press, negotiations are said to be under way to match the Filipino and
the Mexican for the fourth time. If the deal goes through, Tonimy will have a chance to show whether
what happened to him is only a repetition of what happened to Dado. Meanwhile, many still have reason
to believe that he may well be regarded as "our second world’s champion.” For while he has not met
Panama Al Brown, N. B. A. title-holder among bantams, Dado, one of Tommny’s victims, beat Brown.


September 7, 1933





PAG


then flyweight champion of Iloilo.
For some unknown reason, how¬
ever, June of 1925 found Young
Tommy back in Mambulac. Here he
met a childhood playmate, Angelica
Tiamson. The intimacy of their
earlier days was revived. They
found each other likeable and in
time fell in love. They married but
it was with the understanding that
Tommy must give up all his ambi¬
tion of becoming a boxer.
But his instinct to fight was not
dead. There was a silent urge which
told him to go on fighting. But he
did not. Not until he was driven to
do so. When the business of mak¬
ing a living became most difficult,
he realized that he must fight to
make a living. Times there were
when he and his wife missed a meal
or two. Love for dear life and a
still greater love for his family, fin¬
ally made him ask his wife to let
him fight again. With tears, his
wife assented, but still hoped that
Tommy would abandon the ring as
soon as he had made enough money.
Tommy’s “comeback” was staged
in Cadiz. To the average fan the
fight did not mean much, but to
Tommy it meant a lot. He received
ten pesos for his victory and he
literally ran home to give the money
to his wife. Not for a long time
had she had so much money as ten
pesos all at once, and she cried with
gratitude, while at the same time
asking Tommy if he had been much
hurt in the fight. The sight of his
wife that night served as his in¬
spiration. It still is to this day.
While in Cadiz, he polished off
every one in sight. Then he trans¬
ferred his activities to Silay, where
he met some able fighters. He was
matched with Jesus Lagora for the
flyweight championship of the Visa¬
yas. Tommy gave Lagora a neat
lacing and thus became the cham-
pion. In the same ring at differ¬
ent times he was matched with
Eddie Librado, Little Abayan, and
Young Pancho, all Manila visitors.
He beat them all.


ern stocking
od stores


These victories of Tommy at¬
tracted Sportsman Jose Javellana,
who talked Tommy into taking a
trip to Manila. With his reputation
in the Visayas, it was not hard to
sign him up for a bout. He was
matched with Kid Gabo, a tried
fighter. But what happened? Gabo
looked like a novice in the ring and
Tommy took the decision easily.
After that, Tommy was matched
with Young Firpo. Tommy gave
the Spaniard a boxing lesson. He
out-boxed, out-classed, and out-hit
Firpo only to be declared loser at
the end of the fight. Booes and
hoots mingled to sound a protest.
When Tommy was taken to his
dressing room, he wept. It was the
first defeat of his boxing career.


Young Tommy (left) and his manager,
Jose Javellana.


Incidentally, Kid Moro was
the local king of the flywe
Tommy challenged him fo.
crown—and what a fight that
It was great while it lasted. It
a sensation, a pleasant relief to tl
eye to see Tommy duck and pul
dance about the ring, popping,
head up where Moro’s mitts
absent. The referee had to stopi
fight after Moro had been punis
enough. Tommy had the chai
throned by T. K. O.
Dano became the next vict
Tommy when the former,
from his invasion of Ame.
rings and ranked at that time eighti
among the world’s flyweighta
thought he could turn the tio
(Continued on page 27)


EEEABUA
HEALTH SOAP
SMITH, BELL & CO. LTD., MANILA
271 95


Safe from playtime dirt and danger


“He looks healthy enough, doesn’t he?
And I see that he keeps healthy. Ever
since he was a tiny boy I’ve been
strict about the Lifebuoy rule. I believe
that there’s nothing more dangerous
to a child’s health than dirty hands.
Think of the infectious germs they pick
up in the dirt ! So my rule is s before
and after school, after play, and always
before meals, a wash with Lifebuoy
Soap.' Im convinced that regular
washing with the protective
Lifebuoy lather has saved the
children from many an illness.”
A product of Lever Brothers
Company, Cambridge, Mass.,
U.S.A.


LIFEBUOY SHAVING CREAM


No more tend. ",
It soothes thi
giving you tha
you've ever


"his lather!
skin —


IGE 24





September 7, 1933


The Anniversary Of The Execution Of


1

HRIEENIVARO


Occurs This Week, And Stirs Up Thoughts
Ou That Subiect So Much Talked About
Again These Days: Freedom


As an artist depicts Cavite's “Thirteen Martyrs” on their way to the field of execu¬
tion on that tragic 12th of September, 1897.


URING the dark days of
1896, when dissension and
D
distrust were fast fom¬
enting a revolution, daggers to
strike the blow against Spanish
despotism in the Islands were
secretly sharpened. By 1897,
Cavite was at the head of a move¬
ment to overthrow Spanis h
sovereignty in the Islands.
But that patriotic move proved
costly. Thirteen lives were sacri¬
ficed for the cause even before the
movement could completely mate¬
rialize. But noble though their
death was, the mock trial that seal¬
ed their doom was, next to Rizal’s
trial and subsequent execution, the
most inglorious event of its kind
to be recorded in the chapters of
our history.
Every year, on September 12, we
honor the memory of those thirteen
Cavitenos who died without a mur¬
mur of protest. Those martyrs
were: Victoriano Luciano, Maximo
Inocencio, Maximo Gregorio, Euge¬
nio Cabezas, Antonio S. Agustin,
Francisco Osorio, Agapito Chanchu,
se Lallana, Luis Aguado, Hugo
ez, Severino Lapidario, Alfonso
hmpo, and Feliciano Cabuco.
this page appears a reproduc¬
a painting by Roman Faug


tino, who tried to depict the mar¬
tyrs as they were being led to the
field of execution. And their story,
as history tells it, is as follows:
During the early months of 1897,
Spanish authorities got wind of a
supposed plot to do away with the
Spanish government in Cavite.
Those who were reported to be at
the head of the movement were im-
mediately arrested and a trial was
ordered to “ascertain" their inno¬
cence or guilt. During the trial,
the old seamstress, Sayat, of a Spa¬
nish woman appeared in court and
declared against the thirteen Cavi¬
tenos. According to the seamstress,
she heard a plot being hatched
against the Spanish government.
She accused Luis Aguado, one of
those executed, of conspiring with
one Juan Casteneda. The other wit.
nesses summoned declared to the
court, however, that it was only
through hearsay that they learned
about a revolution being planned.
Luis Salazar, who was at that
time captain of engineers, declared
to the court when summoned, that
he had found no proofs to corrobor-
ate the accusation. But in spite of
this, the Council of War, composed
of Carlos Reyes, president, and


Faustino Garcia, Antonio de la Ro¬
sa, Candido Villisni, Manuel Regur¬
ra, and Ricardo Solos—all officers
of the Armada, and as such, in
charge at the time of meting out
sentences to convicted persons—sen¬
tenced the thirteen men to be shot


Father Jose Burgos:


on flimsy "evidence.”


Jose Rizal, national hero of the Philip-
pines: he, too, was the victim of a mack
trial.


without as much as allowing them
to present proofs of their innocence.
The court proceeding, apparently,
was only a matter of formality.
The execution took place on the
12th of September, 1897. In the
morning of that day, the place of
execution was “beautifully” pre¬
pared. The infantry band was
there to play the funeral dirge for
the thirteen unfortunates. At the
Plaza de Armas de S. Felipe, the
place of the execution, were assem¬
bled Spanish authorities, and the
wives, children, and relatives of
what are now known as “the thir-
teen martyrs."
Towards noon of that day, the
military band struck the “March
Cadiz.” Forthwith, the thirteen ca
demned men were brought forw4
their elbows tied behind them
marched to the square in sing
There were no traces of feard
pale, serene faces. But pe
their eyes was infinite sa
they took a last, parting
their wives and children
ter stood among the c,
miserable and helplesa
Then a squad of S
marched to the exec
was at 12:45 noon..
ed. Suddenly, the 4
of the execution
music stopped.
(Contind


September 7, 1933





PAGE 21


AOIAl AMO NAGL BUA


Inspect!
Gentlemen:
The deplorable conditions existing
in the slums of the city have again
come to public notice, thanks to the
findings and recommendations of
Governor-General Frank Murphy.
As a result of this, efforts are now
being made to improve conditions in
the city’s tenement districts.
The elimination of slums, a plan
which is almost impossible to carry
out, and the building of parks and
playgrounds deserve commendation.
However, these plans cannot wipe
out the deplorable living conditions
in the city without the co-operation
of tenement dwellers and the Philip-
pine health service. One has but to
go to some of the districts of the
city to find deplorable living condi¬
tions brought about by the indiffer-
ence of the dwellers to cleanliness.
It can also be mentioned that the
attention of the Philippine health
service has been called to these
places time and again; but except
for occasional inspections of the
places in question, the aforemen¬
tioned bureau is apparently neglect¬
ing these sections of the city.
“Juan de la Cru?”
Manila.


A Blessing
Gentlemen:
I do not intend to impress upon
your readers that I love the depres¬
sion. I hate it as much as any one
else. However, there is no such
thing as perpetual prosperity and
past events have demonstrated that
every boom period is followed by a
financial depression. And disas¬
trous as the present depression has
been to the world at large, it is un¬
deniable that it has been, to a cer¬
tain extent, a blessing.
Of course, Old Man Depression
has put thousands of us out of work,
worried us as to where our next
heal would come from, closed many
our schools and deprived thou¬
ids and thousands of our children
she benefits of education, and re¬
the prices of our commodities.
cannot be denied that he is
ble, to a great extent, for
he miseries now prevailing
rid. Hawever, despite all
Old Man Depression
essing in disguise.
go far to prove this
us take the case of
or just right after
iwhen the price of.
and of hemp as
hundred kilos,
baca or coconut
s who would


work for him continuously for a
week. Prices were sky-rocketing
and it was easy for the people to
earn more money than they were
able to judiciously dispose of. Com¬
mentators of that easy-money era
have it that extravagance, gambling.
and idleness were the order of the
day. Things, however, have radical¬
ly changed within the last three
years. To-day, our laborers are kept
busy all day. They have no time for
idleness or gambling. Old Man De¬
pression has made it hard for them
to make a living, thus making them
more than careful in spending their
hard-earned money.
Old Man Depression has taught
us to be economical, industrious,
humble, and has made us realize the
dignity of labor. College and high
school graduates are no longer seek¬
ing white collar jobs; they know
that there are none left for them.
They are no longer afraid to do
manual labor.


Furthermore, the province has un¬
dertaken the planting of rice twice
a year, with success. These and ma¬
ny more are the reasons why Old
Man Depression has been a blessing
in disguise, at least as far as Albay
is concerned.
Alipio N. Alfonso
Albay.


Coming back to Albay, this prov¬
ince has started cultivating its
hitherto idle lands. To illustrate
this point we can cite the vast ex¬
panse of cogon land in the barrio of
Manawan, extending as far as the
west coast of Albay, that has been
transformed into rice, corn, peanut,
cassava, and camote plantations.


Vice- and Crime-Ridden
Gentlemen:
Iloilo City, the so-called "sac-
charine city,” is doubtless one of
the most important and progressive
places in the Philippines. Time and
again it has had praises heaped upon
it. It is sad to state, however, that
with all its virtues and progressive¬
ness, Iloilo is infested with vice and
crime.
Prohibited games, such as monte
and poker, flourish in the city; va¬
grants and racketeering beggars
roam on its streets; houses of ill re¬
pute thrive in it. On top of this de¬
plorable state of affairs organized
criminality in the city has appeared.
Gangsters, pickpockets, and petty
thieves are getting bolder in their
depradatory activities. The city’s
gangster world is daily increasing in
viciousness and the day is not far
when Iloilo will have the same prob¬
lem that Manila is having with its
tough hombres to-day.
It goes without saying that the
situation calls for quick action on
the part of Iloilo’s duly constituted
authorities. Better start white¬
washing the city now when the vice
and crime menaces in Iloilo can be
adequately remedied than to wait
for that time when the hands of the
authorities might be tied by the ten¬
tacles of the octopus of vice and
crime. The fight must start now!
Nicanor D. Rodriguez
Iloilo High School
La Paz, Iloilo.


You CannotBuy ATMURINE
NO A. I
PN
—O you give Your Eyes
Dthe Care they deserve
YOUR EYES
to keep them Bright and
. Dust,
Beautiful?
Wind and Strain make them appear Dull and Lifeless,
To preserve Natural Charm and Lustre, cleanse
them as Carefully as the Skin and Teeth.
For Daily Use and when your EYES are Tired, Duli
and Heavy, Murine is most Refresh¬
ing and Beneficial.
E TTURIRE
Murine has been used Successfully
over Thirty Years.
Does not contain Belladonna or any
other harmful ingredient.
a
YES
THE MURINE COMPANY, INC.
NE
RPANCAN

CHICAGO, U. S. A.
E
Him
Pode

na Pakaa diainyas Pabaaaca lanamamee
a aluagal diigaan Cirualan  e un  Ala


EALE
NUo
By A. E. L.
*
—o0o—


Dear Mr. Litiatco—I have the
pleasure of commenting on youy
comment:
A man of wit would often be very
much at a loss without the company of
fools.—La Rochefoucald.
A man of wit creates a compas
of fools.—A. E. L.
Nay, Sir, rather a company
fools creates a man of wit.
what is generally considered
be a man of wit is himself mere
ly a subtle consummate fool.¬
Carlos P. San Juan.
Dear Mr. San Juan— must
bow to your superior wit.—
A. E. L.


Mechanical invention can give
us a so-called movie and talkie, bu
it has not yet contributed a thinkit
-James M. Beck.
(t47
How can it, when real “think-
ies" are rare even among men?


Unfortunately, few women are
courageous enough to be old-fashion-
ed to-day.—Leon Gordon.
Aye: Few of us dare to be
different from those who are
trying to be “different."


It begins to look as if the next
war would be fought to make demo¬
cracy safe for the world.—Spring-
field Union.
Or even, perhaps, to make the
world safe from democracy.


“Many budding poets are to be
found in our prisons," declares a
chaplain.—The Humorist.
Unfortunately, however, prison
walls do not a prison make, nor
iron bars a cage!


The fellow who wants to let his
conscience be his guide too often
wants to guide conscience.—H. M.
Stansifer.
The fellow who honestly lets
his conscience guide him... will
not be guided by it alone.


If an earthquake was to engulf
England tomorrow, the English
would dine somewhere amid the
ruins — wearing their evening
clothes.—Douglas Jerrold.
If an earthquake were to en¬
gulf the Philippines tomorrow,
the Filipinos would feast some¬
where amid the corpses—holding
the traditional wake.





September 7, 1933


ho ls Who In The Philippines


EW foreign consuls in the
Philippines can lay claim to
the same distinction as Hon.
Ishi Kimura, consul-general of
n in the Philippines, does.
The universal concept that upon
he scepter of the emperor of Japan,
 to say, rests the future of the
ountries in the Far East, is more
pronounced now than ever. Whe-
her this is true or not, it in no
little way contributes to the glam-
 surrounding the office of the
anese consulate in the
lippines, as represent¬
a country whose future
how the subject of much
prterest among political
prognosticators and ana¬
ysts.
Another distinction lies
in the person of Hon. Ki¬
mura himself. For Consul
Kimura is also recognized
as an authority on Far
Eastern affairs. To him,
the consulate is more than
a diplomatic office. It is
la laboratory where the for¬
mulas in diplomatic rela¬
tions are tested, and at the
same time a scholar’s study,
where current political top-
ics regarding the relations
of his country with the rest
of the nations, of the Far
East particularly, are sub¬
jected to a rigid analysis.
Consul Kimura does not
regard himself as a censor
of utterances and state¬
ments affecting his people
as they appear in the Phil-
ippine press or as heard in
public forums here. But
out of them, he makes his
own conclusions as regards
the future relations of the
Philippines and Japan. A
political weather man, he
foresees through current
thoughts the events of to¬
morrow.
Youthful, and in person
the picture of the cultured
gentleman he is, Consul Ki¬
mura is at home in the so¬
cial circles of Manila.
Charity and similar benefit
programs often list his name
among the leading patrons.
A number of local associa¬
tions and clubs have him in
their rosters. His appeal
for a closer amity between
the Japanese and the
Filipinos, in business as well as in
social life, has awakened many to
the advantages to be derived from
such a friendly relationship. This
same appeal has brought Consul
Atsushi Kimura closer to the hearts
of his many friends in Manila.
Not a few are now unaware of
the fact that Japanese business men
are asserting themselves in the com-
mercial scheme of our country.
latisticians of the bureau of com¬
 made y
nerce an¬


plain that the loss of the' Chinese
in the commercial field here means
gains for Japanese business. To¬
day, there are no less than 4,000
Japanese citizens engaged in var¬
ious occupations in the Philippines.
Consul Kimura was born on Oc¬
tober 30, 1891, in Miyagi-Ken,
Japan. He is the son of Seizo and
Seiko Kimura, both well-known
citizens of Miyagi-Ken, which is
a small town of 10,000 inhabitants.
Consul Kimura had his elemen¬


Hon. Atsushi Kimura
Japanese Consul-General
tary and middle school (the Japan¬
ese middle school is equivalent to
our high school) education in Shi¬
roishi, a town not far from Miyagi¬
Ken. Completing the courses in
April, 1909, he was sent to Daini
Koto Jakko, a Japanese educational
center twenty miles away from his
home-town. There, Consul Kimura
had his training in preparatory law.
Graduating in July, 1912, he went
to Kyoto and enrolled in the Im-
perial University. He took ur law


and foreign relations, two courses
which prepared him fully for the
diplomatic service. He obtained his
Master of Laws degree in July,
1915.
Within one year after his grad-
uation, he was employed in the pre¬
fectural government of Tokyo, tak¬
ing charge of the commerce depart-
ment. In 1920, he was engaged for
the foreign office of the Empire
capital, and three years after, he
was assigned to the Japanese em¬
bassy in Washington, D.C.
He acted as second secret¬
ary to the ambassador of
Japan in the American
capital. Before the close of
the year 1925, he was re¬
called to Japan and assign¬
ed once more to the Tokyo
foreign office, taking
charge of Chinese affairs.
In 1928, he was appointed
Japanese consul of Chicago,
Illinois. He stayed for less
than three years in the
Windy City, his term term¬
inating in 1931, when he
was promoted to the posi¬
tion of consul-general of
Japan in the Philippines.
“I am spending the best
part of my life in the Phil¬
ippines and I intend to stay
here for some years more,"
Consul Kimura told us.
“The hospitality of the Fili¬
pino people has endeared
this country to me. The

climate in the Philippines
particularly suits me.
have never been ill since I

arrived here.”
4
Hon. Kimura was married
to Fumi, of Tokyo, on Oc¬
tober 20, 1917. They have
two children: Ruriko, 14,
and Junichi, 12.
He is a member of the
Manila Rotary Club, the
Wack Gold and Country
Club, and a number of other
organizations. He has trav-
elled extensively.
The present squabble over
the nine islets off the coast
of Palawan, following the
claims made by the French
government, placed the of¬
fice of the Japanese consul¬
general in the limelight.
Consul Kimura, although
not directly in a position to
make a presentation to the
French government despite
his being in the Philippines, made
an illuminating study of the claims
and presented equally illuminating
arguments in favor of the home
government.
Consul Kimura scouts the im¬
pression that there is an influx of
Japanese immigration into the Phil-
ippines. Manchuria, for numerous
reasons, appeals more to the Japan¬
ese than does any land south of the
Empire, he says. And current fig¬
ures are behind his statements.


INSULTED?
Senator Jose Clarin, the man
who always has something to
wise-crack about, except when
he is “rebuked," put one over on
Will Rogers and Tomas Oppus
when he asked his friends: "Why
do Americans insult Turkey by
naming one of their animals
Turkey?'


HE MARRIED AN OLD MAID
One of the Filipino (U. P.) de¬
baters, in the course of their
tour of America, made reference
to the fact that “One of your own
heroes, Patrick Henry, said ‘Give
me liberty or give me death.”
One of the debaters on the
other team, who happened to be
a girl, in the course of her rebut¬
tal, explained the incident thus:
“It is true Patrick Henry asked
for ‘liberty or death.’ but that
was because he married a woman
10 years his senior.”


BOTH WERE WISE
A Filipino advertising solicitor
got a tip that the man in charge
of advertising in a local oil com¬
pany office never wanted ad
hunters around him. The young
man decided to see the man, in
spite of the warning. He called
at the man’s office, presented his
card to the information boy, who
came back a few minutes later
and told him “No can do, mister."
A week later, he called again,
but this time presented a card
belonging to a newspaper re¬
porter named Reyes. He was
readily admitted.
“How are you, Mr. Reyes?
What can I do for you?” the oil
company official, an Englishman,
greeted him.
“Mr. Reyes? the Filipino ad
man said, pretending to be sur¬
prised. “I must have given you
the wrong card. Why, Im not
Mr. Reyes. I’m an advertising
man, and my name is...
“Oh, that’s all right,” said the
Englishman, smiling. "Im on tg
you, fellow.”


Acquire Youthful Bel
With Mercolized W.


For twenty years pure Mercoli
been associated with beauty
face and skin. Let it convincel
millions of other women of.
powers. Just pat Mercolized
over your face, neck and 
it were an ordinary cold cu
the film skin in tiny
gradually disclosing the
der skin. Your new
smoother and softer, co
blemishes. Mercolized
hidden beauty. To
and other age-signs,
sent letion:  l sul
a malg ping cien 1


September 7, 1933





PAGE


THE SECRET OF DOING
By MATEO SANTIAGO
yISHING is entirely different
from doing. For if, as ma¬
ny say, wishing were as
easy as doing, paupers would be
prirces and poor men’s cottages
king’s palaces. And yet, the majori¬
ty of us are pre-occupied most of the
time with the futile task of making
impossible wishes.
This is especially true of the
young—they who should start some¬
thing or get a footing somewhere.
The result is that most of these day¬
dreamers are generally without
work. They are now to be seen
everywhere: high school, normal,
and college graduates who have
nothing better to do than stay idle.
But this is not so with those who
do not waste opportunities, such as,
for instance, Catalina Francisco,


CATALINA FRANCISCO
Unwilling to join our legion of idle
youths, she has engaged in business.
formerly of the Eastern Rizal Aca¬
demy. Unwilling to join our legion
of idle youths, enterprising Catalina
has engaged in business.
She has opened a well-appointed
store and refreshment hall in front
of the Morong, Rizal, public plaza.
The place is close to both the Mo¬
rong Primary School and the East-
ern Rizal Academy, and is now one
of the best patronized of its kind in
the locality. A former student her¬
self, she caters to all the needs of
students. And as a side-line, she
sells weeklies.
Aided by an inborn talent for
business and a pleasing personality,
Catalina is being pointed out as one
who possesses the secret of the way
to the customers’ hearts. She does
things her own way and knows the
value of work
She is an excellent illustration of


what any girl can do if she would
only cease wishing she were Cinde¬
rella with a fairy godmother.


BLINDNESS IS NO HINDRANCE
By ANASTACIO QUERIMIT
—IGHT is essential to man, and
he is unfortunate who is
denied the power of vision.
But everything is not lost when
sight is lost. Milton, one of Eng¬
land’s greatest poets, was a blind
man. Helen Keller, world-famous
contemporary of ours, is blind.
In Rogerio Lagman, proprietor
of the Juan de la Cruz Studio and
pioneer studio man of Manila, one
finds a story as inspirational and
as unbelievable in its humbler way
as either Milton’s or Helen Keller’s.
Beginning with a crude, third-
hand camera, Lagman studied
photography. You would think it
unbelievable for a blind man to
learn an art which requires the use
of the eyes. Everybody did, when
Lagman first announced his desire
to learn photography. Even his
closest companions were dubious.
But Lagman is patient, industrious,
and keen to the progress and im-
provements of modern photography.
He took his time and worked as
few ever do.
In brief, Mr. Lagman succeeded
—through ways which are his own
He encountered numerous obstacles.
He devised his own means of gaug¬
ing accurately the distance of his
“objects.” He did the same in con¬
trolling his "lighting effects, his
exposures and his prints.
All this meant years and years
of experimentation for him. But


that did not matter to him. It re¬
mains that he built up a reputable
business. There came the time
when his studio, then situated on
Calle Azcarraga, became the fav¬


ROGERIO LAGMAN
Blindness was no obstacle to his be¬
coming the Islands' pioneer photographer.
orite of almost all high school and
college students of the city. His
staff of photographers have been
engaged in taking pictures of
schools and students in various
provinces of the Archipelago.
To-day, his studio, covering the
entire fourth floor of an imposing
edifice on Rizal Avenue, is hailed
as a monument to the industry of
a blind man—Mr. Rogerio Lagman.


A POVERFUL
INTERNAL
ANTISEPTIC
and
DRRETIC
6r
Fephritis.
Oedeme.
Dyeuria.
Aoemsturia,
Tlbuminurie,
Cyelitip and
other enomeliero
the Urinery hact.


ARELABLE
URIC ACID
POLVENT
and
y CLCLACCCUE
Jor
Rheumalien,
Claundice,
Gell-elones,
Cohie by Lilhigsir.
Gout ,
laumbago,
and Peme kindof
kin Drearer.


TELN EN ILEN CUNANCLEONUAN EE EETOI
BEAHCOZ- 24-0OO COL GUCEFIDO & TIUD CO. WITHOUT ALCOHOL.
ON SALE AT ALL DRUG STORES
GONZALEZ LABORATORIES
1626-1628 RIZAL AVE., MANILA—TEL No. 2-66-38


TPOUR SECOND WORLDS CHAMPIOH
Continued from page 23
against Tommy. Before the
Tommy was conceded but a
chance to win. But Dana hig
was the first to be surprised,
not ony found Tommy a hafi
to crack, but a fighter willing
mix it up freely. Dano lost t
fight by a wide margin.
THE SRet BA A
equally great fighters was staged’
Wallace Field three years ago wh/
Little Pancho and Tommy met
what was billed as “the battle
the century.” Pancho, by virtuel
the glamour of his name, thanka


his immortal brother, the late E
cho Villa, flyweight champia
the world at the time.
was given a shade
Wallaco Ficla was
city. High gove
A  
As the two enterA
was tense excitement. 
iwa were amung the very7
ers so far matched in Manila
even to-day cauliflower enthusiasts
love to recall the great fight they.
staged. Two little fighters, equally
great, were the cynosure of thou-
sands of eyes as the first roun
started. The fight warmed up intdl
the most beautiful exhibition off
skill and stamina. Pancho was
great. But Tommy was greater.
Pancho was admired for his gamey
ness. He lost the fight, but Toma-s
my’s victory was well-earned.
That fight climaxed Tommy’s
career in the Islands. Shortly after,
he sailed for abroad in quest of
more laurels. The rest of his career
from the time he landed in Honolu
lu to the present, is a matter of
common knowledge. As in the Phil-
ippines, he toppled down the best


boys pitted against him, including
such top-notchers as Speedy Dado,
Baby Arizmendi, Rudolfo Teglia,
Canto Robleto, Baby Casanova,
Little Pancho, Frankie Genaro,
Midget Wolgast, Young Sport, Er¬
nie Hood, Newsboy Brown, Sato
Lareno, Joe Tieken, and a host of
others.
—o0o—


ormula: Manthol 6.3 gm., Camphor 3
gm. Oil
Boric Acid 8.5 m
Oil Pinis
cealsbins el E
Puniile o.1 gmn.. Elcibiants to maka 80 g





September 7 1933


MICELIANEOUJ
NFORMATIO


HUESTIONS: — In connection
th the last examination for certi¬
piblic accountants, how many
aamihationt How mnaly
e repeaters? How many schools
re represented? — An Inquirer,
nila.
NSWERS:—(a) One hundred
fifty; (b) Forty six; and (c)
ht schools were represented as
College—66; 2. In¬
nts, Business, and
VUniversity of the
M. National Uni¬
Salle—1; 6. Uni¬
—1; 7. Pace Insti¬
l—1; and s. Nation¬
V
VB. The colleges attended by
9 candidates admitted on the
Wrength of their previous applica¬
ions which are not in the file of
bureau could not be determin¬
VAnswered by Paterno Lopez,
u of civil service, Manila, for
thief examiner.
UESTIONS:—What are the
es and addresses of the best
piversities in Japan (either state
r private) offering courses in med¬
ine? How much is the approxi¬
hate monthly expenditures of an
verage student studying in those
Hastitutions, including board and
fonging, and the necessary school
fees, in P. I. currency? How long
bes it take one to finish the course
ading to the doctor’s degree?¬
Meneleo Bernardez, Bangued, Abra.
ANSWERS:—A. The imperial
hiversities: (a) Tokyo Imperial
iversity, Hongo-ku, Tokyo; (b)
noto Imperial University, Kami¬
yo-ken, Kyoto; (c) Tohoku Impe¬
al University, Sendai, Miyagi¬
92; -d) Kyushu Imperial Univer¬
ty, Fukuoka, Fukuoka-ken; (e)
Hokkaido Imperial University, Sap¬
poro, Hokkaido; (f) Keijo Imperial
University, Keijo, Chosen; and (g)
Takihoku Imperial University, Tai¬
Woku, Taiwan. Graduates of high
chools are admitted, in principle,
Wut owing to the excessive number
W high school graduates, selective
tramination in the Japanese lan¬
vuage is held. In view of this fact
it is very seldom that foreigners
we admitted in the imperial univer¬
nties, unless they know the Japa¬
tese language.
B.—The private universities: (a)
Teio University of Medicine, Shina¬
to-machi, Yotsuyaku, Tokyo and
b) Jikeikai Medical College, Ata¬
1o-cho, Chiba-ku, Tokyo. The Jikei¬
sai Medical College is the only col¬
ege in which the foreigners, espe¬
ially Filipinos, are studying at
mesent. For further information
pply directly to the college.
card and lodging: The principal


cities of Japan proper have comfor¬
table lodging houses. The rates of
board and lodging vary according
to location and the kind of accom¬
modations, but the average rate for
a single room without bath, on the
American plan, is about Yen 50
monthly.
Other expenses: School fees for
tuition and textbooks and other
necessary expenses total approxi¬
mately Yen 50, so the monthly ex¬
penses of a student may be calculat¬
ed to be about Yen 100 or up.
The present system of degrees in
Japan- distinguishes the two grades
of Gakushi (somewhat correspond
ing to the master's degree) and
Hakushi (the doctor’s degree). The
degree of Gakushi is granted to
those who completz the full course,
a course requiring four years. Ha¬
kushi is granted to those who, be¬
ing Gakushi or its equivalent, have
successfully pursued research work
in the post-graduate course and who
have proved themselves competent
scholars by presenting acceptable
theses.—Answered by M. Izawa,
Japanese-Consulate General, Mani¬
la.
—o0o—


RABALAAI
DOA


QUESTION:—For just about a
year now, I have noticed an irregu¬
lar enlargement of the veins in my
right leg. I was told that this are
what are called varicose veins.
Could you tell me its causes and
cures?—Salvador Olmedo, 158 Ca¬
bildo, Intramuros, Manila.
ANSWERS:—Varicose veins re¬
sult whenever there is obstruction
to the return of the blood to the
heart. Occupations requiring stand¬
ing throughout the day are apt to
produce varicose veins.
Application of cloth as bandage
wrapped loosely around the leg may
be of help. Other treatments re¬
quire medical knowledge in order to
understand them, so we refrain
from giving them here.—Answered
by Dr. Jose P. Bantug, chief, sec¬
tion on public health education and
publicity, bureau of health, Manila.


Shes just come
into a million
dollars!


Af least she FEELS that way!
She’s just had her morning
bath and sees the world
through the rose-colored
glasses of any normal infant.
She can kick her legs, wave
her orms, and squirm ecstati¬
cally without feeling a single
chofe anywhere. Credit her mother’s common sense for that!
She corefully showered into every lapping fold of skin the
soothing protectiveness of Mennen Borated Baby Talcuml
Thaf is any right-thinking mother's protection against the sore¬
ness and inflammation caused by constant weftings and per¬
spiration. Note the word "BORATED"—it means that speciol
medicated ingredients have been added to prevent chofing,
soreness and infection. An investment in Mennen Borated Baby
Talcum is an investment in permanent baby comfortl
"FOR YOUR PROTECTION —Mennen
Borated Baby Talcum is now Packad in
Non-Refillable containers, to pravent re¬
filling with inferior talcum.”
F. A. THOMPSON
Exclusive Representative
208 Masonic Temple, Manila.


MENNIer
BORRTED
BAEY TALCUPI


VT
QUESTIONS:—My child, nine
months old, is healthy and strong.
She can stand, but cannot walk yet.
However, she does not have, as yet,
even a single tooth. Is it abnormal
for a child of her age to have not
even one tooth? Is there any defect


in her gums? What is the usual
length of time required for the
teeth of a child to appear? Is it not
advisable for a child of her age to
eat bananas, biscuit, rice, and eggs?
What are the best foods for a child
of her age? At present, I feed her
condensed as well as breast milk.—
Apolonario Castillo, Masbate, Mas¬
bate.
ANSWERS:—The first two lower
front teeth generally appear in the
sixth month, the upper two follow¬
ing, etc., so that by the child's first
year eight teeth are present, k up-
per and l lower. The delay in the
eruption of the teeth in infants is,
however, common. Diseases of long
standing, especially those of the
stomach and intestines, contribute
to the delay.
The mother’s milk is the best
food for the infant. If, however the
health of the mother is menaced in
feeding the child thus, artificial
feeding may be resorted to as an
aid.
You may give your child about
half of a cooked potato, mashed and
mixed with soup, rice broth, eggs
(cooked), and ordinary bananas (not
the saba kind) in small quantities.
It will be of much benefit for you
to go to the puericulture center in
your locality, and ask for the advice
of the doctor or the nurse in charge
of it.—Answered by Dr. Jose P.
Bantug, chief, section on public
health education and publicity, bu¬
reau of health, Manila.


QUESTIONI:—Could you advise
me as to the best treatments for my
present ailments? I have been suf-
fering from cold for almost two
years now. As soon as I get up from
bed, my nose is filled with mucus.
and constant sneezing prevails. At
noon, after a short nap, the same
thing occurs again.
Another ailment which disturbs
me as frequently as cold is head¬
ache. I’ve been suffering from it
for four years now. The ache
usually occurs in the right half of
my forehead. I have tried several
medicines, but to no avail.—Fausto
C. Mina, e/o Visayan Rapid Transit
Co., Inc., Victorias, Occ. Negros.
ANSWER:—Consult a special¬
ist in the provincial hospital at Ba¬
colod for a thorough examination of
the nose, as you may have "sinusi¬
tis."—Answered by Dr. Jose P.
Bantug, chief, section on public
health education and publicity, bu¬
reau of health, Manila.


MARION
DAVIEJ


PAGE 30





93
Sep


Born on Septem¬
ber 9, 1878, in Ce¬
bu, Sen. Sergio Os¬
mena celebrates his
fifty-fifth birthday
the day after to¬
morrow.
Entering the ser¬
vice of his people
in 1904, first as
governor of his
province and later
as a leader of the
Filipino participa¬
tion In the govern-
ment, he has contj¬
nuously devoted his
time and fortune
to the nation's
cause.
In this exclusive
 phofo,
taken a few days
before his 55th
birthday, he is


shown with Mrs.
Espesanza Limjap
Osmena, and their
five-week old baby,
and Miss Maria
Osmens.


September 7, 1932





PAGE 31


Above: Sponsors and unit commanders of the U. P. Cadet Corps, photographed during the annual sponsors’ hop, held at the Plaridel
Temple on August 12. The sponsors are, from left to right: Misses Lourdes Aunario, Rosario de Jesus, Evelyn N. Bennett, Cirila Marquez, Julita
Cuaderno, Tomasita Mata, Asuncion Tan. Rosalia Berenguer, Elisa Tabunar, Claudio M. Cruz, Corazon Ruth de Veyra, Nelly X. Burgos, Evelina Kalaw.
Felisa de la Fuente, Vicenta Noel, Elena Mapua, C. de la Paz, Vicenta Joven, Loreto Tomelden, Erlinda Nicolas, Fe de la Fuente, Carmencita Mapua,
and Nena Banez.
Below, left: Members of the board of directors and the quest of honor of the Caloocan’s Women’s Club, which was inaugurated last August
27. Leff to right, front row: Miss Carmen Herrers, Mrs. L: Javalera, Mrs. M. Almario, Mrs. Pilar Hidalgo Lim, Mrs. Frencisco Sevilla, Miss J. Sanchez,
Mrs. Gochuico, and Mrs. Flores. Standing, same order: Mrs. Sityar, Mrs. Sanchez, Miss Catalina Laudico, Mrs. Ligaya V. Reyes, end Miss Pacita Manalo.


The Abra Associafion, composed of prominent men end women of Abra, will honor Speaker Paredes, of the same province, with a reception and ba o
Pept. 23. A committee of prominent members called recently on the speaker, as shown in the picture. They are lleft to right) Speaker Part-
des, Miss Consuelo Villamor, Procopio Borromeo, Misses Esperanza Fajardo and Nena Banez, and Dr. Eratida Valera.


LADRE VO MISMA
SU PELLEZA.


DE VENTA EN TODOS LOS ESTABLECIMIENTOS
DE PERFUMERIA


POLVOS MAJA


JABON
LOCION
PERFUME


FASHIONED OXFORDS


First in Durability,
First in Style,
First in Comfort,
First in the Thoughts
of every discriminating
Shoe Wearer.
toribio


At leading Shoe Stores Includtry
Center de Lune. Excolta
teodoro


710-714 Ilaya, Manila
MANUFACTURER


PAGE 32





Septembor 7, 1933


Above: Mary
IAstor’'s concepf
of profection:
strong arms
around her. The
arms belong to
none other than
Ricardo Cortez.
Both Mary As¬
tor and Ricardo
Cortez, who
have been play¬
ing since silent
picture days, are
now featured in
talkies. Mary
stor is now
married fo a Ca¬
lifornia doctor
—the same phy-
sician who freat¬
ed her when she
had a break¬
down following
the tragic death
in an airplane
crash of her first
husband, Ken¬
neth Hawkes
Left: Judith
Allen and Brace
pradley, posed
after a bicycle
polo. Bicycle
polo is a new
tad in Holly¬
wood.



E





N E
E  E  E EPA


eptembor 7, 1932


SRAR


PAGE 33


ALTAAAAAAAAAAIAAAPAN:
PALII
riena indeeo.

RTO
CIGARETTES


Soothing and refreshing -
with just enough anise to
make smoking a pleasure!


ur Choice in


DaC
E


Made in the Philippines by
me Aromafic Cigarettes Mfg., Company
661 Magdalena, Manila, Tel. 4-95-57


Center, above:
An unusual pho¬
fograph of Gene
Raymond and
Adrienne Ames.
The picture was
taken on a
beach, with a
camera projeci¬
ed directly
above them.
With Adrienne
in a beach cos¬
fume, if cannot
be a dull day for
Gene. Inciden¬
gally. Adrienne
Ames will soon
mppear in a pic¬
fure with Mau¬
rice Chevalier.
Upper right:
"Let's hike if..
An d who
wouldn't, with a
girl like Rochelle
Hudson briskly
keeping up with
your steps, and
with pedestrians
eyeing you en¬
viously for be¬
ing in company
with such a nice
lass! Eric Linden
is the gallant es¬
gort.
Right: Kath-
leen Burke and
Lona Andre.


NVV VVV P


EVVFUVVUUVTVIVUTUVETTN


PAGE 34





Sepfember 7, 19


Fan leffers are both a
delight and a task to the
members of the film colony.
Joan Crawford, Norma
Shearer, Clara Bow, Jean
Harlow, Clark Gable, Mary
Pickford have each personal
secretaries who do nothing
most of the time but open
and answer fan mails. The
volume of leffers each of
them receives is said to be
so enormous that it would
ttake all their time fo read
them personally.
At the right, Randolph
Scott and Cary Grant show
what a dull morning it is—
with their mail box empty
save one for Randolph.
Both actors live together in
a feshionable house. The
number is 217, as the fig-
ures above the mail box
reveal.


Below: A remarkable ca¬
mera study of Jean Parker,
complete with light and
shadows, and a mandolin.
Lower right: Fascinating
Claudette Colbert in her
costume for "Tonight Is
Ours."


Saptambor 7, 1933


HOME & FASHION





HOME & FASHION


PAGE 35


Above: the reception line
at the Kahirup dance af the
Tiro al Blanco clubhouse
on August 26. From leff to
right: Secretary of Justice
Quirico Abefo, Mrs. Refael
Alunan, Rep. Emilio Yulo,
Mrs. Soledad Zulueta, Un¬
der-Secretary Jorge Var¬
gas, Mrs. Serafin Hilado,
Miss Emma Unson, and Do¬
minador Hernaez, presidenf
of the club. The reception
and dance was given in
honor of the "protectores"
of the club, whe are pro¬
minent men and women
from the Visayan regions.
¡Photo by Santos)


Left: the receiving line at
the dance of the Club Cer¬
vantino of the U. P. From
left to right are: I. Serrano,
Nelly X. Burgos, G. Mana¬
lac, Erlinda Nicolas, J. Men¬
doza, Mrs. Rosario Boria,
Profesor Jose R. Teotico,
and Adolfo Reyes. Below,
the members of the com¬
mittee in charge of the
dence of the Kahirup. From
left to right are: Mariano
Goiti, Angela Vargas, Ro¬
dolfo Lizares, Virginia Igna¬
cio, Conchita Rovira, B.
Yulo, Lirio Severino, !. Lac¬
son, Josefina Yulo, and Be¬
nito Montinola.
(Photo by Santos)


PAGE 36





Saptombor 7, 1933


Above: chairman of
commitfees in charge
of the "Sweet Cha¬
rity Bal!" for the anti¬
t, b, society who met
at Malacanang to dis¬
cuss plans for the
program.
(Photo by Santos.


ant MDa


For That Sweeping
Upward Curl of
Your Eyelashes
Beautiful eyelashes—long, thick
and dark, soft and glossy, with
needle-point ends sweeping up-
wards—make your eyes more
expressive, more brilliant, more
sparkling! How easy this charm
becomes yours with a Kurlash
Eyelash Curler.
Only F2 postpaid
LRAAGUINALDO
$14-520 Juan Luna
MANILA


Above: members of the U. P. Writers' Club and quests who mef at the house of Maria Kalaw on the
evening of her arrival llast Sunday). Maria may be seen seated in the canter with a fan. Af her left is her sister,
Purita. A buffet supper prepared by Mrs. Teodoro M. Kalaw, was served to the quests. ¡Photo by Sun Studio.!


When Mrs. Marguerite Murphy Teshan gave a reception at Malacanang fof the
childreh of the St. Anthony Institution.


MISSING PAGEIPAGI
S


September 7 1933





PAGE 43


Mr. Taba


J. M. Perez


Lady of the House: Here are
some old stockings, but they need
darning.
Bum: Oh, that’s nothing, madam
I can wait while you do it.


Little Peggy had gone to the
country and was learning the names
of the new things around her.
“Now what are those?” asked
her mother, pointing to a cow with
two calves.
“It’s a bull and two little bullets,"
said Peggy.


Joe—“About what age is she?”
Dot—“In her early nicoteens."


“I see your husband never gets
out at night."
“So do I!”


Wife: You’ll have to swim by
yourself. I’ve just found a tear in
my bathing suit.
Husband: Is it a big tear?
Wife: Don’t be an idiot. There
isn’t any room for a big one!


Customer: And what is this $450-
diamond reduced from?
Jeweler: That’s the regular price,
madam.
Customer: But you have a sign in
your window that says “Cut Dia¬
monds!"


Affable Friend: You aren’t look¬
ing too bright today.
The Other: No. I mustn’t. You
see, the doctor has ordered my wife
away and if I look pleased she won’t
go.


Professional Compliment. — Two
expert pickpockets were strolling
along the road together.
Every now and then one of them
would stop, take out his watch and
look at it.
His companion began to get an¬
noyed.
"I say, Jim, he said, "what’s up
with you? Why d’yer keep looking
at your ticker? Ain’t it going, or
something?”
"I’m not looking at it to see the
time” said the other: "I’m looking
at it to make sure that it’s still
there!”


Getting to the Bottom of It.—
Little Betty, watching the farm
hands spreading out a stack of hay
to dry, could contain her curiosity
no longer, so she politely asked:
“Is it a needle you’re looking
for?'


Wifey—“I wish that we lived in
a house where everything was done
by touching buttons."
Hubby—“Yes, and I wish that I
lived in shirts and had buttons to
touch."


“I must go out because I have an
appointment."
"With whom?'
"With my tailor. He is bringing
his bill here at 8 o’clock.”


May: My fiance is telling every¬
body in India that he is coming
home to marry the most beautiful
girl in the world.
Edna: Too bad, darling, after be¬
ing engaged to you for such a long
time!


T SHOULD GIRLS STUDY ABROAD?
1
Continued from page 32


ness, but they are not for Filipino
girls, even if these were in America.
A girl, she believes, had better wait
until she is a little bit older before
going abroad to study for then, per¬
haps, she would take things philoso¬
phically, instead of feeling hurt and
left out. She also believes that one
should not stay abroad for a long
time. When she arrives in the new
country, she will have to adjust her¬
self to her environment. But no
sooner has she settled down and got-
ten accustomed to her surroundings
than she will have to go home—
which would necessitate another re¬
adjustment! And unhappiness al¬
ways accompanies the process of ad-
justment.


 CAVITE'S THIRTEEN MARTYRS
Continued from page 24
ley of shots. And, covered with
blood, the thirteen martyrs of Ca¬
vite fell dead.
Simultaneously, the shrieking sobs
of the wives and children of the
fallen victims, and shouts of "Viva,
Viva Espana!” broke out. But
though these shouts were thunder-
ous, they could not drown the wails
of grief that intermingled with
them.
The dead bodies of the thirteen
martyrs were gathered in a heap,
and at three o’clock that same after¬
noon, were sent in a bull-drawn
cart to their final resting place.
That was thirty-six years ago on
September 12th this year. This
week, as we commemorate the an¬
niversary of those thirteen deaths,
we again recall that era in our na¬
tional life when to claim the in¬
herent right of man to seek his
freedom was a crime punishable by
death. If those thirteen and all our
other martyrs could come back to
life to-day and witness how the na¬
tion is presently engaged in a
peaceful campaign for the same
freedom they sought, what would
they say?
-o0o—


Wife: You don’t love me! The
doctor says I must have a reducing
course and you won’t let me. Un¬
sympathetic brute!
Hubby: Of course I love you,
darling. I love you so much I can’t
stand to lose an ounce of you.


Piggy


By Don Juan


Wife Seeks Divorce,
Puzale Fad Blamed


Mrs. Ida Hood, 1262 Bellows
Street, Akron, Ohio, recently sued
for divorce and blamed Jig-Saw
Puzzles. She stated in her petition
her husband substituted Jig-Saw
Puzzles for job hunting.
Jig-Saws in Manila have become
the season’s best relaxation for the
“tired business man.” It is the
wives here who buy the puzzles, ac¬
cording to Philippine Education
Company.—Advt.


PAGE 44





September 7, 1933


OTIEREARIDOTTIlOMORo


A NEW KIND
OF PARA¬
CHUTE. The re¬
markable picture
at the right was
taken during a re¬
cent demonstra¬
tion of a new kind
of parachute in
the United
States. The pic-
fure was taken af
the moment that
the parachute
jumper leff the
"plane and the
parachute was
about to open.


EXPERT MARKSMEN. The gentlemen shown below are
employees of the Reichbank in Berlin, demonstrating how they


HITLER MEMORIAL. The picture af the left was taken during
the inauguration of the new Hifler Stadium in Sfuttgart, Wurftemberg.
German girls, as can be noted in the picture, are greaf exponents of
ourdoor life.
RABID TENNIS FANS. The group in the picture below is
but a small porfion of the rabid tennis fans of Wimbledon, Eng-
land, out to see a tennis match. Some of the world’s classic
tennis compefitions have been played af Wimbledon, as is gen¬
erally known.


September 7, 1933





PAGE 45


Parties are just one of the many extra-curricular activities indulged in by students. The
above picture was taken during a party given recently by Ramon Enriquez, president
of the U. P. student council, who is seated at the head of the table beside two girls.


THE “EXTRAS" SWELL.
Continued from page S


down into figuring how much cam¬
pus politics has cost him during the
last two years. Finally, he came out
with the announcement that the bill
is in the vicinity of P200.00, ₱110.00
of which went into his campaign ex¬
penses last year when he lost the
editorial chair to Ambrosio Padilla,
and P84 this year when he finally
landed the post. It can be mention¬
ed that Padilla, himself a senior law
student, debater, orator, writer,
athlete, actor, and “lover” of the
Upsilon Kappa Phi, U. P. sorority,
also ran up a no mean bill when he
won the editorship of the U. P. stu¬
dent organ last year.
On the other hand, Rafael David,
editor of The Varsitarian, student
organ of the University of Santo
Tomas, and an instructor and col¬
lege of law student of the same uni¬


versity, was not bothered with cam-
pus politics during his first and
present terms as college editor for
the simple reason that politics plays
no part in the selection of the edi¬
tor of The Varsitarian, since the
members of the faculty of the uni¬
versity do the selecting. But Editor
David, like Editor Tolentino, gave
a party to some of his friends after
his re-nomination as college editor
this year.
Leaving campus politics behind,
let us turn our attention to another
extra-curricular activity that is not
confined to a select few and hence
entails greater expenses from the
mass point of view than campus
politics. We refer to dances or balls.
No less than fifteen big dances
are held in the University of the
Philippines each year. To mention
the most prominent of these affairs,
(Continued on page 52)


THE PORTRAIT
1
L
Continued from page 18
the house. She just sat by the
front window overlooking the flow-
ing river which, at midnight, had
a solemn voice.
A few days later, one early mor¬
ning, Apung Sabi was sitting by
this window, and combing her fast
greying hair. Her arms were skin-
ny now.
The morning breeze was dry and
heavy with the scent of burning
stalks of sugar cane from the vast
fields which stretched on to the
lowlands of Sta. Cruz, Her son Ba¬
dong was now out there toling in
the heat of the sun. His young wife
had just disappeared down the wind-
ing path with a pan of clothes on
her head, her three dirty children
ambling by her side noisily. The
children called out their grandmoth¬
er’s name as they played with the
stones and the sand on the path.
Apung Sabi started at the sound
of their familiar voices, and stopped
combing her hair. She peered at
them with half-closed eyes, at these
moving figures, hazily lost as in a
morning mist. But the sun was
well nigh up in the heavens. In
fact, brightly etched against the


morning sky, stood the wooden cross
atop the old and vine-clad church.
As Apung Sabi turned her eyes to
the west, she vaguely wondered if
the wooden cross had not fallen
down in the great storm that had
swept the hillside during her illness
last July.
That morning, Tonio came with
a big, wrapped up picture frame in
his arm.
The children had seen him from
afar as he walked up the winding
paths in the blistering sun. They
noticed that he had something like
a big picture frame in his arm. And
they told Goria about him. Goria
came rushing up the stair without
the pan of clothes on her head, and
told Apung Sabi: “The children say
they can see a man walking toward
us with something like a big picture
in his arm."
Apung Sabi did not understand
Goria at once, but when she did, she
sat still for a moment as if shocked,
and then, she grew weak all over
with a strange happiness.
“Thank God!” she murmured at
“Where is he?”
last.
“He is now coming this way,”
Goria answered breathlessly.


Badong came running from the
fields. His eldest had brought him
the news. The child was trailing far
behind him. Milio and his wife
were also notified.
“Is it true, Goria, that a man
is...” Badong had to pause, for he
was panting hard.
“Yes,” Goria answered, without
waiting for him to complete his
question.
Tonio was coming nearer. Far
beyond the little church the children
could see him walking hurriedly.
Some had even gone to meet him.
He was wearing a white hat. In his
arm was a big, wrapped up picture
frame.
“Here he comes, really," Badong
said.
Apung Sabi was straining her
eyes to see.
Tonio paused in front of the
house. The children surrounded
him. He smiled at the old woman
sitting at the window, as he wiped
his red, perspiring face.
“Where is he?” Apung Sabi asked
very softly, and her voice was easily
drowned in the noise around her.
Tonio climbed up the short flight
of stairs, and approaching Apung
Sabi, kissed her hand.
“Inang,” he said, “here is the pic¬
ture now. It had been finished long
ago but I was so busy I could not
come here at once.... Oh, how
warm...
Apung Sabi held out her thin,
skinny hands for the big wrapped
up picture, and a confused feeling


of happiness that was almost dream-
like took possession of her, and
made her weak, almost helpless, as
she held the portrait in her hands.
She fumbled at the string like one
groping in the dark, while her chil-
dren and grandchildren stood about
her, speechless with expectation.
But she could not untie the string.
“Let me do it, Mother," Badong
offered, coming forward.
Badong easily unfastened the
string, unwrapped the picture, and
gazed with quite unbelieving eyes
at the wonderful enlarged likeness
of his late father. The others
pressed round him.
“There, Mother!” Badong beamed
happily. “It was well done. It is
an exact counterpart of Father.
Look, Mother!”
Apung Sabi held the picture be¬
fore her. She looked at it closely,
wrinkled her furrowed brows, and
for a moment was silent. Those
around her were talking animatedly.
"How can you see it that way,
Mother?” Badong said laughingly.
“You are closing your eyes."
Apung Sabi still held the picture
before her. Her hands were trem¬
bling. She was biting her lips as if
to hide a secret pain.
“Does it really look....does it
look like your father?” she falter¬
ed, as her eyes wandered about the
room, and rested on Badong.
Those around her were but voices,
and Badong, a blurred shadow in
a blinding fog.
—o0o—


The Acid
Test Of A
Good Tire¬-


14
14
TERRIFIC SPEEL
without skidding


"Foremost
since
1888"


DUNLOP TIRES
achieves this
every 24 hours.


MONSERRAT ENTERPRISES
CO., LTD.
Distributors for the Phil. Islands
550-554 San Luis Tel. 5-72-51


PAGE 46





September 7, 1933


By
RAIHARINL BRUSA


—HE lamps were not lit in the
room; but light from the
street, falling through the
double casement windows,
cascading over the cushioned win¬
dow seat to a wide white pool on
the floor, illumined it faintly. You
could tell that it was a college room,
a careless and a gay room. There
were Morris chairs. There were
smoking stands. There were pho¬
tographs of girls. There was a fire¬
place; a hearth littered with cigar¬
ette stubs; a mantel bearing pic¬
tures, magazines, piled sheet music,
a silver trophy cup, an empty pinch
bottle, an alarm clock and a stolen
"Ladies Only" sign. A victrola and
a tower of records stood on a desk,
shoved in among papers and books.
A saxophone curled in a chair,
catching gleams of the light. Ban-
ners patched the pale walls.


On the couch in the corner a large
young man lay. Face downward.
Motionless.
The room was ahum with cacopho¬
nous noises, borrowed, like the light,
from outside. The snarling of
horns of automobiles, the grinding


of brakes, the shrill thin scream of
a traffic policeman’s whistle. That
day, in the concrete horseshoe that
loomed at the edge of the town, a
game had been played; and eighty-
five thousand people had watched it.
They were trying to go home now.
“Let us out!” snarled their horns.
“Out of this town! We’re cold!
We’re tired! Let us o-o-o-u-u-ut!
Voices sang in the street, male
voices, hilarious voices. Whole car¬
loads went by, singing and shout¬
ing. Carloads of the conquerors.
Triumphant. Pitiless. Howling de¬
fiance to the campus of the con¬
quered. “Team! Team! TEAM!
Bawling the score. “Nine to seven!
Yaaaay! Nine to seven!"
The young man on the couch
stirred slightly. His hands, flung
up over his head, opened and shut
A tea dance was going on in the
Beta house next door. The throb
of the jazz came, muffled by walls,
like a beaten jungle drum, miles
away. Nearer were the sounds of
sociability downstairs. The fellows
and their girls, grads and their
wives, warming themselves before
the fire in the living room, sipping
drinks, eating sandwiches. Discuss¬
ing the game. The young man
above heard only their voices; but
he knew. He knew what they said.
It was the thing they were saying
tonight all over the campus, all
over the town. It was the thing
that, in the basement of the tele¬
graph office en High Street, the
newspaper men from the cities
were saying, rattling it out on their
portable typewriters, handing it
page by yellow page to the tele¬
graph operators, so that, tomorrow
morning, headlines wide and black
might ery it to the world at large.
“Evans' Fumble Loses for the
Searlet in Final Minutes of Gridi¬
ron Classic."...
He stirred, and dug his face deep¬
er in the damp warm curve of the
pillows. He was back at the field.
The dusk of two hours earlier was
graying all around him, the cease¬
less raucous roar of just two hours
ago was crashing on his heedless
ears. The game was almost over.
It was almost their game, seven to
three. All they had to do was hold
'em, hold 'em... Seated on a bench


in a scarlet blanket, hunched like
a crippled thing, he was holding
'em, from the sidelines. His cleatea
shoes were clawing the sod be¬
meath him, his fists were flyinig
wildly, pounding his knees; his
breath was short. Every muscle
of his, very sinew and nerve, was
fighting with the team... Now he
was darting out onto the field,
carrying his right arm high, feel¬
ing on his jerseyed back the sting
of the coach’s hand. His heari
bursting, bursting. Now he was
there. He was saying two quick
choked words to the referee, ano
Andrews was pulling off his head-
guard. Andrews, mudstreaked.
bloody, going to the bench—so that
Jeffry Evans, substitute, mighi
win his letter before it was forever
too late.
You had to play in this game, or
the Army game, to win a letter
Lesser games didn’t count.
Jeffry Evans was a senior, and
in three aching years he had played
only in the games that didn’t count.
Or none at all.
He thought now, lying in the
darkness, about the letter; return¬
ed mentally from the field to think
about it. They would give it to
him, he supposed, anyway. But
what mockery! He would not wear
it. Here he had yearned for it.
dreamed of it, toiled grimly and
almost thanklessly all these autums
for it—and now that it was his he
could take no pride in it, but only
shame, remembering at what loss
it had been won
He drew himself wearily upright
and sat on the edge of the couch.
his body bent forward, elbows on
knees, his fingers grooving his
mussed dark hair. A band was
approaching in the street below,
coming closer, growing louder. It
was a big band and a young band,
gone insane, raving in delirium. He
caught the tune it was playing—
but only because he knew so well
what tune it would be playing, that
enemy band. “Yard by yard we'll
fight our way, Through the scarlet
line.” It was very close now. He
could almost hear the marching
feet, he could see with the eyes of
his imagination the sweatered,
white-capped youths who played,
the racoon-coated dervishes who
thronged in their wake, dancing a
saraband. He could see the goal
posts. They had torn them down,
were bearing their splintered gray
remains on a hundred proud fur
shoulders through the town. The
goal posts...
Three minutes more. They were
huddled for signals again. Bending
very low, heads together, quick
breaths mingling white in the tight
little circle they made. LeMarr
coughing and, spitting. Capron
dashing the sweat from his eyes.
Himself pulling at a dislocated


TATHARINE BRUSH is becoming increasingly prominent
among American woman writers, not perhaps to be
Igrouped as yet with Edith Wharton and Willa Cather and
Ellen Glasgow, but surely in the front ranks of the younger con¬
temporaries like Vina Delmar. Three of her novels and one of
her short-stories have been transferred to the screen, and as
books two of them—"Young Man of Manhattan" and “Red¬-
Headed Woman"—were sensational best-sellers.
“Fumble,” which first appeared in Cosmopolitan and was
later reprinted in “Night Club,” a collection of Mrs. Brush’s
short-stories, well demonstrates how deftly and realistically she
can portray character, how appealingly and engrossingly she
can tell a story.


September 7, 1933





PAGE 47


thumb with his other hand. The
thirty-five yard line. First down.
"Formation left! Evans!
Off
tackle.
He had leaped into place, he had
received the ball, he had carried
it— how far? A couple of yards
maybe, three, four. Then he had
fallen, struggling, sobbing for
breath, under three men. And the
ball¬
“God!” he groaned aloud, and
dropped his head to the arms that
were crossed on his knees, rolling
it from side to side in the frenzy
of recollection.
He thought that he might have
guessed this thing would happen to
him; might have foreseen that in
the crisis he would fail. He always
failed. Not pettily and inconspi¬
cuously, at the very start; but
terribly, later, when it mattered.
Viewing in bitter retrospect his
twenty-two years, he saw that they
were spotted with the near-successes
that hurt far worse than no success
at all. There was that tennis
championship, lost in the third
protracted set of the finals. There
was that scholarship prize, for
which he had lacked one point. In¬
cidents like those, by the score. He
was always just missing. Climbing
just high enough so that the
heights were visible—and so that
the fall was terrific. As now.
How much, how infinitely better,
never to have made the football
squad, than to have made it and
toiled on and on—to this!
“Fumble.” Butter-fingered word.
Thick and slow and stupid word. It
had branded him at last, stamped
itself upon him. Now all men shouid
know him for the sorry thing he
was, the almost good, the near-do¬
well.
His mind was momentarily di¬
verted from himself by a sudden
commotion at the door. Some one
trying to get in. He sat upright
and dully, through the gloom, re¬
garded the writhing knob. He had
forgotten that the door was locked.
“Hey, Jeff! Lemme in, will
you, Jeff? It’s Weary."
The identification was necessa¬
ry. Jeffry’s roommate, "Weary
Haynes—so called because of his ha¬
bit of napping in classes, in chapel,
and elsewhere where the world was
rather dull — had led cheers from
two until half past five that after¬
noon. His voice was now not a
voice, but a guttural wheeze, quite
unrecognizable.
Jeffry rose from the couch. He
had an impulse to tell Weary to go
away for cripes sake, to go away
and stay away and let him alone.
This impulse he defeated. It was


babyish. He drew a quick sleeve
across his eyes, humiliated at the
gesture even though there was
none but himself to witness it; and
went to the door.
As he turned the key with his
right hand, his left sought and
found the electric switch on the wall
beside the door. Light poured upon
him, revealing him as big, most
broad of chest and shoulder, slim of
waist. He had the V-shaped torso of
the born athlete, mounted on long
straight legs. His hair was black
and slightly wavy, his blue eyes
were direct, his chin was emphatic,
he was nice.
“Hullo,” he said.
“Hullo, said Weary. “Why the
bolts and bars?
"No special reason. I — just
thought I’d lock it."
This was lame, and Weary’s eyes
upon him were wise and rather un¬
"I
comfortably sy mpathetic.
thought I’d better lock it,” he ex¬
plained additionally. “I didn’t
want any of those dolls from down-
stairs coming crashing in, think¬
ing it was the — Say, what’s hap-
pened to your tooth?'
I broke it,” said Weary. Which
was obvious. He bared his gums
in a solemn grimace, that Jeffry
might the better see. “Chipped the
corner right off. Hit it with the
mouth of the megaphone in the ex¬
citement. Damnedest thing! It
went in my mouth, and when I
started the cheer, I blew it out.
'Evrybody up!' I yelled, and on
the 'Ey’—wst!—out she flew, at
sixty miles an hour, and gone for¬
ever.
“Too bad."
“Oh, S'all right, said Weary.
“It’ll fix. He had shut the door
and crossed the room, and now he
dropped into a chair. “I regret
that I have but one tooth to give
to my college, he paraphrased,
and leaned back, stretching his
“Hey! Hey! Im done up.
legs.
“PIl
bet. It sounded great,
though,” said Jeffry, who had not
really heard a single rah.
"Fair,” Weary nodded, "fair.”
He meditated a minute, frown¬
ing slightly, then dug beneath his
sweater into a pocket of his white
flannels and produced a sat-upon
packet of cigarettes. "Smoke, Jeff?”
“Yeah, I will."
“I should think,” observed
Weary, watching him light up,
“that the first butt after three
months of training would be in the
nature of an event."
‘It is,” sald Jeffry, inhaling.
"Almost an epoch, in fact."
Constraint between them, born
of the things that had not been


said, but must be said, was in¬
creasing; their remarks had a
forced and hollow ring. Their eyes
strayed and shifted. Weary was
visibly se eking the appropriate
words, the fit opening. Jeffry’s
state of mind was somewhat that
of one recently bereaved, meeting
for the first time since his bereave¬
Well,
ment an intimate friend.
say it,” he thought drearily. “Go
ahead. Let’s get it over with.
He stole a glance at his room¬
mate, and felt an abrupt, new pang
Here was a man who was all the
things that he himself was not.
Here was a man who never fum¬
bled. Everything Weary did, he
did triumphantly well, easily and
beautifully well. What he wanted,


he got. A political office, a B in a
course, a trip to Europe, a girl—
whatever it was, it was Weary’s
from the moment he thought of it
first. He was that kind. Chair¬
man of the prom committee, business
manager of the Bleat, head cheer¬
leader, winner of the campus po¬
pularity prize by an overwhelming
majority—his progress through
the University had been strewn
with laurels, attended with hyste¬
rical hosannahs. He was not ath¬
letic; but it came to Jeffry now that
if he had been, if Weary had been
the substitute put into today’s
game in the last five minutes, he
would have made a touchdown, like
the substitutes of fiction, and
(Continued on page 48)


PAGE 48





September 7, 1933


COMMUNION
By NATY NIEVA VALENTIN
Miles lie befween us,
But our hearts, though mute
With the sweetest melodies yef unsung,
Commune in silence.
You are a light perfume,
Intangible because far away;
Yet, the languishing sweetness of
Your dream presence encompasses me,
Lulls me with ifs soothing redolence.
Don'f you hear the soff wind
Tapping against your window panes
In plaintive supplication?
If is my impassioned love
That it sings to you.


FUMBLE
T
Continued from page 47


emerged trailing clouds of glory.
“But,” thought Jeffry, “he wouldn’t
have been a substitute.
Weary, into the silence, broad-
cast a small cough, a sort of prepa¬
ratory “Stand by!” He tossed his
cigarette to the hearth, where it
lay among generations of its pre¬
decessors. And took out another.
“I think it’s damn’ fine, Jeff,
getting your letter."
Jeffry was silent.
“If ever a guy deserved one,”
Weary continued warmly, "you de¬
serve one. Every day for three
years, all through the fall, sweating
out there, working like a horse—
Lord! Pll say you deserved it!
They should’ve given it to you
years ago."
“I wish they had,” said Jeffry.
He did not see Weary’s eyes, for
his own eyes were lowered; but he
felt them. There was a short pause.
Then he rose, flung himself onto
his feet with a sudden swift jerky
movement, and walked to the win¬
dow. He stood there, staring un¬
seeing through the pane, his back
to Weary, his knotted hands thrust
deep in his trousers pockets. “If
I’d copped it before,” he said slow¬
ly, “they wouldn’t have put me in
the game today, and — we’d have
won."
“Bilge!” exploded Weary prompt¬
ly, loyally. “That’s no way to
look at it, Jeff.”
“How else can I look at it?”
Jeffry turned from the window,
presenting a tragic face. “I threw
the game away. I know it, and
you know it.” He turned back.










A


Few people feel fit after mid¬
dle age without some form of
help. Stimulants or drugs
should not be taken except
by medical advice.
But every one can take
Scott’s Emulsion.
It will help to sustain vi¬
tality and build up vigor,
more resistance. It is both
food and medicine — not
merely a stimulant. Take it
now for a few weeks.


FORMULA OF SCOTT'S EMULSION:-
Codliveroil, 29.0329%: Giycerine,12.0977%:
So Solution of Hypophosphites of Lime and
Seda. 56.93770; Excivient, 1.7960 Flaver
tan iaga
. Approved and Registerca
by the Board of Pharmacy.


“Everybody knows it,” he added,
low.
'Everybody doesn’t know it!”
Weary cried out, sitting erect in his
earnestness. “In the first place, it
isn’t so! That is—well, a fumble—
that might happen to anybody,
mightn’t it? Sure it might! Hap¬
pens all the time! You didn’t lose
the game when you fumbled the ball
any more than the rest of the team
lost it when they didn’t catch the
fellow who picked it up, before he
got to the goal-line!"
Weary cleared his throat hur¬
riedly, risking no interruption.
“And in the second place, Jeff, you
haven’t any idea how anonymous
the players are in a football field.
The crowd doesn’t know who’s who,
half the time. They can’t see the
numbers very well, specially when
it’s dark like it was—and even if
they can see, they don’t look in
their pregrams much to find out
the names. They’ve lost their pro¬
grams, by the fourth quarter.
Besides, they don’t care! They’re
mot interested in individuals,
they’re interested in the team!
Why, I’ll bet you money that out of
those eighty or ninety thousand
people in the stadium this after¬
noon, only a few knew who it was
who—fumbled. I’ll bet you!”
“They’ll know tomorrow,” Jeffry
said in the same low voice.
He seated himself on the window
seat, still with his hands in his


pockets, and eyed a cigarette burn
in the worn green rug. “They’ll
know tomorrow, all right,” he re¬
peated. "Leave it to the sporting
writers! They never heard of Jeff
Evans till this afternoon—but they
found out. And so will everybody.
He explored the burn with his
heels, absently. "Anyway,” he
said, "what difference does it make
whether everybody knows or
doesn’t? I know. I—knew before¬
hand."
"What?”
“I mean," explained Jeffry, pa¬
tiently, quietly "I might've. I ought
to have known. It was just like
me what I did. I would do some¬
thing like that. I’m one of those
people."
“Oh, listen!”
Weary was dis¬
mayed. "Don’t talk like that, Jeff!
Why, that’s crazy! You’re taking
it too much to heart. Buck up,
now, for God’s sake, will you? It’s
over. Awful tough, but it couldn’t
be helped—so what the hell?
Forget it!”
Jeffry smiled, not mirthfully; a
twisted smile. He looked straight
at Weary and, smiling said, “Yes.
You know how soon I’ll forget it,
don’t you?
And Weary was silenced.
LI E didn’t forget it. Other people
did, as other people do; but
Jeffry forgot it never at all, nor
did he comprehend that others had
forgotten. By midyear there were


undergraduates who, when the last
sad game was mentioned, asked,
“Who was it made that fumble?
Rhinehart? Evans? One of the
subs”—but this would have been
inconceivable to him, even had he
known of it. Because the thing
that he had done was with him all
the time, a damp dark cloud across
his every sun, he fancied that the
minds of all with whom he came
in contact dwelt resentfully and
perpetually upon it. He had al¬
ways been a sensitive boy; now he
was hypersensitive, almost quite
truly mad with brooding and griev¬
ing. He went looking for wounds,
and thought he found in the eyes
of his fellows daggers of unforgive¬
ness, and in their casual tongues.
lashes of scorn.
The night of the football banquet,
when they gave him his letter—
with careful words anent his three¬
year service to the team—he suf¬
fered agonies. The applause, which
was generous, seemed merciless;
hands slapping him on the raw—
and so interminably! Sweat was
chill on his face, his fingers nagged
and worried his napkin. He could
not look up. "Fellows,” he said,
you—you all know whose fault—
He couldn’t go on.
They were very kind to him
afterward, they shook his hand and
mumbled things about not being an
ass, and the captain said, "It’s all
right, Jeff, you know. Nobody’s
infallible. Why, the help you’ve
been makes up for that, a dozen
times over!” But he was not com¬
forted. Pity—he felt it was
nothing else—is never comforting
to strong men.
He tried to wear the letter; not
to wear it seemed absurd, when all
the campus knew he had it. But
wearing it meant minutes of screw¬
ing up his courage, meant agonies
of sharp self-consciousness. Every¬
body eyed it. Freshmen, class¬
mates, townspeople. That their eyes
were envious, impressed or in¬
terested, according to their several
stations, he never dreamed. To
him the glances leveled at his chest
were jeering glances, "Look-at-that¬
you’ve-got-a-crust” glances... He
took to wearing the sweater with
a buttoned coat above it, and final¬
ly he stopped wearing it altogether.
He hid it away. To Weary, who
quizzed him, he said savagely,
"Why remind 'em?” To other in-
quirers among his closer friends he
intimated that he had lent the
sweater to a girl..
A definite morbidity took posses¬
sion of him. He ceased to partic¬
ularize; the football fiasco occupied
his thoughts less and less as time
went on, and his general inefficien¬
cy more and more. This latter no¬
tion, offspring of the first, grew
to unbelievable proportions. He
was no-account. He would amount
to nothing.
Perhaps you will have to be very
young, and shaken to the roots of
your soul, to understand him.
There was one good result of
this. Because he was much ale
in his room, avoiding compan¬
ship, he studied; and his gr


E




EeL AtEl a oCru,8Cn CILGOGCO FOPR.NONRe EOOGA- SOONGARO OCERSCBRO OZ


SOLD BY ALL DRUG STORES


September 7, 1933





PAGE 49


UNACCUSTOMEDNESS
By NAPOLEON GARCIA
The dreamy languor of a coming night,
The hymeneal chant of fwo love-birds,
Fill me with a longing—not for delight,
The joy pursued eternally by man. The words
From memory's long page refurn fo me
To flood my heart with a momenf’ry bliss
Which hastens forth desire—a wish fo be
Once more in grief—the sorrow nowI miss
Comes marching forth across my misty eyes,
The picture of a winsome face, a smile
Which fills my hearf with ecstasy; yet, skies
Which, wroughi with stars, looked down on us the while
We kissed, serve just to make me long again
For lasting peace—the sight of Sorrow’s lanel


achieved unprecedented heights. He
had never been a brilliant student;
he was not now; but he had be¬
come a diligent one, and it told. He
passed his examinations in June,
his final finals, easily... though
not so easily as Weary Haynes, who
seldom, in the vernacular, “cracked"
a book.
It was a relief to graduate, to
go away from there, even though
the pall of that ruined year went
with him. It was a relief to leave
Weary, whom he loved. The mat¬
ter-of-fact magnificence of Weary
To Weary’s insistence that they
spend the summer together some¬
where in the south of France
(“Let’s not let life get real and
earnest yet a while, Jeff!”) he
turned deaf ears. He was not even
tempted.
The first of July found him in
New York—which, because of its
cruelty, its colossal carelessness, its
myriads who are cleverer, stronger,
richer, higher up, no matter how
high or rich or strong or clever one
may be, was the very worst place
in the world for him.
He had an uncle in New York,
his mother’s brother, Peter Lam¬
bert, of Lambert and Company,
Publishers. For years it had been
casually understood that when Jef¬
fry finished college he would go to
work for his uncle; and lately they
had had some definite correspond¬
ence on the matter. “The job,” Peter
Lambert had written, a month be¬
fore Commencement, "awaits you.
That’s all it is, Jeff—a 'job."
Whether or not it becomes in due
time a position’ depends on you,
precisely as it would if you and I
were strangers.”
This was strategic, but not al¬
together true. Peter Lambert was
a bachelor, and owner of his busi¬
ness; Jeffry, fatherless, since child¬


hood, was his favorite among several
nephews. He thought of him patern¬
ally, with fondness and with faith.
He planned, he had always planned,
to bring Jeffry up and up, until he
was of the firm; until, indeed, Jef-
fry was the firm, carrying on after
him... Unfortunately, Jeffry di¬
vined these things, aided by hints
from his mother; and in his new
frame of mind they distressed and
frightened him. He pondered them
long. And in the end, deciding that
he could not disappoint his uncle
by falling down on the job, he hurt
him sorely by declining to try it at
all, on the ground that he didn’t be¬
lieve the publishing game appealed
to him.
He took a very small apart-
ment (his University Club, where
he could have lived more comfor¬
tably, was too much the University
for his mood) and went hunting
for work. He thought he would sell
bonds. Everybody did. Almost any¬
body, apparently, could.
Accordingly, every morning for
many successive mornings, he sub¬
wayed down to Wall Street and
lower Broadway, and knocked at
various and sundry doors. Some¬
times he gained admittance, oftener
he did not. Two things militated
against him. One was that summer’s
bumper campus crop of would-be
bond salesmen; a supply far in ex¬
cess of the demand. The other was
his manner of approach. He al¬
ways entered thinking, “I suppose
I won’t get this,” “Not a chance
here, of course,”—and this showed
in his bearing, which was timid,
even apologetic, so that office boys
dared to bully him and stenogra¬
phers to say at once, "No. Sorry.
They’re not taking anybody now."
Seldom did he reach the inner of-
fice of Authority; and when he did.
his visits were embarrasingly


brief. Out he would come again,
fingering the rim of his hat, avoid-
ing stenographers’ eyes—his slim
store of courage reduced just that
much more.
Feeling as he felt the worthless-
ness of the commodity, he could not
even sell Jeffry Evans.
At the end of several weeks his
uncle, who had watched from afar,
repeated his offer—albeit this time
rather gruffly. This time Jeffry
accepted. He had to accept. He
was down to his last ten dollars.
The thing was too bad all around.
Jeffry now firmly believed that no¬
body but a relative would employ
him. And Peter Lambert was now
convinced that this pet nephew of
his would rather have gone to work
for almost anyone than for him. So
neither was content.
An incident of Jeffry’s very
first day with Lambert and Com-
pany gave him an additional mental
hazard. He was introduced by his
uncle to a short, brisk, smart young
man with a little blond mustache
and the New York trick of seizing
and clutching the eyes of his hearer
with his eyes while he talked, hang-
ing on optically like grim death.
“This,” said Peter Lambert, "is
Mr. Price, who takes care of our
publicity. My nephew, Jeffry
Evans."
They clasped hands, Jeffry mur¬
muring inarticulately, Price crying
out that he was delighted; then
Peter Lambert cleared his throat
and proceeded. "You two ought to


be pals,” he said. "Same college,
and all that, What was your year,
Price? Twenty-three? Jeff’s just
out. Played football.” Then, to
Jeffry, "Price, here, is a great
football fan. Follows the team all
season. Never misses a game. Yes.
indeed. Publicity certainly falls off
in the fall, it certainly does!
He chuckled fatly at this little
joke, and Price’s mustache rode up
on the crest of his obedient smile,
and Jeffry smiled too, in a faraway
ffleeting way. "Never misses a
game. ...
Price was delegated to show the
new recruit around, and they set
out from Lambert’s office side by
side. “You were on the team?
Price began, immediately, pleasant¬
ly. “I ought to remember, of course
but—
“I was a sub,” put in Jeffry. “I
only played once or twice. You
wouldn’t know. What’s in this
room here?”
“Readers. Where they read the
manuscripts. We’ll go in there la¬
ter. I want to take you downstairs
first.”
Price was undiverted.
“Evans,” he repeated thoughtfully.
And then, “Oh, Evans! Sure! Half.
back, weren’t you? Am I right?”
“Yes.”
“Sure,” said Price again, nod¬
ding, "I remember now. Of course."
"Of course,"” echoed Jeffry’s
mind.
From that moment on, he was un¬
comfortable with Price, ill-at-ease
(Continued on page 53)


ALHAMBRA
CIOEilo


Preferred to all others


CHORRITOS
KATOTO


PALS
BUDDY


Save all empty cajetillas of
ALHAMBRA CIGARETTES
and participate in the
ALHAMBRA CHRISTMAS PRIIE UISTRIBUTION
FIRST PRIZE . . . . . . . . ₱1,000.00
and 1000 other Prizes


Total:


B
OUBOs
What name do you suggest for a new Cigarette?
Ask your dealer for an entry blank and send in your
suggestion; it may bring you P1,000.00.


PAGE 50


September 7 1933


AFTERNOON TEA
L
Continued from page 39


presides over each of these tables.
The table should be made as at¬
tractive as possible. The prettiest
china and the daintiest linen are
used. The small tea napkins should
match the table cover, which may be
of lace or linen. If the table is large
and its wood is beautiful, doilies
may be used, as shown in the illus¬
trations on this page.
There should be no over-crowding
of cups, plates, silver, and glasses
on the table. If the table is not
large enough to hold all these with-
out crowding, the plates of sand¬
wiches, cakes, and other “eats" may
be placed on smaller tables close to
the walls. The centerpiece should
be low and attractive. Everything
should be daintily and conveniently
arranged on the table before the
guests arrive.
Besides the persons who "pour,”
there should be helpers who will
keep the tea pot and the coffee urn
replenished, pass the cups, supply
the guests with food, remove the
used cups, plates, silver, glasses to
the kitchen to be washed, and per¬
form many other small services, so
that there are no delays and awk¬
wardness.
The hostess sees to it that the
guests are introduced to the guest
of honor, -nat guests who are not
acquainted are introduced to each
other, that everybody is served,
and that the party goes on smooth-
ly.
The illustrations on this page
show how the table for tea is set. If
you do not own a samovar or a sil¬
ver coffee or tea set, a china service
will do very nicely. The napkins
and the table cloth must be very
lainty and you yourself can em¬
Simple Remedy For Bad
Stomach Gives Swift
Relief
No Need of Strong Medicine or Diet.
Safe and Simple Home Recipe
Keeps Stomach in Fine
Condition.
If you are a victim of Stomach
Troubles—Gas, Sourness, Pain on
Bloating—you may have quick and
certain relief by following this sim-
ple advice.
Don’t take strong medicines, arti¬
ficial digestants or pull down your
system with starvation diets. For
within reason most folks may eat
what they like if they will keep their
stomach free from souring acids that
hinder or paralyze the work of diges¬
dion.
And the best and easiest way to
do this is to follow every meal with
three or four tablets of Bisurated
Magnesia—a pleasant, harmless, inex¬
pensive, and handy tablet form of
Magnesia that promptly neutralizes
acidity and keeps your stomach
sweet and clean.
A week’s trial of Bisurated Mag¬
nesia can supply at trifling cost,
should quickly convince you that 90
per cent of ordinary stomach distress
is absolutely unnecessary. Be sure
to get Bisurated Magnesia Tablets!
169-A
FORMULA: Magnesium Oxide 62107%; So-
dium Bicarbonate 2992%; Calcium Pro¬
cipitated ses?: Biamnto Sub Nitrats
2006..


GRAP
broider them. The only expensive
equipment that you have to buy will
be a silver fork and, perhaps, a pair
of sugar tongs, for the sugar cubes.
No other fork but of silver should
be used for the slices of lemon,
otherwise it will be stained or the
lemon slices become dark. If no sil¬
ver fork is available, one made of
bone or celluloid will do.
It is necessary to have one serv¬
ant in the kitchen to keep a kettle
of water constantly boiling and to
wash the cups and silver and
glasses.
(Next week: How to make tea
and coffee properly and how to
make dainty sandwiches.)


LEARNING TO POLE VAULT
Continued from page 15


day, three times a week.
(d) Once a week, jump for
height.
(e) Work out with the sprinters
and nigh jumpers.
(f) Take special exercises for de¬
veloping the muscles of the arms
and shoulders. Walking on the
hands and rope climbing are two of
the best forms of exercise for pole
vaulters.
Of course I have my own method
to suit my own convenience. I us¬
ually hold the pole at a point very
much lower than the height of the
bar. My take-off, meaning the
point where I start running, is 140
feet from the bar. I have three
marks in my take-off. From the
first to the second I run slowly, and
from the second to the third, just a
ittle bit faster. From the third un¬
til I reach the hole I run at full
speed. After planting the pole in
the hole, I slide my left hand up to


HIC


Miguel Sujeco: our best bet in pole
vault in the coming Oriental Olympics.


my right hand, at the same time
raising the pole above my head.
Then I spring from the ground and
when I am half-way up, I get a good
pull with my arms, and twist my
body so that my feet might soon be
above my head. Once at the top of
the bar, I push the pole back, and
raise my hands so that I will not
touch the bar in going down. I us¬
When 7
ually drop on two feet.
touch the ground I bend the knees
so that the force of the fall will have
little effect on any part of my body
I do not know exactly what height
a person should be to be an ideal
pole vaulter. Carr and Miller are
both six-footers. Nishida is quite
tall, too. I stand only 5 feet, six
and a half inches. I believe, how¬
ever, that the lighter the body is,
the better. I weigh only 118 pounds.
I use the smallest pole among local
vaulters.
Most Filipino pole vaulters do not
have any “take-off" mark. Further¬
more, due perhaps to the absence
of expert trainers, most Filipinos


do not follow any scientific method
of performing with the pole. If
Japan beats us next year, it will be
because they have better trainers
and athletic facilities.


WHAT MAKES THE HOUSEWIFE. 7
Continued from page 42


A woman who goes at her tasks
with the attitude implied by the
above points, even if she happens
to be one for whom house work is
not a particularly congenial duty,
is on the way to developing the pro¬
fessional pride that comes from
mastering a job instead of being
mastered by a job, Dr. Ryan be¬
lieves.


THE VANISHING TOWN PLAZA
Continued from page 11


conut groves, and many of them now
frolic under the rolling palms. Or
on the vacant farms. In the writ-
er’s home town, the mountain peo¬
ple come down to town every Sun¬
day not only to buy and sell things
but also to play indoor baseball or
volleyball with the poblacion athle¬
tes. And the games are played on
idle fields at the risk of stumbling
into mud-holes and breaking necks
and being chased away by an angry
owner at the point of a bolo! With
the agricultural resources of the
country developing by leaps and
bounds, the day is not far distant
when the boys and girls even in the
rural districts will have to go troop-
ing to the back-yards to do some
jumping and running. Even these
places will soon be lost to Juanito
and Juanita, for pretty soon moth-
er’s ampalaya and talong will be
crawling along the trellis, and roll¬
ing their leaves in the breeze in a


A
A
M




Getting
Them Free


September 7, 1933





PAGE 51


month or two. In that case, the last
refuge will be the streets. And if
the streets, too, are made to bloom
with tomatoes and sicua—why, we
better burn our towns and die!
We can imagine the reader cut-
ting in with the query, "But how
about the school grounds?” To be
sure, there is much playing space
at the back of our school buildings.
But is it not solely for those who
are in school? The general public
can use it at times. But if we are
not mistaken, an outsider has to
go through plenty of torturing red
tape and a series of endorsements
before he is granted the permis¬
sion to use the school grounds. The
doubting Thomases need only see
how well the school grounds are
fenced and how the school gates are
locked on holidays to be convinced
that those who are not attending
school should play somewhere else.
At any rate, even if one is allowed
to use the school grounds, it can
only be on Saturdays or Sundays;
for the students cavort around the
premises five days of the week.
The students are well taken care
of in this regard. But are all the
children in school? How about
those adults who want to play?
Shall they be always waiting for
Saturday and Sunday in order to
engage in athletics? Those who
were unfortunate enough to be re¬
jected from school, and those who
quit school or can never go to school
at all on account of poverty—where
shall they play? On the farms?
But these will not be idle for long.
In localities where there are irri¬
gation systems and crop rotation is
in vogue, the farms bloom with
plants the whole year round. On
the streets? That is often done;
but municipal ordinances prohibit
that. Besides, what game can you
play in such a limited place as the
street? In the back-yards? These
will soon be planted with vegetables,
especially in these days when every
nook is made to yield something to
help keep the wolf away from the
door. On the plazas? What plazas,
when they have been turned into
Lunetas with rows and rows of
trees, benches, and ornamental
plants?
We hope our sallies will not be
mistaken for a raillery against town
beautification. All of us are in per¬
fect accord as to that. Beautiful
parks? Why not! Of course, very
few in the towns, perhaps, are eru¬
dite enough to explain the mean¬
ing of beauty and its role in life;
but those in the know tell us that
beautiful parks give the individual
a certain breadth of understanding
and breed in him appreciation of
the beautiful, and that this consti¬
titute a development of spiritual
qualities that are the cornerstones
of happiness. Bandstands? Sure¬
ly! The town’s brass band may be
made up only of a pair of cracked
cymbals, one bajo, a cornetin, or
two and a bombo that drowns all
the other instruments; but even
then, there should be a place where
the musicians can sit down with
some comfort when they think of


tickling our ear-drums with their
time-worn selections. Tennis
courts? Let us have them! There
may be only three rackets and as
many devotees of Tilden’s art in
the place, but why worry! The
tennis court serves, too, as a sort
of Roman Forum where the politic-
al guns of the province may give
their tongues some calisthenics and
crown the queen during the town
fiesta, and as a decent place where
the local herd of the Hope of the


Fatherland may trip the light fan¬
tastic with some touch of dignity.
And then, of course, many a com-
mon tao will seratch his head sev¬
eral times before he can understand
why the hero of Bagumbayan
should be penalized further by mak¬
ing him stand that long in the mid-
dle of our parks. But in due time,
we hope, even Juan in the out-of-
the-way corners of the rural world
will find Rizal-in-marble another
source of patriotic fervor.
Bandstands, monuments, tennis
courts, and parks—let us have
them; but in having them, let us
not erase the public playground
from the town’s scheme of things.
By playground we do not mean
those things we often see in physi¬
cal education books, with trapezes,
slides, swings, and other elaborate
paraphernalia. We know our muni¬
cipalities cannot afford to purchase
such equipment just now. But we
do mean what the man of the street
understands by the word—just
enough space where the townspeople
may assemble and play any time
they wish, without the necessity of
asking the permission of anybody.
Such was the plaza of olden
times. We do not have it now; and
we are very positive that the towns
have not been any better for its
absence. In fact, we are afraid that


the lack of such an important thing
is developing into a sort of nursery
of social evils. Because if we are
to believe the psychologists and the
sociologists, an individual always
seeks after working hours some form
of play, amusement, recreation, or
what you will, whereby to relax his
high-strung nerves and ease off his
tired mind. Whether you are in the
city of in the country, the case is
generally the same: you stop work¬
ing around four or five in the after¬


noon. Then, you feel the urge to go
some place for some fun. In the
cities, there are the cinemas and
the gay streets; but out among the
coconut groves, rice fields, and
bamboo trees, life is altogether
different. Yonder, there is no
library, no Charles Farrell and
Janet Gaynor to make you forget
the depression; nor an aquarium, a
Dewey Boulevard, or a Crystal
Arcade to beguile one. If an idle
mind is the devil’s work-shop, then
you can imagine what a veritable
social explosive lies hidden in this
apparently innocent picture: of
children, young men, and adults who,
for lack of a recreation center, sim¬
ply hang around the corners. In
one place down South, the scarcity
of open fields outside of the school’s
barbed-wire fence is such that there
is hardly a place for one volleyball
court, unless you dare to hang the
net in somebody’s private lot. The
result is that even these young peo¬
ple who used to indulge in athletics
before could not but forsake the net,
ball, and bat for the roosters and
the cards. They often hie to some
mysterious trysting place at the foot
of the hills and there make a Sun¬
day out of the whole week.
Ask anybody about this matter,
or travel around and see things for
yourself; and you will readily agree


with us that this is really becoming
a serious problem in the Islands.
We are still in the agricultural
stage; but already we are begin¬
ning to understand the ancient
mariner’s cry of despair. Over the
whole length and breadth of the
country, there are plenty of fields¬
rice fields, sugar cane fields, corn
fields, abaca fields, and other fields;
but not space to play in! That may
be saying too much; but if we go
on sleeping at the switch, the stark
reality will not be long in coming.
Let us look ahead and provide
our communities with one of the
most important factors for social
well-being—the public playground.
Now is the time to act on the mat-
ter. When the country is finally
caught in the maelstrom of the in¬
dustrial revolution and speculating
realtors buy all the lands around
and sell them by lots; when build-
ings, and factories spring up right
and left and the little towns awake
from their lethargy to rise into
bustling cities—then it will be too
late! But now there is still ample
time for our authorities to study
the problem and seek the proper re¬
medy. If suggestions are in order,
how about passing a law, requiring
every town to set aside somewhere
in the heart of the locality at least
one hectare or so for play purposes?
That, we think in our simplicity, is
hitting the nail on the head with
one stroke. And sinking it, too!
As things are, it is taking too much
for granted to suppose that the
municipalities themselves will do
that at their own initiative.
Whatever steps we take on the
matter, here is honing that the old
playground—the thing we used to
know as plaza—will in time be re¬
turned to the towns. For if the
park beautifies a place, and the
monument inspires a people, the
playground socializes the individual
and contributes to the making of
virile manhood.


freckles


Secretly and Quickly Removed!
Stillman's Freckle Cream bleaches
them out while you sleep. Leaves
the skin soft and white—the com¬
lexion fresh, clear and natural.
For 37 years thousands of users
have endorsed it. So easy to use¬
The firsi jar proves its magic worth.
Stillman's
Freckle Cream
Reroves  Whitens
Freckles I The Skin
In Spanish Stillman’s Freckle Cream is
Called “La Crema Bella Aurora”
For sale at all good drug Stores
STILLMAN CO., Manufacturars
Aurara, II.. U. S. A.





This plaza of Silay, Occ. Negros, may claim to be a sign of progress on the strength
of its "looks”—but of what actual use is it to the people?


PAGE 52





September 7, 1933


t


THE "EXTRAS" SWELL.
Continued frem page 45


1


they are the Circulo Cervantino ball,
the Dramatic Club dance, the Senior
Education dance, the Pharmacy As¬
sociation dance, the Varsity Mardi
Gras, the Junior prom, the Military
ball, the Law Bachelors’ ball, the
Women’s Club ball, and the Senior’s
farewell party. If we add to this list
the "smaller” affairs that take place
in the university from time to time,
one phase of the mounting cost of
so-called higher education can be
easily accounted for.
Let us now get down to cold, hard
figures. From Gil R. Carlos, presi¬
dent of the U. P. Debating Club,
former vice president of the U. P.
Law Bachelors, and city editor of
the Philippine Collegian for 1933,
comes this explanation: "A student
who is desirous of taking a part in
the social life of the state universi¬
ty must of necessity incur expenses
that may or may not exceed the
amount of his outlay for actual stu¬
dies. Tickets to dances cost from
₱1.00 up, depending on the ‘class’ of
the affair. But tickets are just in¬
cidental—that is, they form but an
insignificant part of the expenses
since it is customary for one to
bring lady friends to parties.
However, one does not have to
bring ladies to parties. In this case,
the expenses become negligible. In
my opinion, a student who is so¬
cial—though he need not attend all
the social affairs in the university
calendar—must have at least P50.00


He has a lat to show for his extra-curi
—but what did they cost him?


to spend every month for all extra¬
curricular activities; namely
dances, parties, banquets, outings,
college fairs, benefit shows, ball
games, etc. If he is a member or an
officer of a fraternity or any col¬
lege organization, or if he happens
to be the manager of a certain col¬
lege affair, then his monthly ex¬
penses soar. In last year’s ball of
the Law Bachelors, the quota for
each officer was P50.00 and for each
manager P30.00."
Arturo Tolentino differs, how¬


VAARO
AFPROVLD BY U S UTASS
gNAMALEO


You can
master
difficult
strokes¬


Insist On
WRIGHT
G DIISON
Tennis Rackets
and Balls
Sold by—


ut it takes
a
rood racket
to assure a per¬
fect return without
the “quiver"
when
gut meets ball.


ROCES & Co., Inc.


Plaza Goiti


(Sportsmen’s Headquarters)
(Open half day on holidays)


Manila


ever, with Gil Carlos
as to the amount an
average socially-inclined
student of the state
university spends every
month. “I believe that

the amount cannot ex¬
ceed P30.00,” he declar¬
ed. Edmundo Cea,
speaking for the aver¬
age U. S. T. social bug
calculated that this
student parts a way
with P200.00 more or
less every school year
despite the fact that
balls and dances are
not sanctioned by the
University of Santo To¬
mas. “As a matter of
fact, there are only a
few dances of conse¬
quence in the univer
sity, such as those spon¬
sored by the fraterni¬
cular activities
ties every year and the
graduation ball,” he
said. "However, parties and ban¬
quets are staged frequently by
the different colleges, organiza¬
tions, fraternities, and the sorority.”
Arturo Roco estimated that a
student with social inclinations of
the National University spends an
amount that will not be less than the
yearly budget of his U. S. T. coun¬
terpart.
So much for male students. Let
us shift our attention to the co-eds.
They, as a rule, do not have to wor-
ry their pretty heads over dance
tickets and garage bills, but there
are such things as gowns, shoes,
stockings, and, before we forget it,
cosmetics. From socially prominent


Pacita de los Reyes (she is now in
her last year, college of law, U. P.)
we learned that she has a gown
made for her for every social affair
that she attends (she has a modiste,
by the way) and buys herself at
least two pairs of shoes a month.
"Women always want to appear in
something new on every occasion, if
possible; this is inherent in them,
she stated. “But then, a girl does
not have to go to parties to be pop¬
ular," she added. On the other
hand, Nelly X. Burgos, equally so¬
cially prominent, liberal arts student
and instructor in the state univer¬
sity, makes her own gowns. "My
mother helps me make them,” she
said. Nora Diokno, University of
Santo Tomas pre-medic student and
prominent city socialite, on her part
admitted that inasmuch as there are
not so many social affairs in the
U. S. T., there being only “one or
two balls that you can call real
balls," and at that these affairs are
usually staged in the afternoon, an
average U. S. T. social co-ed “doesn’t
have to spend much on dresses," in
fact, on all her extra-curricular ac¬
tivities. From Carmen Cruz and
Natividad Inocentes, college of edu¬
cation students of the National
University, and Rosario D. Llena.
liberal arts student of the same uni¬
versity, we gathered that N. U. co¬
eds spend as much as the male stu¬
dents on extra-curricular activities:
their individual monthly bill runs to
P20.00.
We now come to fraternities and
sororities. The usual fee for mem¬
bership in fraternities is P15.00, the
annual fee P5.00, and around P20.00
are spent for the fraternity pin and


AMAZEA
SCIENTIFACTS -


MINUTE
- BY ARNOLD


GLACIAL MARKERS —
THREE SUCCESSIVE WORLD
GLACIAL PERIODS ARE SHOWN BY
SEA-LEVEL MARKS ON CALIEORNIA'S
. CONSTANTLY RISING SANTA MONICA
CMQUNTAIN.


INERA-RED FOR HORSES-
AN OHIO RACEHORSE STABLE
HAS INSTALLED AN INFRA-RED
ROOM BELIEVING HORSES NEED
EASTER
THESE RAYS AS MUCH AS HUMANS


TENANCSSLS
IS BEING CONSIDERED AS PROPER
EASTER FLOWER, BEING FOUND IN
HOLY LANDS AND BLOOMING
NATURALLY AT EASTER. THE EASTERI
LILY, A RECENT IMPORT FROM
JAPAN, MUST HAVE ITS BLOOM
FORCED.


INMA


September 7, 1933





PAGE 53


College students who take active part in extra-curricular activities. Top. Rafael
David, left, editor of The Varsitarian, student organ of the University of Sante Tomas;
and Arturo M. Tolentino, editor of the Philippine Collegian, student organ of the University
of the Philippines. Bottom, Gil R. Carlos, left, president of the U. P. Debating Club and
prominent in social activities of the state university, and Ambrosio Padilla, orator,
debater, writer, actor, and athlete.


hat and the "blow-out" that is giv¬
en by every neophyte. And as in
the case of dance tickets, these ex¬
penses are but incidental: the bulk
of the expenses of members of fra¬
ternities is incurred in connection
with dances, parties, and banquets.
According to Ramon Enriquez, a
dinner dance given by the Beta Ep¬
silon fraternity last year at the Ma¬
nila Hotel cost each member P12.00.
And there are other affairs that cost
individual fraternity members no
less than P20.00 on each occasion.
Vicente Roco revealed that the
members of the Phi Beta Kappa
fraternity of the N. U., numbering
22, give a party after every meeting.
Since there are two meetings of the
fraternity in a single week at times,
it is easy to imagine how much this
extra-curricular activity is draining
the financial resources of the mem-
bers.
College fraternities, as the term
indicates, are intended to foster a
spirit of brotherhood among college
students. That there has been a de¬
viation from this original course is
pointed out in some quarters. Fra¬
ternities are now the objects of bit-
ter censure, particularly in the
United States. An American ex¬
fraternity man recently made this


startling accusation against frater¬
nities: “College fraternities make
fools of tens of thousands of young
Americans annually, and in the best,
they bury virtue so deep that a na¬
tional crisis is needed to uncover
it.” Pray, what do our college boys
think of fraternities? Here is what
Ambrosio Padilla has to say: “I do
not believe much in artificial broth-
erhood. Fraternity members call
each other ‘brother' when they
scarcely know each other. This is
the reason, if for no other, why I
have stayed away from fraterni¬
ties. One can be popular in college
and enjoy college life even if he is
not a fraternity man."
What do our educators think of
extra-curricular activities? Mr. Ga¬
bino Tabunar, acting president of
the National University, finding
that parents of students are groan¬
ing under the burden that sending
their children to college has become,
has started curtailing the extra¬
curricular activities of the students
under him. “This may appear auto¬
cratic,” he commented, "but some¬
thing has to be done.” A dean in
the state university is also in favor
of regulating the extra-curricular


FUMBLE
1
Continued from page 49


whenever he saw Price or heard his
voice, believing that this fellow¬
alumnus with the bright inescap-
able eyes was always remembering.
never forgetting. He thought, too,
that Price spread the story gleeful¬
ly around. There were men in the
office who saw in this nephew of
Lambert’s a menace to certain of
their personal hopes of future ad-
vancement. These men were afraid
of him, really, and resentful be¬
cause of that fear. But he thought
them supercilious. He felt that
Price must have told them about
him, and that, like Price, they had
no use for such a futile one.
However, the work was fascinat¬
ing, and often it absorbed him se
he quite forgot to watch the chip
on his shoulder. He was very busy.
In line with Peter Lambert’s plan
to teach him the business from
every angle, from the ground up,
he belonged to no set department,
but labored in them all by turns.
Sometimes he read manuscript,
sometinies proof. Sometimes he
wrote advertisoments. He spent
whole days at the printing plant in
Brooklyn, seeing books made; he
packed books for shipments, de¬
livered copies to spectacled review¬
ers in newspaper offices, sold
novels across the counter at one or
another of the several little shops
maintained and managed by the
firm. Once he took a feminine poet
to lunch, and found her unpoetic
but quite nice. Once he accompa¬
nied the firm’s star salesman on a
trip through the middle West,
listening and learning, and lugging
the sample case.
His salary to start was sixty
dollars a week. At the end of six
months it was sixty dollars a week.
At the end of a year it still was.
He was doing well, he deserved
more, and his uncle was aware that
he did. But Peter Lambert had
got everything he had by asking
for it, not by keeping quiet and
waiting for it. He believed in de¬
mand—provided, of course, there
was justice to back it up. Jef-
fry had not approached him on the
subject of a raise. "And,” vowed
Jeffy’s uncle to himself, “he won’t


activities of students. The prevail¬
ing opinion, however, among educa¬
tors and students seems to be that
these activities are not unnecessary,
subscribing to the popular notion
that “all work and no play makes
Jack a dull boy.” But of course,
there can be too much play as well
as too much work.
—o0o—


Learn Public
Speaking
SDA
At hop
N
E
Satin
a
V INe da n
 MRE
North American Institute,
Dept. 5986
13601 Michigan Avenue, Chicago, III. U.S.A.


get one until he does.” This as a
matter of discipline, a lesson. Lam¬
bert did not guess that to Jeffry
it was simply another proof of his
hopeless inefficiency. A whole
year!—and he was worth no more
than when he started.
Not even
worth that, probably. Receiving it
only because his uncle was his un¬
cle and kind.
Had you encountered him about
this time, you would have seen a
serious unsmiling big fellow, young
except for his eyes, athletic save
for the slight, beaten droop of
his splendid shoulders. Had you
met him, shaken his hand, you
would have found him polite, but
unresponsive; either pre-occupied,
or—or what? You wouldn’t have
known. Unless you were keen at
analysis, and interested in people as
persons, as problems in humanity,
separate and distinct, you doubtless
wouldn’t have troubled to find out.
You would have dismissed him. But
(oddly) not forgotten him. Weeks
later, passing him on the sreet, you
would have bowed and called him
by name, suddenly and surprisedly
conscious that in a vague, fragmen¬
tary way, you had been thinking
of him in the interim.
— HEN he fell in love.
It happened without preamble,
without warning; and that was the
worst of it. Afterward Jeffry told
himself that if he had only seen it
coming, he could have headed it
off—and would have. But he didn’t
see it. It crept on him quietly, in¬
sidiously, like fog. It was simply,
suddenly there, obscuring all things.
On a morning in September he
was called on the telephone by a
half-forgotten classmate named
Caruthers, who, it appeared, had
written a book. Caruthers was on
(Continued on page 56)
IMPROVES BLOOD
CONDITIONS!
-OOo¬
Sargon may be safely
relied on by those suf-
fering with simple ane¬
mia (thin, watery
blood) to increase, the
red cogpuscles, on which
depends vigor, strength.
clear glowing comple¬
xion. By improving ap¬
patite and nutrition
Sargon is the most nat-
ural means to put on
weight for skinny un¬
dernourished people.
ES
Sargon and Sargon
Pills are used by thousands of people in the
Philippines as a general Tonic and in over¬
coming constipation.
Read the following: "After being in poor
health for four years I began the Sargon
Treatment. I am now like a different wom¬
en. My weight has increased, my complexion
is good and I feel so vigorous. I give Sar¬
gon full credit.”—Mrs. Tarcila de Marinda,
509 Sanchez Barcaistegui, San Miguel Manila.
Don't delay, hegin taking Sargon today.
SARGON is sold by all Druggist
BOTICA BOLE
Distributors—Manila
SARGON LIQUID. Sodium Citrate 3.83
grs.; Potasium & Sodium Citrate 7.47
grs.; Ferrie & Ammonium Citrate 3.21
grs.; Cafeina 1.82 grs.; Quassia 3.8 grs.;
Fel Bovis 4 grs.; Syrup Ferrous Iodide
11 Minims; Alcohol 86.4 Minims; Color¬
ing Syrup & Aromatica 1 ounce.
SARGON PILLS: 	Phenolphthal 3 grs.;
Sod. Salicyl. .25 grs.; Strych. 005 grs.:
Sod. Oleate 25 grs.; Aloin .25 grs.; Ext.
Beliad, Leaves .08 grs.; Pur. Ext. Fol
Bovia 1.00 grs.: Excip. O.S.


PAGE 54





September 7, 1933


LITERARY SECTION


RESULTS OF THE STUDENTS' LITERARY CONTEST
(Eightieth Week)
COLLEGIATE GROUP
Winners:
Beato A. de la Cruz, Philippine Normal School, Manila.
Bernardo C. Sabalburo, University of the Philippines.
Honorable Mention:
Joaquin E. Chipeco, Far Eastern College, Manila.
Macario D. Demate, Visayan Institute, Cebu.
Elpidio Fegi, Philippine Law School, Manila.
SECONDARY SCHOOL GROUP
Winner:
None.
Honorable Mention:
Anacleta A. Aninao, Batangas High School.
Jesus Jose Amado, Eastern Luzon Academy, Atimonan, Tayabas.
Fidel B. Carrion, Colegio de San Agustin, Iloilo.
Care Pero Dayot, Doane Evangelistic Institute, Iloilo.
Socorro M. Federis, St. Agnes’ Academy, Legaspi, Albay.
Jose Moleta, Jr., Iloilo High School.
Remedios M. Segura, Iloilo Normal School.
Marcelo L. Sison, San Alberto Magno College, Pangasinan.
NOTE: Manila winners should call at the  office for their
respective prizes. Manuscripts should contain 300 words
more or less and bear the author’s private as well as school
address. Contestants enrolled in an institution giving both
collegiate and secondary courses should specify to which
group they belong. Those merely accorded honorable mention
are not entitled to any prize.


These Blades Of Grass...
By BEATO A. DE LA CRUZ


Y looked at some blades of grass;
these symbols of God’s omnipo¬
tence.
All the ingenuities of man cannot
make one perfect likeness of any
blade of grass. For, what is created
by that Unseen Being is different
from what is fashioned by Man.
True, man can carve beautiful
blades of grass out of silver and
gold, but they lack the litheness and
softness of real grass; they are
without beauty and grace. Artifi¬
ciality is what Man reaps in his vain
attempt to copy Nature.
A blade of grass is not only as we
see it. It is many other things be¬
side. It is a gift to man. It is used
by him wherever he is. Its utility
is universal. A banana leaf may
serve as an umbrella when it rains.
A buri leaf, if woven with patience
and deftness, would make a fine hat.
The midribs of the coconut are good
for a broom. An anahaw or vine


leaf is good when used as the sub¬
ject of an artistic design. A gabi
leaf or camote top may be good as
leafy vegetables. Every blade of
grass has its own use in this world,
just as every human being has his
mission to fulfil here on earth. In
fact, in every lithesome, tender,
soft, and life-giving blade of grass
are found the cells that build up the
tissues and fibers of our physique.
(I think, we are also only blades of
grass of that great vegetation which
we call Humanity.)
Sometimes I wonder at those sim-
ple things, but I cannot fathom the
mysteries behind them. Why they
give us fresh air, food, clothing,
shelter, and enjoyment, I do not
know. I simply love them, live with
them, wonder and wonder about
them. I even call them God’s mas¬
ter strokes in this wide, beautiful,
wonderful world.
—o0o—


The Importance Of Proper Selection
Of Teaching Staff
By BERNARDO C. SABALBURO


 HE selection of a teaching staff
is a problem of prime impor¬
A tance to a school administra¬
tor. The effective execution of the
main objectives of education and the
successful carrying out of the pro¬
gram of the school rest, to a large


extent, upon a properly selected
teaching staff. The social and pro-
fessional relationships among the
teachers can be harmoniously car¬
ried out through the wise judgment
and foresight of a school adminis¬
trator.


Si, senor, these young men and women find it interesting to study the lan-
guage of Cervantes. They are members of the Club Cervantino of the Triangle
School of Commerce, a progressive private institution of learning in Iloilo
City. In the picture may be seen Director Jose Mariano, of the school (with
eyeglasses): Club President Cornelio Salas, Vice President Melerio Robles,
Miss Natividad Musora, secretary; Miss Segundina Cortes, treasurer; and R.
de la Cruz, business manager. (Courtesy, Jesus P. Ramos.)


The good leadership and initia¬
tive of a properly selected staff will
result in a systematic execution of
the objectives, schemes, and organ¬
ization of the school. An adminis¬
trator should bear in mind that the
selected staff have been trained in
their respective lines of specializa¬
tion. This would mean a compre¬
hensive and broad perspective of
the knowledge and skill of the teach-
ers selected.
Quite often, petty jealousies arise
among the teaching staff. Some are
antagonistic to the administration;
others are rebellious; and still
others foment non-co-operation. As
an unavoidable consequence, the
balance of social and professional
relationships as well as the peaceful
order of the school are jeopardized.
It becomes, therefore, an important
task of the administrator to adjust


and iron out the petty jealousies
and the social differences of the
members of the teaching staff.
Through a wise guidance and
foresight in the proper selection of
a teaching staff, a pleasant social
school atmosphere among the teach-
ers can be effected. The students”
activities can be properly carried
out with the full co-operation of the
students themselves, the teaching
staff, and the wise supervision and
administration of the administra¬
tor.
The proper selection of a good
teaching staff is the basis of a ba¬
lance of harmony, as well as so¬
cial and professional relationships.
Therefore, a successful administra¬
tion should center its attention on
a comprehensive foresight and wise
judgment in the proper selection of
a teaching staff.


SCHOOL NEWS


MANILA
The Columbian Institute branch
of the Hi-Y Association, whose
members are all male honor students
of the institution, had an election
recently, with the following results:
president, Alfredo Nibut; vice pres¬
ident, Agustin Reyes; secretary¬
treasurer, Geronimo Naniong; and
reporter, Dionisio M. Macasieb.
The branch was lately reorganized
by the main office under the aus¬
pices of Secretary Martinez, of the
Y.M.C.A., and P. Miraflores, ad¬
viser.
—Dionisio M. Macasieb
The special and commercial high
students of the National Institute,
Manila, recently organized the Stars
Club.
The following are the officers:
David Alnaz, president; Napoleon


Reyes, vice president; Miss Nativi¬
dad Magsambol, secretary; Miss
Consuelo Mariano, treasurer; Gau¬
dencio Batungbakal and Leonardo
Guadalupe, representatives; and Al¬
fredo Martinez and Teofilo Castille¬
jo, reporters.
-Alfredo Maftinez


PANGASINAN
The Dramatic Club of the Rosa¬
les Institute of Rosales, Pangasi¬
nan, successfully staged “The Des¬
erted Lover” at its eighth convoca¬
tion recently under the management
of Miss L. Quirolgico, instructor in
English III. Cresonte Y. Pardo,
club president, played the leading
role. The presentation of “The
New Leader" at another program
will have been effected by the time
this is published.
-Francisco F. Nunez


September 7, 1933





PAGE 55


Pre-Primer Reading
By NIEVES AUSTRIA ALBURQUE


1. Aims: To teach the children to
read independently.
To teach them to read the fol¬
lowing as new sight words: had
happy, played, counted, she, very.
were, gave, there, and then.
To teach the new phrases show
you how, we played, and there
were.
2. Materials: Blackboard, sentence
cards, and a chart.
3. Procedure:
A. Introduction
What did we read yesterday?
How would you like to read
another story?
B. Presentation and development
Children, read the name of our
story. (Teacher draws the
curtain.)
What did Miss Santos do?
What did she say?


—LASSROOM recitation is one
of the best means by which
 the cardinal mission of the
school—to educate the youths—can
very well be effected. Upon no other
phase of school activities than the
actual contact of teacher and pupils
in the recitation room can depend
the success or failure of the
students in life. We need, then, a
good recitation.
But what is a good recitation?
It is a mutual conversation between
the teacher and the pupils. It is
not a stilted dialogue, but a lively
interchange of their individual
ideas based on the lesson of the
day. A good recitation sees to it
that the pupils express their ideas
freely and without fear or hesita¬
tion. It is characterized by freedom
of thought. Pupils respond more
readily to the teacher when a ques¬
tion is asked in the spirit of con¬
versation than when it is asked in
an official or authoritative tone.
A good recitation does not abso¬
lutely limit the discussion of the
lesson to the assignment. It departs
from it if classroom discussions
and circumstances make such de¬
parture imperative. It, therefore,
moves and goes wherever it likes,
as determined and occasioned by the
situation of the moment. It may
touch a point or two in the les¬
son and totally leave it if classroom
interest so wills it. A good re¬
citation touches the pupil’s as well
as the teacher’s entire life, inside
or outside the school, provided the
conversation is carried with a view
to learning something.


Then what did she do?
Who had black cats?
Who had white cats?
What did Miss Santos say?
Who counted the white
cats?
How many black cats were
there?
What did Miss Santos say?
What did you do?
How did you feel?
Children, these sentences are
also written on these cards. I
will ask you questions. Select
your answers to the questions
from the cards.
C. Check-up
Now, read the whole story on
the board; on the chart.
4. Seat Work: Checking up and
matching the right answers.
-o0o—


A good recitation broadens and
widens the pupil’s ideas of and
thoughts on life each day. It is
concerned not with how much a
pupil has unnecessarily memorized
or mechanically absorbed from the
lesson of the day, but with how
much benefit or practical value he
has derived from it. In connection
with this, Frasier and Armentrout,
co-authors of An Introduction to
Education said, “We are prone to
allow ourselves to think of educa¬
tion as a manufacturing process,
with so many units of reading, geo¬
graphy, and arithmetic put into the
machine and a finished product
turned out — an educated individ¬
ual.” A good recitation inclines
more to the practical than the theo¬
retical side of the lesson. “The
only sound justification for teach¬
ing any subject is to make it a
means of enabling each child to re¬
cognize his experiences and widen
his outlook on life,” said those au¬
thors.
A good recitation is just like an
informal conference of pupils and
teacher who are bound together by
a common purpose and a common
idea with regard to the solution of


a certain problem of the day. It
is not interested so much in measur¬
ing the worth of pupils on the basis
of grades as in the smooth-going
and spontaneous activity of pupils
and teacher, undisturbed by the
mechanical marking down of pupils"
grades. That recitation, therefore,
is good which provides for the
students’ voluntary participation in
classroom discussion.
-o0o—


MINDORO TEACHERS
FORM SOCIETY
In order "to form a strong body
which will defend their rights and
to register a strong opposition to
any movement that will be inimical
to their best interests,” the elemen¬
tary teachers of Calapan, Mindoro,
organized themselves recently into
a society known as the Calapan
Elementary School Teachers Asso¬
ciation. The officers are: Poten¬
ciano Antonio, president; Conrado
R. Nicasio, vice president; Miss
Modesta V. Torres, secretary; and
Miss Leonila Bugarin, treasurer.
Felipe Luarca, supervising princi¬
pal, is the adviser, while Abdon
Javier, division superintendent, is


honorary president. Rufino Farin,
academic supervisor, and Damian
Rayala, industrial supervisor, are
honorary vice presidents.
The society also aims to "work
actively for the cause of education,
safeguard the best interests of
teachers, extend financial help to
those fellow teachers needing ur-
gent assistance, and fight all move¬
ments which are detrimental to the
best interests of the teachers and
the school system"
BULAN TEACHERS' CLUB
Because of the resignation and
transfer of some of its officers, the
Bulan Teachers' Club of Bulan,-
Sorsogon, was reorganized recently.
The new officers are: president,
Irineo Erestain; vice president,
Rufino J. Leander; secretary-treas¬
urer, Miss Sulpicia Fajardo; report-
er, Rufino J. Leander; social com-
mittee, Miss Sulpicia Fajardo,
chairman, Miss Conegunda Grafilo,
Miss Salome Granado, and officers
of the club, members; auditing
committee, Jose Chavez, chairman,
and Miss Carmen Lafuente and
Miss Antonina Maldo, members;
and advisers, Fulgencio Mella, su¬
pervising teacher, and Candido Sag¬
nip, principal teacher.
The aims of the club are: (1) To
encourage recreational and cultural
reading among the teachers; (2)
To foster good fellowship among
them; (3) To keep alive that spirit
of unseflish co-operation; and (4)
To preserve the teachers’ health
through wholesome games and hikes.


What Is A Good Recitation?


Officers and members of the Calapan Elementary School Teachers As¬
sociation, organized recently. First row, from left to right, are: E. Aceveda,
J. Evora, and P. Luarca. Second row: Miss L. Dugarin, treasurer; C. R.
Nicasio, vice president; F. Luarca, adviser; P. Antonio, president; and Miss
M. V. Torres, secretary. Third row: P. Agutaya, E. Medina, Misses C. Al¬
cancia, N. Valencia, H. Luna, E. del Rosario, J. Banta, M. Moron, F. Gozar,
Mrs. P. Ramirez, M. Adeva, and S. Aytin. Last row: Misses F. Samala, T.
Barrientos, I. Calayan, G. Garcia, L. Masangcay, and P. Asturias. Members
who are not in the picture are R. Pangilinan, A. Barrientos, A. Azul, and
L. Sikat. (Courtesy, Conrado Nicasio.)


By ROSENDO DE GUZMAN


—R. J. Leander


PAGE 56





September 7, 1933


FUMBLE
1
Continuad from page 53


from his home town, which Jeffry’s
mind dimly identified as Johns¬
town, or possibly Williamsburg, for
the purpose of placing his book
with a New York publishing house;
and he wanted to know whether, if
he submitted the manuscript to Jef¬
fry’s uncle’s firm, Jeffry would per¬
sonally guarantee that somebody
—preferably his uncle, but failing
that, “somebody who means some¬
thing”—read it.
“All I ask,” Caruthers asked, "is
a reading. That’s all. Just a read¬
ing. You see, I know this publish-
ing racket. If I simply send it in,
without a word, it won’t be read.
They never are. Don’t tell me!”
Jeffry promised that Clinging
Vines by Rodney H. Caruthers
should be read, thoroughly and dis¬
cerningly; and he also agreed, al¬
beit without undue enthusiasm, to
be taken to lunch that day by the
grateful author. They met in the
lobby of the Algonquin, where Ca¬
ruthers (having heard that it was
literary) was staying, and exchang¬
ed the feverish “Well, well, wells”
of two who never knew one another
well at all, but are striving to over¬
look the fact. Caruthers was long
and thin, with a pear-shaped head
of which his brown string necktie
was the stem. He wore spectacles,
and talked stentoriously. Everybody
in the Algonquin restaurant knew
within two minutes of his entrance
that he had achieved not merely a
novel, but the Gr. Am. novel¬
though it must be acknowledged that
they concealed the excitement they
no doubt felt about this, perfectly.


BEAUTY PARLOR
TERESA PAZOS
(In charge)


Permanent Waves
₱.50 per tube
Water Waves
Hair Waves
Pompeian Massage
Belleza Sorei Massage
Fango Massage
Wax Massage
Harmless Hair Dyes
PIALA BARBER SHOP
101 PLAZA GOITI


Toward the end of a meal which
seemed to Jeffry doomed to endless¬
ness, Caruthers interrupted himself
long enough to inquire what his old
classmate was going to do that eve¬
ning. Jeffry said, after only a tiny
pause, "Why—nothing. He heard
himself saying it with astonishment.
It of course committed him to the
further society of this merciless
egotist; he could have fibbed out
of it with ease, and he was at loss
to understand why he had not.
The truth was that Caruthers was
flattering Jeffry. He felt that Jef¬
fry was important to him, and he
treated him with deference and res¬
pect. Jeffry in his sore heart want-
ed more of this—much more, at
whatever cost.
“I know a little girl," observed
Caruthers now (and Jeffry had a
quick bleak picture of the kind of
little girl Caruthers would know),
"from my home town. Barbara
Kincaid, her name is. Awfully nice
kid. She has an apartment down in
Greenwich Village—she’s over here
designing, or something. I rang her
up this morning, and got her to
break a date she had for tonight.
I’m going to take her to dinner. Like
to have you join us, Jeff."
“Thanks, said Jeffry. "I—Pd
like to."
Her apartment was the first


shock. Huge studio room, rough¬
walled, high-ceilinged, tasteful and
beautiful. Lamps under odd-shaped
parchment shades, diffusing low
soft gold. Dark things, velvet
things to sit on and lie on—and
sudden flaming gorgeous splashes
of color. Books in long cases, un¬
glassed. Good books.
Her voice was the second shock.
Soft and laughing-cool, and just a
trifle breathless, as if she feared
she might be interrupted before the
end of each sentence. “Hello, Rod
Caruthers!” she said from the door¬
way. And then, “Oh! How nice.
You’ve brought someone¬
The third shock was dizzying.
Not the studio, the setting, not even
the voice, had prepared him proper¬
ly. Blond she was, slim—tinted like
a gay bouquet in which an artist
florist had blended yellow, scarlet,
pink and cream. An exquisite per¬
son. At first glance, a light and
frivolous person, belonging to the
world of shine and bubbles and
string bands. Then you saw her
eyes. And her peaked firm chin.
And the eyebrows, dark and straight
and rather heavy that punctuated
and remarked her face. And the
hands. Intelligent. Restless, pale.
Hands with temperament.
She said to Jeffry, “I am very
glad you came. And Jeffrey knew


MANILA MARKET REPORT


For the Week Ending Sept. 2, 1933


SUGAR
Centrifugal 960-
Manila export,..


—Per Picul
**











Lowest Highest
₱8.10
₱8.10
AE


Iloilo export .....


 * * * * *


* * * * * * * *


* *. * * * * .


 * * 


a



8.10


8.10


New York market


firm.


COPRA—Market. Per 100 kilos


Buen corriente





*


E 








₱4.40


₱4.60


Semi resecada


*


* 


**


 


ES*


4.70


4.90


Resecada ..


* * * *


* *  * . * * .. * * * . *    * * * 


5.00


5.20


COCONUT OIL—Market dull.


Per Kilo, delivered in drums P


HEMP—Market quiet, per picul


nominal.


Lowest Highest


Lowest


Highest


₱10.75


₱11.00


₱4.50
P


₱5.25


9.75


10.25


Y


4.75



5.00


 maa


S
m


7.25


75


9
L."


4.00



4.50


S2 .....


* ** * * ****


7.00


7.50


L2


3.75
* ** *  * * * * *  **


4.25


1.....


*****


6.25


6.50


M


 4.00


4.50


3.....


  * * * * * * *


5.75


6.25


M2


4.00
 * * * *    


4.2


6.....


8


5.00


5.50


DL


3.25



3.50


J2 ......





4.50


5.25


DM


3.00



3.25


Catbalogan asseried


*








a 





3.75


4.00


Calbayog assorted


*** *****


*


* *. ***.


****


 * **  * *


3.25


3.50


Tacloban assorted ......


 . . * ..


* * * * * * *


 * * *  *  *


3.00


3.00


RICE—Market improved. Per


sack of


57 ki


Elon-elon—


1st class .


*


***  * * **








₱5.75


P5.85


2nd class.


* * * * * * P


*** *


* * **


* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


5.e


5.
5


Inaposto!—


1st class .








* * .4


* ****  * *


5.55


5.e


2nd class .


* * * ** * *


E*


* **





5.45


5.5


Macan—


1st class .


*. 





 





5.4.


5.55


2nd class .


* **





*





5.35


5.65


Red—


Ist class


 





 


 y


5.45


5.55


2nd class





*








5.15


5.25


E
BULLETIN OF MAILS
(Issued by Bureau of Posts)


SEPTEMBER 6, 1933—3:00 P. M.
(Registered Mails Close One Hour Earlier Than Time Given Below)
DEPARTURES
TO THE UNITED STATES


Close
Sails


Steamers


Connections


Due at


Date


1:30
Sept. 6


p.


Jefferson
m.


Direct


Seattle


Sept. 26


Sept. 7
10:30


a.


USAT Grant
m.


Direct


S. Fran.


Oct. 


Sept. 9 1:30


p.


m. P. Hoover


Direct


S. Fran.


Oct. 2


Sept. 12 2:30


p.


m.
ilverpalm


Direct


L. Ang.


Oct. 4


Sept. 14 10:30


a.


Gen. Lee
m.


Direct


S. Fran.


Oct. S


Air Mails for Siam,


Burma, India, Persia, Irag


Palestine and Points


in Europe Are


Forwarded


to Hongkong by


Every Opportunity


TO MISCELLANEOUS PORTS


Destination


Sails
Closing


Per Steamer


Due at


Date


Hkong-Shai


Sept. 6 1:39 p. m.


P Jefferson


Hongkong


Sept. a


Australia


Sept. 7 2:30 p. m.


Tanda


Brishane


Sept. 20


ARRIVALS


FROM THE


UNITED STATES


No


Due


Due


Due


Steamers


From
Date Bags


Honolulu


Hongkong


Manila


E. of Canada


Seattle Aug. 12


Aug. 17


Sapt. 1


Sept.
3


P. Jefferson


Seattle Aug. 12 550


Direct


Sept.


Sept. 4


P Garfield


Fran. Aug. 1 200


Aug. 1


Sept. 1


Sept. 4


P Hoover


S.


Fran. Aug. 11 72


Aug. 17


Sept. 4


Sept. 


Silverbeech


L. Ang. Aug. 15 3


Direct


Direct


Sept. 7


Raby Castle


L. Ang. Aug. 7 3


Direct


Direct


Sept. 9


FROM EUROPE VIA SUEZ


From
Date


Due Hkong.


Due Manila


Steamer


French Mails


July 19
Marseilles


Aug. 29


Sept. 2


Coblenz


that she was genuinely glad. His
mind, ever ready with explanations
of things complimentary to himself,
explained this at once. Caruthers
bored Miss Barbara Kincaid, natur¬
ally, though she was sweet to him,
it was not hard to guess that only
dutifully, through a feeling that she
ought, had she accorded this evening
to this former acquaintance from
Johnstown (or was it Williams¬
burg?); and she would have been
glad to see almost anyone who
would relieve her of a tete-a-tete
with him.
Nevertheless, Jeffry was pleased.
To be so welcome to such a girl, no
matter what her reason, was a
pleasant, an exhilarating thing.
They had cocktails at the studio
before they left, cocktails mixed by
Barbara, cunningly, and shaken up
with all his might by Jeffry. Pink
cocktails, foamy-frosted, two apiece,
Caruthers talked about his book.
He sat holding his goblet, waving
it, threatening at any instant to
drop it or spatter the walls with its
contents, talking and talking about
his book. He said, "Jeff is going
to see to it that it gets a fair read-
ing," and both he and Barbara
looked gravely at Jeffry, and Jef¬
fry felt warm, expansive, big. A
man who could see to things.....
“I should think, observed Barba¬
ra, at the first break in Caruthers"
monologue, “that the publishing
business would be awfully interest¬
ing. Isn’t it?”
“It certainly is,” Jeffry said.
“Tell me about it."
Again they were looking at him.
Expectant-eyed. Caruthers, whose
mouth had opened to continue,
closed it again. The girl leaned for¬
ward a little, propped her chin on
her hand.
"What would you like to know?”
Jeffry asked her.
“Oh—everything. You see,” she
said simply, with a little indicative
flick of white fingers, "I’m mad
about books. I buy them when I
can’t afford cream for my coffee, or
—gin for my grenadine! Tell me
what I buy. Just exactly what went
into the making of—this?” She
touched a book that lay on the table
beside her.
“Toil," sighed Caruthers drama¬
tically. “The toil and the tears and
the dreams of some poor wretch like
me.
“Yes," said Barbara, still looking
at Jeffry, "—but after that?
He told her. He described, he ex¬
plained, he gesticulated. Encourag¬
ed and drawn out of himself by Bar¬
bara’s eyes, her intentness, her
questions, he talked glibly and well,
without diffidence. “You really
ought to see for yourself,” he wound
up. “You ought to let me take you
through our plant, and show you."
“Would you?” she said, with
either eagerness or a most perfect
counterfeit.
This early success at conversation
carried him into the evening. He
found he could talk of other things
to those listening gray eyes; not
only of books but of plays and
places—anything that came up. He


September 7, 1933





PAGE 57


could talk! He could even make her
laugh now and then. He wasn’t so the doorman.
bad! At least he knew that nothing
he said was as idiotic as anything
and everything pompously said by
Caruthers....
During dinner he was reminded,
by a chance remark of Barbara’s,
told him she did designing, or some¬
thing. This suddenly became ex¬
ceedingly important. Just what did said. “It would have been deadly
she do? What sort of designing?
Where was the shop? How long
had she had it?
He put down his fork and regard-
living! Good Lord!
“The shop," replied Barbara, "is
second and Fifty-third. It’s the
the cutest—if I do say so as
shouldn’t. I’ve had it three years,
and it’s called Bal Masque, and we
make fancy dress costumes. Let’s dress."
see—what else did you ask me?”
“Who’s we?”
“I am we,” Barbara said. “Then
I’ve three girls who sew. I design,
and they manufacture. I used to
have a partner, Sonia Surles—her
real name was Esther—but she got
married."
“Im not surprised,” Caruthers
put in owlishly. “I saw her. Dis¬
tinctly the marrying kind."
“Fancy dress costumes," mused hmm?”
Jeffry aloud.
Barbara nodded. "And original
ones. I have never in my life,” she
shall."
queried.
said.
"No?”
"No.”
He felt strangely relieved. No
romantic-looking birds who attended
fancy-dress balls (it seemed to him
they were always sideburned and too!"
romantic-looking) came to her
should have known then and there
what was happening to him. But
that was later.
They went from dinner to a play,
and from the theater to a supper
club, and from that supper club to
another like it, and thence to a
third. This was known as "giving
Rod a whirl," and was done by Bar¬
bara and Jeffry with the customa-
ry relentlessness of New Yorkers
entertaining out-of-towners. Caru¬
thers reacted in the customary way.
He became a little drunk. He be¬
came quite drunk. At the second
supper club he quarreled with a
waiter, clinching the argument with
a shouted, "Know who I am? Well,
Im Rodney H. Caruthers!” At the
third supper club he thrust out a
roguish foot and almost, not quite,
floored a cabaret girl in the throes
of a buck-and-wing. In the taxicab
leaving the third supper club he
wept, and then slept. They drove


him to his hotel, and gave him to
“And," sighed Barbara, leaning
thankfully back in her seat, "that's
settled! Whew! What an evening!”
Through the half-gloom of the
foot or two of space between them
she glanced at Jeffry sideways, up-
about her shop, that Caruthers had ward, and smiled. His hand lay on trading. And apparently, many of
his knee, and she touched it light-
ly. “Thank heaven for you,” she
with just Rod."
“He wasn’t so good, was he?” Jef-
fry answered.
"Awful. If anything,” Barbara
ed her solemnly, wide-eyed. Such a stated, "worse sober than tight. I
little soft young thing! Making her got to the point where I thought if
he said one more word about his
book—” She checked herself;
on Madison Avenue, between Fifty- laughed, a little apologetically.
“Poor old Rod,” she said. "He’s real¬
very littlest shop in New York, and ly nice.... Does this taxicab driver
know where he’s going, Jeff? Or and maintained it save for an oc-
is he just going?
“He knows. I gave him your ad-
“You remembered it?”
“Sure.” He repeated it.
"Amazing!” said Barbara, shak¬
ing her head. “Remarkable mind!
Tell me, how is Addison Sims of
Seattle?”
thought of something. “See here!”
he exclaimed, sitting bolt upright
excitedly, turning to her, "maybe
you don’t have to go home yet,
“Oh, yes, I—"
“We can go to another night
club,” Jeffry pursued, his eagerness
added, buttering a roll, “turned out soaring. Incredible that this had not
a Pierrette and, so help me, I never occurred to him before! “Oh, come
on, Barbara,” he said. “It isn’t late. silly! There are other evenings.”
“Not a Pierrot either?” Jeffry We’ll have a couple more dances,
and something to eat—You’re hun¬
“No men’s costumes,” Barbara gry, aren’t you? Why, you must be!
You haven’t had a thing to eat since
dinner, and now it’s—
“Four A. M.” Barbara laughed.
"Pd love to, Jeff. But—ask me on. "Im sorry you were bored,” he
men, eh? None of the sideburned, again. I’m a business woman, you
know. With an alarm-clock.” She
sighed. “The darn thing works, self in.
shop...... Later on, recalling this be persuaded; but Jeffry could not had been; and shame boiled in him,
relief and its cause, he thought he drop the subject. He had glimpsed
Paradise, and now he fought for it
doggedly, frantically. It wasn’t four
A. M. Impossible. And anyway,
what if it was? She could make up


IGOROTS HALT GOLD RUSH
Continued from page 8


20 centavos, and at one time even
reached 30 centavos. Over 400,000
shares changed hands last Thurs¬
day, with the Benguet Consolidat-
ed leading the field, with a rise of
P8 per stock in only one day’s
the speculators are new in the
field, and are going in for stock
buying without definite assurance


sleep tomorrow night..... . Thus he
pleaded. And thus he tarnished the
memorable shine of his golden eve¬
ning. For by forcing Barbara to
repeat her refusal, twice, thrice,
more and more firmly, he reminded
himself that she probably didn’t like
him, really; he had been merely the
lesser of two evils, after all.
He relapsed into moody silence,
casional monosyllable when common
politeness demanded, the rest of the
way.
There was a moment at the door
of her apartment house when he
thought he might have been mis¬
taken. Her gray lifted eyes were
so seemingly sincere, her voice when
she said, “Ell see you soon, Jeff?”
Jeffry ignored this. He had sounded so as if she wanted to, that
his breath came short, his pulses
pounded, and he hoped again. He
seized her hands, "Don't go in, Bar¬
bara. Please. Don’t end it yet. Let’s
drive back uptown and have just a
sandwich or something. Please!
Ill bring you back in an hour,
honestly I will."
She smiled, shaking her head.
“It’s too late. Oh, Jeff, don’t be
“But tonight’s tonight!” he cried
"How do I know PIl
desperately.
ever—” He broke off. Stared at
her. Flung down her hands. He
picked up his hat from the parquet
where it had fallen, and rammed it
said bitterly, low, and turning,
strode to his cab and slammed him¬
An absurd performance. Two
It was plain that she was not to seconds afterward he knew that it
and he writhed. Now. What must
she think of him now? Oh. fool!
Fathead! Simpleton!


(To be concluded)


WARNINGS
An imitation of LUX TOILET SOAP has
been offered to retailers and to consumers.
You are WARNED to examine your purchases
carefully and to make sure you have received
the real article.
EUX
IOILLI SOAl


Igorots may naturally not want pro¬
spectors to gold-hunt on their (the na¬
tives') property, buf they themselves pan
for gold.
that they could “cash in big.”
It was learned that most of
the stocks sold in the local
exchange belong to companies
which are still in the experimenta¬
tion stage. Many of them, espe¬
cially the small firms, have as yet
been unable to strike anything
rich. Shares of these firms, nev-
ertheless, have started selling fast
at prices far above par.
Appointive Solon Gaerlan of the
Mountain Province believes that
there is too much speculation go¬
ing on in the local gold stock mar¬
ket. Such a situation, in his opin¬
ion, calls for a warning early
enough to save people from a very
distressing experience.
“In all my years of contact with
people engaged in the gold mining
industry,” said Solon Juan Gaer¬
lan, “I have never been able to ar¬
rive at the decision to speculate in
gold. I know that there are many
mining claims up north, but only
three have been able to produce the
kind of gold worth investing one’s
money in. I wish to warn specula¬
tors and those who are ignorant of
the gold situation to take due pre-
caution when investing money in
this new venture.
“I don’t think there is any trou¬
ble up in Bontoc, but if there is,
it’s this mad gold rush that is to
blame. People will do anything for
gold."
Toward the weekend, reports
coming from the gold area indicated
that peace had been restored, but
that trouble might again occur
should the miners resume work.
Claims in the vicinity of the trou¬
ble area, investigations show, total
160, most of them being owned by
government employees.
Coincident with the vague con-
firmation that trouble had really
occurred in Bontoc, stock prices
suddenly hit the downward trend
after Thursday’s exciting exchanges.
Last Friday shares exchanged to¬
talled only 91,190, as compared with
the 400,000 of the previous day.
And sellers far outnumbered buyers.


PAGE 58


 WEEKLY NEWS DIGEST


September 7, 1933


MALACANANG


NATIONAL AFFAIRS
QUTGOING VICE GAG. HOLLIDAY HONORED BY CABINET


HEABERS


Former Vice Governor John H. Holliday, who teft the Islands with Mrs. Holliday last Monday, was honored by the members of
the cabinet at a despedida luncheon at Wach Wack Gelf and Country Club lost week. Top pheto, left to right: Major George C.
Dunham. Under-Secretary Vicente Carmona, Mr. Holliday, Secretary Singson Encarnacion, G.-G. Frank Murphy, Col. Louis J. Van
Schaick, and Alejandro Roces, Jr. Bottom photo is a view of the banquet table. Others present at the luncheon were other distin¬
guished government officials and notables in cibil life.


Mrs. Marguerite Murphy Teahan.
honorary chairman of the P. I.
Anti-Tuberculosis Society, is urg¬
ing co-operation in support of the
“Sweet Charity” Ball to be given
in the Santa Ana ballroom tomor¬
row (Friday). Urging the giving
of money, she said that “those who
are able to do so should contribute
generously, and others according to
their means, with the brunt of the
load borne, of necessity, by those
whose circumstances are such as to
make it possible for them to do so.”


The g.-g. has come out flat-foot-
edly against reinstating public of¬
ficials who are found guilty of
wanton disregard of law and duty,
and particularly negligence in
handling public monies, although
they may have peen acquitted of
the criminal charge of malversation
of funds.
The case in point is that of Gavi¬
no de Castro, Jr., justice of the peace
of Buayan and Glan, Cotabato,
whom he has dismissed from office
against the recommendation of the
under-secretary of justice, urging
the official’s reinstatement in of-
fice. The court of first instance
acquitted De Castro of the criminal
charge of malversation, but the
same court found him guilty of ir¬
regularities in the discharge of his
duties and of carelessness and neg¬
ligence in handling monies paid to
him as costs and fines.


To the g.-g. has been submitted
by the unemployment committee a
bill providing for an appropriation
of P30,000 for the purpose of estab-
lishing unemployed families in
homesteads. Major George C. Dun¬
ham, medical adviser to the g.-g.
and chairman of the committee, said
that while this procedure would not
furnish a great deal of unemploy¬
ment relief, it would be, neverthe¬
less, a factor in relieving unemploy¬
ment in that it would remove from
Manila a small number of those
who otherwise would be without
work.
CABINET
The members of the cabinet last
week gave a despedida luncheon at
the Wack Wack Golf and Country
Club in honor of Vice G.-G. John
H. Holliday. Vice Governor and
Mrs. Holliday left the Islands last
Monday on an extended trip to Chi¬
na, Japan, the South Sea islands.
and Europe before proceeding to
the United States.


In a brief speech he delivered at
the banquet, Vice Governor-General
Holliday thanked his hosts, spoke of
how pleasant had been the relations
he had with them and other of-
ficials of the insular government,
mentioned the co-operation he re-
ceived from them all, said he was
very grateful for the cordiality
with which he was received by
everybody in the Philippines.
Alejandro Albert, under-secretary
of public instruction, will be in
charge of that department until the
arrival of the successor of Vice
Governor-General Holliday.


LEGISLATURE
Replying to the statement attrib-
uted to Senate President Quezon to
the effect that the mission did not
insist on a shorter transition per¬
iod in connection with the HHC act,
bespectacled, daring, fiery Resident
Commissioner Camilo Osias last
week stated that the senate head
considered a short period also, “too
short, too violent. “If not,” he ask¬
ed, "why did he write Senator
Hawes to make the period in the
Hawes-Cutting bill of 1930, ten
years instead of five? Why did he
advocate a ten-year period in his


official report to the Philippine
legislature in 19312 Why did he
write Commissioner Guevara and
myself a letter on September 18,
1931, recommending a change from
five years to ten years?”


Senators Sergio Osmena and Be¬
nigno Aquino, minority leaders and
at one time arch opponents of wom-
an’s suffrage, last week came out
for the women’s taking part in the
plebiscite. They also declared that
the women should not be required to
pay for the privilege of voting on
the Hare-Hawes-Cutting act.


Denying the report that there
would be neither a plebiscite nor a
national convention, Senate Pres¬
ident Quezon announced last weel.
that the legislature will pass both
the plebiscite and the national con¬
vention measures, in order to
choose which of the two measures
should be resorted to in acting on
the HHC law. President Quezon is
anxious to have the independence
law acted upon without delay. He
deplored the delay in the house in
acting on the plebiscite measure.
and intimated that when the ques¬
tion reaches the senate, the majori¬
ty will act promptly.


Aana N ng Maa .
pending trouble between Igorots
and mining prospectors who are in¬
vading their lands in the present
gold rush in the district of Bontoc,
Mountain Province, the committee
on public lands, mines, and forests
of the house of representatives.
headed by Rep. Jose G. Domingo,
is preparing a bill prohibiting gold¬
hunters from trespassing on Igorot
lands, and instructing the proper
authorities to determine the rights
of the Igorots over their lands.


Left to right: Senator Osmena, Rep
M. Ramirez, and Resident Commissioner
Osias, who with other members of the
Osrox faction, pleaded for acceptance of
the HHC act at Sta. Cruz. Laguna, last
Sunday. (Phote Claudio, TVr.)


September 7, 1933


 WEEKLY NEWS DIGEST


PAGE 59


NATIONAL AF FAIRS—(Continued)


AS WE GO TO PRESS
Congressman John D. Dingell
of Michigan, a member of the
house committee on insular af¬
fairs and territories, at an in¬
formal gathering in the office
of Speaker Paredes last Tues¬
day, discussed the Hare-Hawes¬
Cutting law frankly with the
representatives. A po in t
brought out was whether or not
proposed amendments to the
law, in case it is accepted con¬
ditionally, will be approved in
congress, as well as whether
another bill can be secured in
the event the independence act
is rejected.
Answering an editorial of a
daily last Tuesday, Dean Maxi¬
mo Kalaw said that “the truth
of the matter is that both pros.
and many of the antis have pro¬
bably yielded a good deal al¬
ready,” and that the official
stand of the legislative mission
which is embodied in its report
to the legislature shows that
the mission itself no longer con¬
siders the HHC act as the acme
of perfection.
Discoursing on Senate Pres¬
ident Quezon’s "exaggerated
views as to the American high
commissioner being 'the real
power' in the the common¬
wealth government,” Resident
Commissioner Osias, in an arti¬
cle by him published last Tues¬
day, said that Mr. Quezon is not
only out-Hurleying Hurley but
also out-Hoovering Hoover.
Said he: “While Mr. Quezon
thinks the high commissioner
has powers so vast that he can
reduce the Filipino chief exec¬
utive to a 'moro-moro' chief
executive, former President
Hoover said the commissioner’s
powers under the Hare-Hawes¬
Cutting law are inconsequen¬
tial."


The distinction of being the first
Philippine member of the National
Recovery Administration in the
United States goes to the house of
L. R. Aguinaldo, which has become
a member of the N. R. A. through
its offices in New York City. An
announcement to this effect was
made by the offices of the firm last
Tuesday.


As part of the Child Health Day
program celebration this year, Ma¬
jor George Dunham, health adviser
of the g.-g., and Dr. Basilio Valdes.
acting health commissioner, last
Tuesday made a study of the gen¬
eral health condition of children.
visiting the different city schools
and other centers of children.


G.-G. Murphy last Tuesday creat¬
ed a “city beautiful" committee to
study and make recommendations
to improve the health and sanitary


conditions of the city, by cleaning
up the slums and establishing and
improving city playgrounds and
public parks.
The Philippine Collegian, organ
of the U. P. students, may print
articles on and discuss the HHO
law, U. P.’s President Palma ruled
last Tuesday in answer to an in¬
quiry of the weekly’s editor-in¬
chief.


Because of the impassability of
the road to Bontoc, the investiga¬
tion of the trouble between the Igo¬
rots and the miners in Bontoc
ordered by Secretary Sison of the
interior and labor last Tuesday
could not be carried on.


Found guilty of frustrated mur¬
der with three aggravating cir¬
cumstances against him, Isidro Viz¬
carra, notorious Manila gangster,
who last July 8 attacked Attorney
Juan L. Diaz, was sentenced to 17
years and four months imprison¬
ment and to pay an indemnity to
the injured party of P600, with no
subsidiary imprisonment in case of
insolvency.


The action of the legislature in
appropriating P20,000 for the open¬
ing of the U. P. school of dentistry
was questioned last Tuesday by Dr.
Fernando Calderon, dean of the col¬
lege of medicine and director of the
Philippine General Hospital.


Investigation of the apparently
"mysterious” death of a Chinese
business agent at the Chinese Gen¬
eral Hospital was begun last Tues¬
day by the secret service division’s
homicide squad. A Chinese mes¬
tizo, said to be a medical student
in one of the local private medical
colleges, was being sought by the
police for questioning in connection
with the case.


MANILA
A special literary-musical pro¬
gram will be held at the Grand
Opera House on Saturday evening,
Sept. 9, in honor of Senator Sergio
Osmena, on the occasion of his birth-
day anniversary. Outstanding local
talents will participate in the pro¬
gram.


City Engineer Artiaga, as well as
Mayor Earnshaw, has been asked
by the department of the interior
and labor to submit a memorandum
showing why the city entered into a
ten-year contract with the Meralco
for the supply of electric current.
The mayor was requested to pres¬
ent a similar memorandum some¬
time ago. The explanations given
by the two officials will serve as
the basis of a communication to be
forwarded to the secretary of jus¬
tice for an opinion on the question
of whether the contract in question
is legal.


Commenting on what the courts
should do to help in the suppres¬
sion of organized crime in Manila.
Judge Pedro Ma. Sison, of the court
of first instance, declared last
week: “I think the time has come
for the courts and the police to co¬
operate and put an end to the
growth of organized gangsterism
in Manila, as long as it is in its
early stage. There have been cases
recently which show that the gang¬
sters tend to become too bold in this
city, and the government should be
mobilized to suppress them at once."


Found guilty of charges of gross
disrespect to Dean Jorge Bocobo
and of conduct unbecoming a gen¬
tleman, filed against him by Prof.
Alejo Labrador, Jose Alejandrino
was suspended from classes for two
weeks last Monday by the faculty
of the U. P. college of law.


PROVINCES
Albay
Special to Graphic
By ALIPIO N. ALFONSO
The body of Dalmacia Moratalla.
45, wife of Antonio Balignasa of
Tompaa, Camalig, Albay, was found
in a state of decomposition some¬
time ago hidden in the bushes at
the foot of Mt. Mayon. Investiga¬
tion revealed that Dalmacia had left
her house unnoticed several days
before and could not be found. Her
husband said it was the peculiar
habit of Dalmacia to leave the house
when she was not in good humor and
wander for several days before re¬
turning home. After an autopsy the
authorities declared that the death
of Dalmacia was due to hunger.
Antique
Snecial to Graphic
By FRANCISCO O. MAZA
All the dry goods merchants of
Sibalom, Antique, have declared a
strike as a protest against the or¬
der of Municipal Treasurer Fran¬
cisco Elizalde prohibiting the dis¬
play of goods on hangers outside the
stores. As a result of this strike it
is said that the municipality is los¬
ing an income of about P50 every
market day. No settlement between
the treasurer and the strikers is in
sight. The municipal council has
petitioned the provincial board ask¬
ing for intervention in favor of the
merchants and recommending at the
same time the transfer of Treasur¬
er Elizalde from Sibalom to another
municipality and the payment by
the treasurer of the loss sustained
by the municipality as a result of
the strike.
Bulacan
Bulacan’s Municipal President
Medardo B. Valete has requested the
co-operation of the authorities in
Manila and elsewhere for the arrest
of Alberto Reyes, absconding mu¬
nicipal treasurer of that town.
President Valete said Reyes disap-
peared on August 7, last, carrying
with him P800 of public funds.
Agapito Torrechiva and Zosimo
Mansueta, who took part in the Ipo
payroll hold-up about the first week
of last month, were convicted last
week by Judge Francisco Enage of
the court of first instance of Malo¬
los, Bulacan, to three years, eight
months and one day imprisonment,
and to pay a fine of P60 each for
illegal possession of firearms. Two
other accused. Patricio Arante,
alias Batoy, and Teodoro Ayaso.
were acquitted for lack of evidence.


Camarines Sur
Special to Graphic
By ANTERO STO. TOMAS
With the recent publication of
another Bicol weekly dedicated to
the cause of the HHC act, the pros
in Camarines Sur now have two
strong organs for their campaign
for the acceptance of the independ¬
ence act. The weeklies in question
are Bicolandia and Indepedencia.


AMERICAN KILLED IN AUTOMOBILE ACCIDENT


Above is the wrecked and burned car of W. L. Ghent, American Bible Society repre¬
sentative, in which he was killed in La Carleta, Occ. Negres, a few days ago. Mr.
Ghent may be seen beneath the wreckage. Standing at the extreme left is the chief
of police of La Carlota, who took charge of the removal of the corpse and the car
to the municipal building. (Read stovy on p. 60.) (Courtesy, Antonio Aplan )


PAGE 60


 WEEKLY NEWS DIGEST


September 7, 1933


NATIONAL AFFAIRS—(Continued)


The antis in Naga, Cam. Sur, not
to be outdone by the pros, also held
a mass meeting recently at the Pla¬
za Rizal. One of the speakers was
a female student, who urged the
people to be careful should the law
be submitted to them for decision,
otherwise “their children and their
children’s children will inherit not
the whole Philippines but only a
part.” Other prominent speakers
were Attorney Rosendo Lontok, At¬
torney Ezequiel Grageda, member
of the provincial board; Attorney
Luis N. de Leon, who will be a can¬
didate for representative in the sec¬
ond district of Cam. Sur; and Igna¬
cio Meliton, who will also be a can¬
didate for that office in the first
district of the province.


Cebu
Special to Graphic
By MAMERTO POLANCOS
As a result of the raising of the
price of rice in the Chinese stores
at Tudela, Cebu, a group of promi¬
nent persons in that locality recent¬
ly formed a business partnership as
a move to break the business mono¬
poly of the Chinese in the Camotes
islands. A store has been establish-
ed by this entity and is now patron¬
ized by the people of Tudela and vi¬
cinity. Incidentally the people there
are beginning to realize the advan¬
tage of patronizing stores owned by
Filipinos.


Iloilo
Special to Graphic
By JESUS P. RAMOS
A sensational murder case was
unearthed in Iloilo a few days ago
when Dr. Asecion Arancillo, who
performed an autopsy on the ex-
humed body of Vicente Javelosa
which had been found floating in the
fish corral of Venancio Dolar, of
Dumangas, on August 13, declared
that Javelosa did not die through
accident as had been supposed but
had been murdered. The physician
found a lesion in the occipital region
of the head, caused by a pointed in-
strument. Authorities in Duman¬
gas are now combing the town for
the author or authors of the mur-
der.


Nine of the 16 persons arrested
for gambling in a raid sometime ago
at the house of Pedro Palmares
(See , page 60, August
24, 1933) were found guilty and
fined from P60 to P80 each. Those
found guilty were Esperanza Pal¬
mares, Pedro Palmares, Clodualdo
Saliente. Francisca Alcantara, Do¬
nato Pedroso, Servando Calama-an.
Alberto Sitias, Camilo Casiano, and
Eugenio Sorayno. The other seven
were acquitted when Irineo Canto,
star witness of the prosecution, de¬
nied having seen them playing the
prohibited game of monte.
Also in Iloilo a few days ago three
jueteng agents were nabbed in the
act of receiving bets from the peo¬
ple. They were arrested by constab-
ulary men, headed by Lt. Patricio


Borromeo. The jueteng agents ar¬
rested were Agustin de la Cruz, Ba¬
siliso Jison, and Vicente Firmeza.


La Union
Special to Graphic
By B. P. ALCANTARA
Damiana Florendo, 55, of Nagui¬
lian, La Union, a lonely widow, who
had no children, found the world too
lonesome to live in. Tired of living,
she decided a few days ago to end
it all. She took a piece of wire,
coiled a noose, hanged herself. Her
body was found dangling by her
brother, Timoteo Florendo. Pre¬
viously, the deceased had attempted
to take her life by jumping into a
well.


Leyte
Special to Granhic
By FELIX LAFUENTE
The municipal officials of Kawa¬
yan, Leyte, headed by Municipal
President Narciso Atipolo, recent¬
ly tendered a dance in honor of
visiting health officials. The guests
were: Dr. A. Aldaba, district health
officer; Dr. P. Villegas, new sanita¬
ry division president; Dr. Santiago
Sudario; Red Cross Nurse Miss A.
Turrado; Mr. Galimpin; and Jose
Ocampo. The district health offi¬
cer, in a brief speech, enjoined the
people of Kawayan to observe sani¬
tary rules, with special reference to
drinking water, telling them that
their supply of water was none too
safe.


The drive for anti-tuberculosis
funds finds ready support in Naval,
Leyte, where the municipal presi¬
dent of the town is personally con¬
ducting the collection of funds. He
recently called a meeting of all re¬
sidents of the town and explained
the advantages derived from the
services of the anti-tuberculosis so¬
ciety.


Special to Graphic
By BENITO G. KILLING
The young people of the town of
Malitbog, Leyte, are interested in


the civic welfare of their communi¬
ty. Recently they formed two so¬
cieties for the good of the public.
One society is called the Malitbog
Gay Club, which plans to establish
a puericulture center; and the
other is the Daloli Club, which has
as one of its aims the installation
of a radio station. Miss Pacifica
Veloso, sister of the justice of the
peace of Baybay, Leyte, is the pres-
ident of the former organization,
and Juan Baybay, a former teacher
of the Malitbog Elementary School,
of the latter.


Masbate
Special to Graphic
By GREGORIO BORO
More than 100 heads of cattle
that were suspected of being affect-
ed with hoof and mouth disease
were placed under quarantine by
veterinarians in Masbate last week.
The disease is prevalent in some
municipalities of the province, espe¬
cially in Milagros.


Mt. Province
Ingawa, the Igorot woman, who
was one of the causes of the strain-
ed relations between mining pros¬
pectors and the Igorots in Bontoc,
was in a weak condition at the Bon-
toc Hospital last week. Miner San¬
chez, a Visayan, who is said to have
pushed her so that she fell down a
hillside, remained detained in the
constabulary barracks. The natives
were still restless and wanted to lay
their hands on Sanchez, but the con-
stabulary men succeeded in dissuad¬
ing them.


Occidental Negros
Special to Graphic
By PRAXEDIO SILVA VILLALUZ
William L. Ghent, representative
of the American Bible Society was
killed a few days ago when his car
turned turtle and was burned on
the way from La Carlota to San En¬
rique, Occ. Negros. Professor Do¬
nato Galia, of the Central Philip-
pine College, Jaro, Iloilo, and a Ce¬


buan, who were with Mr. Ghent,
sustained serious injuries and were
rushed to the provincial hospital.
The family of Mr. Ghent, residing
at Mamungan, Lanao, was imme¬
diately notified of the accident.
The deceased is survived by his
wife and eight children. (See pic¬
ture on page 59).


Special to Graphic
By MAN. M. ROULLO
About 100 persons, mostly illiter¬
ate laborers whose transportation
and dinner expenses were paid by
somebody else, joined the parade
staged one recent Sunday afternoon
in Silay, Occ. Negros, by the antis.
Following the parade was a public
meeting at the plaza, attended by
nearly 400 people, who were mostly
pros.
First to speak was Reno Lopez, a
young man of Silay, introduced as a
former student. He spoke in En¬
glish. After he had talked for some¬
time several in the crowd shouted
they could not make out what he
was saying. Among the protestants
were the municipal president of Sa¬
ravia and the young man’s uncle,
who suggested his nephew had bet-
ter talk in Visayan.
Lopez was followed by Felix Se¬
verino, who said he had convinced
his brother to become an anti. But
hardly had he uttered those words
then his brother contradicted him,
saying he was still a pro. Other
speakers were two men "imported"
from Iloilo.


Tarlac
Special to Graphic
By RUFINO BALAGTAS
The recent painting of the iron¬
concrete fence surrounding the mu¬
nicipal building of Capas, Tarlac, is
the latest improvement made in that
town. This was made possible
through the appropriation of P200
for the purpose and for the care of
two municipal gardens.


In accordance with the order of
Secretary Antonio de las Alas, of
public works and communications,
the provincial board of Tarlac has
reduced the tolls on the Bamban
bridge. The new rates are: motor
truck, regardless of weight, P0.40;
automobile, P0.20; trailer, P0.20;
tractor, P0.20; motorcycle, P0.05.
Other vehicles not specified and all
animals are exempted from paying
toll fees.


Samar
Special to Grapluic
By TEODORICO NOBLE
Catbalogan recently observed its
town fiesta. People from neighbor¬
ing towns came flocking to the cap-
ital of Samar and a lively two-day
fiesta was enjoyed by all. Vernacu¬
lar operettas were staged for the
entertainment of the people. A pa¬
rade was also held in which all ele¬
ments of the province were repre¬
sented. The affair was a complete
success.


This picture was taken during the necrological services held recently under the aus¬
pices of the Northern Colleges in memory of the late Justice Ignacio Villamor. Among
those whe took part in the ceremonies were Judge Pablo Rivera, of Vigan's, Iloces
Sur, court of first instance; Governor Quirolgico, Dr. Alonzo, of the U. P. Vigan branch;
Dr. Crisologo, of the Northern Colleges; Bishop Sancho, and Father Pasion.


September 7, 1933


 WEEKLY NEWS DIGEST


PAGE 6I


United States


Italy's General FRANCESCO DE PINEDG
He was burned to death.


General Francesco De Pinedo,
noted Italian airman, was burned
to death in New York early last
Saturday morning in an attempt to
take off on a record distance flight
across the Atlantic and Europe to
Bagdad, Iraq. The plane taxied
about 2,000 feet, unable to get into
the air because of its heavy load of
gasoline, when De Pinedo apparent¬
ly lost control. It caromed in the
dirt, turned around and headed to¬
ward some bystanders, crashed into
a fence, burst into flames. De Pi¬
nedo’s cries could be heard but
there was no chance for rescue.
Twice conqueror of the Atlantic,
he was the first to come to the
Philippines on a long distance solo¬
flight from Italy, arriving in Zam¬
boanga on August 19, 1925.


The coastwise tanker Coldwater
last week burst into flames and
sank after colliding with the
Orient-bound Dollar steamship lin¬
er President Wilson about 200
miles off the North Carolina coast.
Thirty-six men were saved. The
bows of the President Wilson were
damaged.


Six balloons out of the seven en¬
tries got into the air, drifted away
northward as the 1933 Gordon
Bennett Air Race got underway at
Glennview, IIl., last Saturday. Von
Opel’s German entry burst while
the balloon was being inflated.
There were no casualties. Partici¬
pating in the annual air race were
W T. Wan Orman’s Goodyear en¬
try, the Belgian entry, Lieut, Com-
mander T. G. Settle’s navy balloon,
the German entry Deutschland, the
Polish entry, and the French entry.


General Hugh S. Johnson, direc¬
tor of the national industrial re


FOREIGN AFFAIRS


covery administration, last week
painted an optimistic picture of the
progress made in the national re¬
covery program thus far in a speech
which he telephoned to Detroit on
the occasion of the celebration of
the success of the N. R. A. drive in
that city. Said he: “Recovery has
passed the experimental stage and
is now actually working in most ci¬
ties."


Officials of the national indus¬
trial recovery administration as¬
serted last week that the industrial
program thus far had resulted in
2,000,000 unemployed going back to
work, and had augmented the na¬
tion’s payrolls by $30,000,000 week¬
ly.
They also informed the execu¬
tives of insular territories and pos¬
sessions, including the Philippines,
last week that if their industries
wish to come under the sweeping in¬
dustrial control program they would
be glad to hear from them, but no
attempt is intended to compel them
to come into line. It was recognized
that conditions, in insular indus¬
tries, especially in the Philippines
and Porto Rico, differ so greatly
from those in the United States that
it would be impracticable to make
the recovery act’s terms apply in
blanket fashion.


Individualist, practical, seventy¬
year-old Henry Ford was warned
last week by General Hugh S. John¬
son, director of the national indus¬
trial recovery administration, that
unless he joins the automobile code
the “people may crack down on
him.” Addressing a celebration of
the N.R.A. drive in the capital,
Johnson indicated that the govern¬
ment was ready to forbid govern¬
ment purchases of Ford products if
Ford persists in defying the code.
The automobile wizard has declined
to sign the automobile code, saying
that he pays higher wages and
maintains better conditions on his
own initiative than the recovery
program.


William Green, president of the
American Federation of Labor, de¬
clared last week that the hours of
labor being inserted in the codes for
individual industries receiving NRA
(national recovery administration)
approval were not short enough and
must be reduced to spread employ¬
ment further. A maximum of 40
hours a week for office workers and
35 for hand workers is provided in
the temporary voluntary blanket
code for all industry and business
now in effect, but these provisions
vary in character for individual in¬
dustries.


Patrick J. Kearney, deputy ward¬
en at the federal penitentiary at
Leavenworth, Kan., was placed on
the retired list last week by order
of the civil service commission,
after more than 30 years’ service


which began at Manila. Kearney
recently was suspended in connec¬
tion with the government’s investi¬
gation of unauthorized privileges
accorded Terrence Druggan, Chica¬
go beer baron, who is serving a sen¬
tence for income tax evasion. Drug¬
gan, it developed, was permitted to
drive a motor truck to visit a wom¬
an friend outside.


The deadline for reporting gold
hoards was extended last week by
the treasury department to Septem¬
ber 18. The previous deadline was
September 12.


An indication of the Roosevelt
administration concern over affairs
in Cuba was given last week with
the announcement that A. A. Berle
and John Laylin would go shortly
to Havana as adviser of the Ameri¬
can embassy in connection with the
economic reorganization of the re¬
volt-torn island republic. Berle has
been legal adviser for the farm ad¬
ministration in the current effort
to reach a sugar stabilization agree¬
ment. Laylin is a treasury depart¬
ment lawyer. In some quarters the
move was interpreted as further
evidence that concessions of some
kind are planned for Cuba’s sugar,
the island’s basic industry and crop.


The mysterious sleeping sickness
epidemic of the last several weeks
in St. Louis, Mo., made a fresh start
last week, adding six victims to the
death list, which has now reached
53. Dr. Charles Armstrong, federal
epidemologist, and other specialists
sent there to try to trace the cause
of the puzzling malady, apparently
made little progress.


That the U. S. navy will keep the
scouting force, formerly known as
the Atlantic fleet, in the Pacific
and “has no intention" of changing
this policy was reiterated last week
by Admiral William H. Standley,
new chief of naval operations and
acting secretary of the navy. At
the same time he predicted suspen¬
sion of the navy’s modernization
program for five battleships unless
funds are granted by congress or
the public works administration in
charge of the $3,300,000,000 voted
by the recent congress primarily to
aid employment.


Bone dry for nearly two decades,
Washington last week became the
twenty-fourth state to join the un¬
broken procession toward repeal of
the eighteenth amendment. The
votes of but 12 more state are
needed to ratify repeal of prohibi¬
tion, 36 being required under the
constitution, and 13 already have
set voting dates before the end of
the year. Vermont voted last Tues¬
day, and Maine is scheduled to go
to the polls on Sept. 11. Maryland
and Minnesota vote the following
day.


Ecuador
Emulating the example of Cu¬
bans, Quito, Ecuador, commercial
workers went on a general strike
last week, hoping to force the resig-
nation of President Juan de Dios
Martinez Mera. Congress gave in¬
direct support to the movement by
recessing for three days in order to
emphasize the demand. The move
for Mera’s resignation was based
on his failure to aid the country
economically. Mera indicated he
would resist the drive to oust him.
He claimed support of the army.


England
Viscount Edward Grey, ene of
the outstanding diplomatic figures
in the early stages of the World
War, sank into a coma last week
after being critically ill for several
days, and it was feared he would not
recover. His illness was ascribed to
high blood pressure, from which he
has suffered for many years. Now
71 years old, Viscount Grey was the
British secretary for foreign af¬
fairs from 1905 to 1916, and by ma¬
ny has been credited with England’s
participation in the war on the side
of the entente allies.


Mexico
Mexico’s President Abelardo L.
Rodriguez last week declared Tia
Juana and Ensenada, in lower Cali¬
fornia, free ports where imports
will be admitted without duty. The
declaration was made to stimulate
foreign trade. Tia Juana and En¬
senada, close to the American bor¬
der, are tourist resorts.


Panama
Found guilty of espionage by
court martial at Fort Sherman, C.
Z., Panama, last week, Corporal
Ralph Osman, U.S. army, was sen¬
tenced to dishonorable discharge,
two years imprisonment at hard
labor, and a fine of $10,000. Os-
man will forfeit his pay during im¬
prisonment, and in the event he
fails to pay his fine, he will have
to serve 18 years in addition. He
was charged with possessing mili¬
tary secrets.


Sweden
Lanky, reserved, modest Col.
Charles A. Lindbergh and his wife,
who made a survey flight across
the North Atlantic by way of
Greenland and Iceland, visited the
land of his forefathers for a few
hours last week when they were
guests of the Swedish crown prince
and princess at their summer resi¬
dence, Sofiero palace. Afterward
they returned to Denmark, where
they were received in audience by
King Christian and Queen Alexan¬
dria of Denmark. Lindy’s father,
a member of congress from Minne¬
sota, was a native of Sweden. 


PAGE 62


 WEEKLY NEWS DIGEST


September 7, 1933


NATIONAL AFFAIRS-(Continued)


PERSONALITIES
Bemustached, slim Michigan’s
Representative John D. Dingell,
speaking before the Manila Rota¬
rians last week, said that America
desires to see the Filipino people
realize their ambition and that it
would fulfill any of its promises to
the Philippines. He said further
that his purpose in coming to the
Philippines was to pay a visit to
G.-G. Murphy, "a man of conviction
who always labors for the welfare
of the majority.” Congressman
Dingell expressed his sympathy
with the aspirations of the Filipi¬
no people, hoping “that they will
settle their problems dispassionate¬
ly and without rancour of any
kind."


Charles Edward Russell, noted
Rizalist and friend of Philippine
independence, in a letter recently
received by former Commissioner
Isauro Gabaldon, reveals that the
legislative mission could have ob¬
tained a better independence bill
than the Hare-Hawes-Cutting act if
it only had supported the Sabbath
bill granting independence virtual¬
ly at once.


Homage to the memory of Datu
Piang, colorful Moro leader and
former member of the house, was
paid by the house of representatives
last week. Representative Jose San¬
victores of Bukidnon said that
Datu Piang was responsible for the
progress of the province of Cotaba¬
to, whose people Datu Piang ruled.


Attorney Ewald E. Selph, of Ma¬
nila, was elected member of the
American Bar Association’s general
council for the forthcoming year at
the annual convention at Grand
Rapids, Mich., last week.


A. Kimura, Japanese consul-gen¬
eral in the city, last week welcomed
the idea proposed in a bill offered
in the senate by Senator Elpidio
Quirino to look into the ownership
of the nine islands located in China
Sea, about 200 miles off the coast
of Palawan. Mr. Kimura, however.
expressed doubt over the strength
of any claim that the Philippines
might have on those islands.


Tan Liong Tan, assitant director
and head of the English depart-
ment of the Anglo Chinese School.
upon his departure last week for
Amoy, China, said that the Chinese
are looking towards the Philippines,
not only for trade opportunity but
also for guidance in democracy and
education. “It is lamentable,” he
said, “that a narrow sea separating
the two countries has served as a
barrier for centuries towards mu¬
tual understanding. However,
am looking forward to much closer
mations between the two peoples.”


SPORIS
For lack of funds, the tradition¬
al athletic meet between the Uni¬
versity of the Philippines and the
Silliman Institute, scheduled in Du¬
maguete, Oriental Negros, on De¬
cember 14, 15, and 16, this year,
may be called off, it was learned
last week at the U. P. physical edu¬
cation department. The state uni¬
versity spends more than P1,000
every time the team invades Ne-
gros for the annual affair, and this
year it is not known where the mon¬
ey will come from.


Failing to show his old form,
Young Tommy, Filipino bantam-
weight champion of California, was
decisioned by Johnny Pena, New
York Portuguese, in a ten-round
bout in San Francisco, Calif., last
week. This was Tommy’s second
setback in a row, as the fight was
his first ring appearance since he
was knocked out a few weeks ago
at Mexico City by Babe Casanova.
Tommy’s state crown was not at
stake as both he and Pena were
over the bantamweight limit of 118
pounds, the former’s weight being
120 pounds and the latter’s, 124.


Santo Tomas University annexed
the 1933 “Big Three" swimming
championship last week when it de-
feated the University of the Philip-
pines, its closest rival for premier
honors, by the count of 51 to 28 at
the new Santo Tomas pool.


BUREAUS
Customs
As a result of the suspension of
Pedro Roxas, former chief of the
immigration division of the bureau
of customs, Insular Collector of Cus¬
toms Aldanese is now in the market
for the right man to fill the vacan-
cy caused by Roxas, who has been
temporarily suspended pending final
action of the department of finance
on the findings of the investiga¬
tion board recommending his separ¬
ation from the service. Roxas was
found guilty by the board of the
immorality charg es preferred
against him by Miss Soledad Veloso,
an interpreter in the immigration
office.


Health
Endorsing Dr. Calderon’s theory
of eugenic sterilization, Dr. E. S.
Gosney, president of the Human
Betterment Foundation of Pasade¬
na, California, has written to the
director of the Philippine General
Hospital, informing him that his
comments on the subject have pro¬
duced favorable impressions in
America, where thousands of peo¬
ple are living under laws providing
for official sterilization. He added
that more than 9,000 sterilizations
have been done in the state of Ca¬
lifornia alone over a period of 24
years.


EDICATION
In answer to the need for better
and more efficient police and detec¬


tive work in the city, the Police
and Detective Academy has been
established in Manila. Here all
phases of police work are offered.
The young students are taught all
about crimes and their detection,
finger-printing, legal medicine,
criminal law, municipal ordinances,
and other phases.


JUSTICE
The defendants in the famous
Dimiao, Bohol, dance scandal case
were acquitted last week by Judge
Fortunato Borromeo Veloso, of the
court of first instance of Tagbila¬
ran, on the ground of reasonable
doubt. The accused were Ciriaco
Bagabaldo, Juan Catampang, form¬
er academic supervisor; Dr. Candi¬
do Garcia, health officer; and Dis¬
trict Auditor Marcelino Torres.
They were charged with abuse of
chastity. The defense was handled
by Attorneys Paulino Gullas. Jose
Casenas, and Jose Leuterio.


Two members of the Philippine
bar were punished by the supreme
court last week. One was reprim-
anded and the other suspended for
one year. The man suspended was
former Governor Abordo, of Pala¬
wan, "an attorney who agreed to
purchase opium, but was duped in
a fake opium deal, found guilty of
non-professional misconduct.” The
man reprimanded was Lucio Cruz,
of Borongan, Samar, who was at
the same time ordered to return to
a client the sum of P50. He was
charged with malpractice.


U. P.S ADVERTISING CLASS VISIIS RAMON ROCES PUBLICATIONS PLANT


These are members of an advertising class of the U. P. School of Business Administration who visited the offices of the Ramon
Roces Publications, Inc., last Saturday afternoon. Sitting, left to right: Pacifico Costilla, Ernesto Q. Uson, Pedro R. Romero, and
Guillermo Castillo. Standing, same order: Policarpio W. Custodio, Victeria G. Jesena, Francisca Concio, Prof. Manuel S. Rustia, Loren¬
zo Santamaria, Isabelo Funtanilla, Jose B. Rodriguez, Carlos T. Olmedo, and Pedro T. Abella.


malo 1. 198





PAGE 63


A SCIENTIFIC FISH TRAP
Continued from page 12


necessary for proper illumination.
This invention of Lt. Yanga has
; attracted considerable attention in
the United States, where he had
it patented. Incidentally, imme¬
diately after the release of the
patent, Lieutenant Yanga was duly
made member of the Chartered In¬
stitute of American Inventors, an
association exclusively for people
who have worth-while inventions to
their credit.
Lieutenant Yanga has no definite
plans as yet regarding his Luminous
Automatic Submarine Trap, but ex¬
pects to interest some corporation
to exploit it. He believes that with
this device, the fishing industry in
the Islands, in particular, could be
developed to such an extent that
the industry will give rise to other
occupations, such as fish packing,
smoking, and other allied industries.


PHILIPPINES DAY AT THE WORLD -
Continued from page ?


Dawes responded in behalf of the
Fair, congratulating Mr. Steele and
the Philippines on its last-minute
participation. Floyd Gibbons laud¬
ed the achievements of the Filipi¬
nos and longed for the time of their
political emancipation. He said in
part: “I cannot forget Manila for
it was there, in the R. C. A. studios,
that I had my first broadcast. It
was a most elaborate broadcast, one
that has never been equalled. I count
among my bosom friends Mr. Que¬
zon and Mr. Osmena. More power
to their national aspirations!
The program was concluded with
a series of selections from two or¬
chestras and the chorus singing
Mabuhay."
The crowd was then conducted to
the Philippine exhibits at the head
of the stairs on the second floor
of the Travel and Transport Build¬
ing. As to the nature of the ex¬
hibits, it has become a live subject
among the Filipinos here. Some
extol it as “better than nothing,"
others deplore it as a "misrepresen¬
tation" of the Philippines. I may
tell you all about it another time.


WHY SUICIDE?
L
Continued from page 16
Of the means suggested to curb
suicides we are citing two. Henry
Morton Robinson believes that
“there is no magic incantation over
fire and water that will exorcise the
demons of contemporary suicide
but there is always the slow fire of
education to dissipate the damps of
evil.” On the other hand, Dr. Hoff-
man is of the opinion that “there is
need in every large city of a con¬
sulting office giving advice to
would-be suicides," and says that
the situation "imperatively demands
drastic social interference if a much
more substantial rise to higher
figures (of suicide rates) is to be
avoided."


Do¬


TTHE WEEK ON THE POLITICAL FRONT
Continued from page 5


"1. All the cables and letters be¬
tween himself and myself and publish
them all without conveniently omit-
ting my letters urging him to join us
in Washington?
“2. The Quezon cables to Secretary
Hurley and the replies even while the
mission was already on its way to
Washington without omitting the ca¬
ble for Secretary Hurley sent through
the resident commissioners and whigh
I refused to transmit because 1 con¬
sidered it damaging to the cause of
independence.
“There would be other things worth
being unearthed by Mr. Quezon but
these can wait until after the fore¬
going have been duly attended to by
him, who ought to have them in his
files."
The lull in both houses, however,
was interpreted by majority leaders
to be a preparation for the big push
in the programs of the solons.
Bulacan’s Delgado absented him¬
self from the house, announced he
was busily putting on the finishing
touches to a long—and probably
memorable — speech answering the
attacks of the missioners. As soon
as Delgado is through closing the
debate on the bill, the plebiscite
resolution would be voted on, Speak¬
er Paredes announced.
To hasten the approval of the
budget, Leader Quezon cut off dis¬
cussions over the U. P.’s appropria
tion, proposed that the salaries of
professors be given in lump sum,
those of the other employees to be
itemized.
September 1, 1933
N his Pasay house, the senate
president talked to newspaper
A men, announced that there will
be a plebiscite and a convention.
Following the conference between
the high priests of the opposing
factions (Quezon and Osmena)
came rumors of a truce. Thereupon,
Cebu’s Osmena straightway denied
that there had been "negotiations"
for truce of any sort.
Commenting on the Osias chal¬
lenge, Tycoon Quezon told newsmen
that the commissioner should pub¬
lish all the letters and cables in his
possession, not only because he has
them, but also because he has the
'courage, manhood, and statesman¬
ship” to do so, besides being with-
out question the "most brilliast
speaker and the most wonderful de¬
bater in the Islands."
Leaders of the pro faction have
expressed fear that the antis might
eventually kill the law by failing to
act on it. As anticipated, the speech
of Solon Delgado practically block¬
ed all errorts to reach an early set¬
tlement of the big problem.
September 2, 1933
N another barnstorming cam¬
paign, Senator Osmena and
Icompany invaded San Miguel,
Bulacan, submitted ten reasons why
the Filipino people should accept
the HHC law without delay. Among
others, Senator Osmena cited:
(1) Because the law solves the
problem of dual responsibility in our


Senate President Quezon (with How¬
ers), at the mammoth anti meeting in
Malabon, Rizal, last Sunday. At his left
is Speaker Quintin Paredes.
(Photo, Claudio, TVT.)
government; (2) establishes an ac
cord with the United States by virtue
of which the principal export products
which we send to that country free of
duty will have a sure market during
the next ten years; (3) puts an end
to the campaign against Filipino im¬
migration to America; (6) gives us
our independence, fixing a definite
date for its coming.
Meanwhile, the Cavite Naciona¬
listas today approved a vote of con¬
fidence on the leadership of Boss
Quezon, urged him to strike out
objectionable features in the bill.
In a signed article appearing in
a local afternoon daily, Dean Maxi¬
mo Kalaw brought to light the fol¬
lowing:
1. That Senate President Quezon
in his communications with Hurley in
1931 favored a law very much con¬
servative in character, with less auto¬
nomy than the congressional independ¬
ence law provides.
2. That he considered the Hawes¬
Cutting bill in 1930, as his own very
formula, if only the provision regard¬
ing tariff would be eliminated, the
transition period increased from five
to ten years.
3. That in April, 1932, upon the
approval of the Hare bill in the lower
house, he cordially congratulated tho
mission, an indication of his support
of the bill:
4. That while the original Hawes¬
Cutting bill, calling for a transition
period of from 15 to 19 years, was
being discussed, he insinuated that he
would not object to even a 15-year
period of transition;
5. That he openly compromised in
favor of the United States’ retention
of naval and other bases in the Is¬
lands.
6. That he has declared publicly
that immediate, complete, and abso¬
lute independence is hariful to the
interests of the Filipinos, and even
suggested the suppression of the words
"immediate independence" from the
platform of the Nacionalista Consoli¬
dado party;:
7. That his subsequent plea for an
immediate independence came only
after he received assurance that the
Hare-Hawes-Cutting bill would be ap¬
proved;
8. That he had assured the mem¬


bers of the mission that he would ac¬
cept their decision and would help
them, even saying that “our party
and—we believe—the country in gen¬
eral will support the mission";
9. That on various occasions he has
reiterated that he would accept inde¬
pendence “under the most difficult
conditions."
Said Kalaw further: “There is
scarcely no important provision in
the independence law which M. Que¬
zon has not approved of in the past.
He approved of the theory of econ¬
omic limitations. He approved of
the 1,000,000 tons of sugar limit
without specifying whether they
were short or long tons. If they
were short tons, the limit would
have been equivalent to 850,000
long tons. He favored an American
commissioner with great powers."
September 3, 1933
—OLLOWING in the footsteps of
the missioners, the Quezon
 group invaded Malabon, Rizal,
today. Before 7,000 people Leader
Quezon said only the Filipino gov-
ernor-general and the politicians
will benefit under the HHC law,
not the general masses.
In the meantime, the pros in¬
vaded Lagunas’ capital, where
several thousand people met them
September 4, 1933
ENYING reports to the ef¬
fect that he and his cohorts
D
have abandoned the plebiscite
plan, Tycoon Quezon told news¬
paper men: “It is not true we are
going to abandon the plebiscite on
the Hawes-Cutting law. We are
going through with that. I do not
know what is delaying the bill in
the house.
Quezon Lieutenant Avelino told
newspaper men that the senate will
act immediately on the bill. De¬
bate in the upper house on the meas¬
ure is expected to make furs fly far
and high
Expected to be voted upon in the
house tomorrow is the HHC meas¬
ure, with all agreed to set aside de¬
bates for a while.
In today’s session in the house,
interest was centered on the plea of
Missioner Sabido, who accused Del¬
gado of unfairness, asked for half¬
hour privilege speech to answer
Solon Delgado’s charges regarding
military and naval reservations.
On the other hand, Bataan’s lone
delegate, De Leon, refused to scut¬
tle before the Tirona charges hurled
against fellow Democratas, asked
for privilege to return the brick¬
bats with interest.
Impatient members declared
themselves sick to the bone because
of long speeches delivered, indicat¬
ed a willingness to shift to the con¬
vention plan. Solons Ozamis, Bon¬
can, Luna are said to be among
those likely to favor the convention
project.
Debate on the floor of the house
today formally closed with Bula¬
can’s Delgado maintaining that the
HHC law is a Republican measure
and does not proffer the indepen¬
dence desired by the Filipinos.
-000—