No Creed But 
Freedom
No Law But
Justice


Guerrilla
THE DAILY


A Thought A Day
For God And
Country


VOL. No. II—NO. 22
15 CENTAVOS A COPY
MANILA, WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 15, 1945


FORMAL NOTE ON
SURRENDER DUE


STATE COUNCIL
IS REVIVED BY
PRES. OSMENA


With President Sergio Osmena pleading anew for unity,

other 30-day special session at
5:00 o'clock yesterday after
noon. Attributing the triumph
of the Allies to their being
"united", the chief executive
again pleaded to all elements to
join hands "for the best interests of the nation.'
The president argued that national unity is "absolutely essential' especially in view of the
fact that the country confront(Continued on page 4)


Petain's Fate To
Be Decided Soon,
Trial Nears End


PARIS, Aug. 14. (UP)—The
treason trial of Marshal Henri Philippe Petain, 89-year-old
Vichy chief of the state, is rapidly reaching its end and the
case most likely will go to the
jury this afternoon.
When the hearing is resumed
at 1 p.m. today ,it will be devoted chiefly to the final defense pleas. Prosecutor Andre
(Continued on page 4)


Radiocast Says
Japs Accept Terms


SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 13 (UP) Domei, the official
Japanese news agency, reported tonight that Japan had accepted the Allied surrender demand and that an imperial
message of acceptance would soon be forthcoming.
The Domei report, broadcast by Radio Tokyo at about
11 p.m. (about 3 p.m., Manila time, Tuesday) did not give details of the forthcoming message, merely stating that "an
imperial message accepting the Potsdam proclamation is
forthcoming soon."


Funeral Rites Held
For California Solon


SAN FRANCISCO, Aug. 14.
(UP)—Funeral rites for Senator Hiram Johnson were held in
San Francisco's City Hall yesterday afternoon. More than
2,500 attended.
Senator Sheridan Downey delivered the eulogy.
A military guard of honor
and an army band formed the
honorary escort when the funeral cortege arrived in San
(Continued on page 4)


All Senators
To Draw Lots


All preparations for the
drawing of lots which will determine the tenure of office of
the individual members of the
Senate are now complete, it
was authoritatively learned
yesterday. The draw is scheduled to be held within ten days
from today ,in accordance with 
the bill approved by Congress
during the last session.
It was reliably learned that
a drum has been especially con(Continued on page 4)


SeeMalacanan
Hand In Deal


Malacanan intervened in the
NDC textile sale was revealed
during yesterday's hearing in
connection with the probe when
among the documents presented
included a letter addressed by
the assistant secretary to the
president to Secretary Vicente
Singson Encarnacion, acting
manager of the firm, interceding for the wife of former Solicitor-General Alex Reyes.
(Continued on page 4)


Japanese Deliberate On Terms


The question which had delayed the Japanese reply—the demand of the Allies that the emperor be under the authority of the Allied supreme commander as
soon as Japan surrender—was not referred to in the
Domei report. The report was rebroadcast at least once
by Radio Tokyo.
"Immediately upon receipt of the Allied reply yesterday, Monday," Domei said, "the Japanese government started deliberations upon its terms, which created a very serious problem for the Japanese people. The
cabinet had been in continuous session until late Monday
night. It is understood the Japanese government's reply probably will be available any time as soon as the
legal procedure is completed."


Roxas Denies Charge, Says
He Will Fight Fascism Here


In a strongly worded reply
to an article published yesterday in the Manila Guardia, a
local publicatioin, charging him
with being a tool of Fascists,
Senate President Manuel Roxas not only denied the allegations but challenged every
statement made in the article
The senate president declared
that he is not openly against
Fascism but will fight it in the
country.


Senate President Roxas' letter to the editor of said paper
follows:
"My attention has been called
to your headline in today's issue of the Manila Guardian and
I feel constrained to state that
this article merely reflects a
malicious and unjust attempt
to smear my reputation and
public conduct. There is not
one particle of truth to the con(Continued on page 4)


De Gaulle Will See
Truman In Capital


WASHINGTON, Aug. 14.—
(UP)—The White House announced that General Charles
de Gaulle, chief of the French
provisional government, will
arrive in Washington August
22 for conferences with President Truman.
The announcement did not
give any indication on the scope
of their talks but well-informed
(Continued on page 4)


Broadcast Follows Raid


Observers noted that the Domei broadcast reporting acceptance of the Potsdam proclamation came in
the wake of another heavy Superfortress attack on
Honshu. (In Guam, headquarters of Gen. Carl A.
Spaatz, commander of the U. S. Strategic Air Forces
in the Pacific, the assault was described as the first
phase of a new 10-week campaign to reduce Japanese
industries to ashes.)
Three fleets of B-29's, in the first such attack 
since the war broke out, hit railroad mashalling yards at
Marifu, on Honshu, on Tuesday, Japan timen encountering no opposition, according to official announcements from Guam. (Marifu is not far from Hiroshima,
victim of the first atomic bomb.)