PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF
THE PIONEERS' CLUB OF MANILA


AFTERNOON ON THE OLD LUNETA — 1898


A
VOL. VII
NO. 3
JAN. 40


TWENTY CENTAVOS


1893


STRING ALONG WITH
SMEEPSTAKES PATRONS
It will make you feel befter and happier es
fresh hopes rise again with the coming
of the New Year.
PRIZES FOR THE FEBRUARY 18 DRAW
1 First Prize of P100,000 Residual Prizes, at P200 each.
50,000
1 Second
" " 25,000 Consolation Prizes to tickets
1 Third
the last two digits of the
6 Fourth Prizes at 5,000 numbers of which are the
50 Fifth
2,000 same as the last two digits of
100 Sixth " " 1,000 the number winning Firste
77
1)
200 Seventh
500 Prize, at P8 each.
BIG PRIZES FOR AUTHORIZED RE-SELLERS
Be an authorized re-seller and win handsome commission,
besides the following prizes for selling the principal prize
winning tickets—
Re-sellers Prizes
If ticket wins First Prize ................ P5,000
3,000
Second Prize ........... ....
 " " Third Prize .............. . .
1,000
1 *1
3
any of the Fourth Prizes,
500
at..
" "
" any of the Fifth Prizes,
100
at.
The only condition to re-sellers is that they must sell not less than six
(6) booklets of tickets for each draw. Send P20.24, the price of one
booklet of twelve (12) tickets, and start right away as an authorized
re-seller.
SAVE A LIFE AND WIN A PRIZE
Amappine onarrty OWeepStaNes


P. O. Box 141


National Charities Bldg.


Manila, Philippines











Compliments


of


A
tanic, Culf & Pacifie


Company


of


Manila





O





"Gresh up


Sparkling
with
HVIR)
Lest
Sots 
DEVEN
Or
At all
bars, hotels, clubs,
offers a fine re

.


and
restaurants
or direct from—


freshing beverage for that
tired" feeling.


ISUAN, INC.
Tel: 5-73-06 —
— — — We Deliver








MINE CARS
RAILS
RAILBENDERS
SWITCHES
and
All accessories for
Mine Railways
Stocks in Manila
for
Immediate delivery
The Gregg Company, Ltd.
P. O. Box 117—Manila, P. I.


For Sale At All Good Drng
Stores
Ag ents
INHELDER, WALCH CO., Ltd


Warchouse & Office
Calle Tomas Claudio
Pandacan


Phone
6-75-86


2





CFOR more than Thirty years constant and sincere
devotion to the eyesight welfare of those who come
to us has established a firm relationship between our
patrons and ourselves.
Ever the best in quality but never
higher in price.


lane


&Co.


NURIIMERI
HELLPES
90 94 ESC0LTA
MASONIC TEMPLE






Smoke
Chestertield
CIGARETTES
cThey Satisfu 
LIGGETT & MYERS TOBACCO CO.
MANILA


2nd Battalion Barracks, Estado Mayor


American
DLSTMER


A MONTHLY MAGAZINE PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PIONEERS' CLUB
OF MANILA, P. I.
Telephone 2-78-04
JAN. '40


Published at No. 559 Calle Echague, Manila.
Edited by R. B. BLACKMAN


VOL. VII


Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at the
Manila Post Office on Jan. 4. 1934.


No. 3


U.S. ARMY OPERATIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES
T is a fact—yet not to be wondered at—that very few of the men
who participated in the military operations of the United States
Army in the Philippines have a clear and comprehensive knowledge
of what these operations were. Each veteran of the many campaigns, in Luzon, Panay, Samar, Mindanao, and others of the Islands, saw just that part of the activities in which he was concerned, and has some—though perhaps only a slight acquaintance—
with the work of the other divisions of our forces, through the
hearing of experiences recounted by some of those who took part.
It is a fact, also, that no soldier had, at the time of his service,
much idea of the extent of the territory covered by the U.S. forces,
nor of the plans of the campaigns in which he did his very modest,
but most faithful duty.
Forty years have passed, and most of the details of these campaigns are now simply incidents, more or less dimly remembered.
Time buries a great deal, but embellishes and distorts the parts
that it preserves. There are some publications—books and short articles—which were written soon after the end of the period of the
Spanish and Philippine wars, and these give us the facts as they
were seen by the writers. It would be a gigantic task to collect a
complete history of the U. S. Army operations in the Philippines.
to be carried through as well as we can, to get the record in outline, hoping that, for the details, veterans who can help us will come
forward.
In our next issue we begin an account of the first northern campaign—a sample of what may follow if the Historians of the various
Regiments which served in the Islands will cooperate with us. It
is hoped that the histories of these Regiments in Philippine service,


5


will fill in the outline and make a fairly complete picture. If we
can do this job before all of us have answered "“taps”, the record
will be of interest to the sons and daughters, and perhaps to the
grandchildren, of the men who served in the only 100% volunteer
army ever called to the colors for service off the mainland of America.


INTRODUCTION TO OUR REVIEW OF MILITARY
OPERATIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES, 1898-1901.
THE operations of the United States Forces in the Philippines,
during the more than three years of the Spanish-American War
and the suppression of the Insurrection, may be divided into three
periods:—
1. Defeat of the Spanish Fleet, and capture and occupation
of Manila, from May 1, 1898 to February 4, 1899.
2. Major campaigns by the U.S. Army against the organized
forces of the Philippine Insurrection. February 4, 1899 to
December 31, 1899.
3. Garrison duty and minor operations against guerilla bands.
from January 1, 1900 to June 30, 1901.
The operations of the first and part of the second period were carried through by regiments of U.S. Regular Infantry and State Volunteer regiments,—the latter being skeletons of State Militia mustered
into the Federal service and recruited to full strength. The Regulars
were, of course, commanded by regular Army Officers, while the
State Volunteers were officered by appointees from civil life and a
few regular officers. The Generals were from the regular army
and civil life, most of the latter having had considerable previous
military experience.
We publish in this number a table showing the order of arrival
in Manila of the various units of the American forces. From this
table can be seen just what forces were present for the capture of
Manila, and the others who arrived later, but in time for the operations against the Insurgents which began February 4, 1899.
The period from the defeat of the Spanish armada to the capture of Manila, May 1 to August 13, 1899, was one of waiting. Commodore Dewey had no land forces with which to take and hold
Manila, so he refrained from forcing a surrender, which he might
have done on a threat, or by actual bombardment of the city, with
loss of life and destruction of property. The Spanish Government
and Spanish forces hold the Walled City, so were left there to pre

serve order until enough Infantry and Artillery arrived, with supplies, to make an adequate attacking force, capture the city, and garrison it.
The table shows that during this period of waiting three expeditions arrived, comprising three Regular Regiments, the 14th,
18th and 23rd, eleven State Volunteer Regiments, and parts of other
units, regular and volunteer. These were the forces with which the
capture of Manila was effected. Generals on the ground were Anderson, Greene, Merritt and McArthur.
Up almost to the last few weeks, some of these troops were
held at Cavite, others on the transports. The Filipino forces, organized by General Aguinaldo as soon as he had been brought over
from Hongkong on a navy boat, furnished with arms captured from
the Spaniards or purchased and others issued by Dewey from the
Cavite Navy Yard, which he had taken from the Spaniards, ringed
Manila around from the Bay on the north to Pasay on the south,
occupying the line of Spanish blockhouses, some 14 in number (see
map of Manila pp. 34-35) with trenches constructed by themselves. Manila was, therefore, completely invested by the American
fleet in the Bay and Filipino lines on the north, east and south.
To understand the presence of these Filipino forces, we must
go back to 1896 and beyond. There had been, during these earlier
years, an uprising of the Filipinos (Tagalogs mostly) called by the
Spaniards the Katipunan Insurrection. It was organized by Andres
Bonifacio and others, who planned a surprise attack on Manila. The
discovery of this plan, through a priest in the confessional, precipitated the conflict, full preparations for which had not been completed by the Filipinos. The Spaniards, after some bad reverses.
finally pushed the Insurgents back until the latter retreated to the
mountains of Biacnabato, 90 kilometers north of Manila, where they
remained until negotiations resulted in their surrender. The leaders,
including General Aguinaldo, accepted banishment to Hongkong and
a promise of a payment of 600,000 Spanish pesos. Only half of
this amount was paid, however, so the Filipino leaders did not regard their own promises to refrain from further operations as binding, and when Dewey had defeated the Spanish fleet, they quickly
reassembled as much as possible of their scattered regiments, closing
in on Manila, pushing the Spanish forces into the city. They also
attacked other Spanish garrisons in the provinces, some of which
surrendered to them, other held cut for relief by American troops.
One of the most heroic defenses made by these outlying Spanish
garrisons was at Baler, on the east coast of Luzon, an attempted
relief of which by the Navy resulted in the capture of Lieutenant


Gilmore and a number of his landing party. This story will be told
later. The Spanish garrison at Iloilo also held grimly on, and that
will make another story.
It is therefore clear that, in so far as the Filipino army that
surrounded Manila in 1898 is considered, we may regard them as
Insurgents against the Spanish, a continued or reconstructed state
of war that had been merely suspended in 1896.
There has been much controversy as to the right of these Filipino forces to be recognized as a part of the American forces concentrating for the capture of Manila. While there were meetings
between the Filipino and American Commanders, and a somewhat
friendly relationship between the men of the two armies, no agreements were made, nor was the active cooperation of the Filipino
forces counted on as part of the pending operations. This was the


Brigadier General T. M. Anderson and Staff


statement made by the American Commanders, while General Aguinaldo claimed that definite promises had been made to him as to
the rights and rewards expected by the Filipinos. Probably there
was much misunderstanding on both sides. It is a controversy that
will never be settled, and now, forty-one years later, is seen to have
arisen under circumstances which could not have made a cooperative
military capture of Manila possible under the orders issued to the
American forces from Washington, and under the rules of warfare
as then understood and practiced. The Insurgent army of Aguinaldo was insurgent against a Spanish government whose days were
numbered. It could not be incorporated into the American Army,
for the latter could not, morally or actually, assume responsibility
for its acts. The American Commanding General had no authority
to accept its help or to make any agreements with it. On the contrary, and in so far as possible, its pfesence had to be ignored, and
its operations as far as might be, prevented from complicating the
situation. But it was there, and in formidable force, and had to
be reckoned with, and the end results of these incompatible relations were to be tragic.
This delay of three and a half months between Dewey’s victory and the capture of Manila, with the American Fleet in front
and the Insurgents behind—with no cooperation between them—gave
ample time for the Spanish Officers in high command to think out
the situation and come to a tentative agreement with Dewey and
Anderson, the essence of which was that there was to be a Spanish
surrender to the Americans, "with satisfaction of Spanish military
honor.” This meant a more or less sham attack, a perfunctory defense, a parley and a capitulation, the terms of the latter being the
most favorable ever conceded to a vanquished enemy during any
previous period of warfare. Had the plan as made been carried
through exactly, there might not have been the loss of a single life.
That it miscarried in some of its details, resulted in some losses,
mostly on the Spanish side.
We publish in this number two accounts of the capture of
Manila and also the Articles of Capitulation. A careful study of
the latter will show, between the lines—especially the last paragraph—the serious problem that confronted the Americans. The
Spaniards agreed to surrender to the American forces, and the U.S.
Army was to accept full responsibility for order and for the protection of the population of Manila and the property therein. The
period of waiting, during which some Insurgent officers had been
allowed to enter outer Manila (under pass, and after surrendering
their arms) had bred intense ill-feeling among the Insurgents, and


vivid fears among the people of Manila. There were many rankling
feelings of hate and probably some threats of revenge for the drastic
actions of the Spanish troops in suppressing the insurrection of
1896; and hatred flamed especially against the Spanish Friars whose
administration of the provincial and town governments, and whose
acquisition of large land-holdings had been the principal protest of
Bonifacio and his Katipunan followers.
If the reader, at this point, will turn to the Articles of Capitulation herein published, and read carefully the last paragraph, he
will see the problem; and he will feel a justifiable pride at the confidence in the integrity and honor placed in the American Army by
the enemy Spaniards. The Spanish officers and men, and the
Spanish civil population of Manila, evidently did not accept at face
value the Proclamation of the Spanish Archbishop of Manila, made
soon after the victory of Dewey, that the Americans had come to
rob, rape and enslave the people of the Philippines, and to seize
their property.
Hence it was that no occupation of Manila could be undertaken
until the arrival of troops from the States sufficient to make it effective under the terms of surrender. And hence it was that, in
preparing for the attack, as planned in advance, Insurgent forces
along that part of the line on the south, inward about a half-mile
from the Bay, had to be asked and required to move off to the rear,
leaving this part of the line to be taken by the American troops who
were to participate in the attack—in fact the only forces that were
to be allowed to make it. When the American regiments and artillery were landed along the Bay front, in Pasay (named Camp
Dewey), they occupied a position with their right against Filipino
forces and their left at the water-edge, facing north toward the city.
For the account of actual operations, the reader may turn to the
two accounts published herewith.
As soon as the occupation of the captured city had been completed, American troops moved out and took stations in the districts
of Manila east of the Walled City and north of the Pasig River—
districts then called “barrios"—which are now a part of the larger
City of Manila. Out from these districts the Insurgents were required to retire their forces, so that they then formed a line around
the city, north, east and south, closing in even behind the American
positions in Pasay and Santa Ana. This resulted in a practical and
complete investment of the Americans on the land side by the Insurgents. Subsequent operations, after February 4, 1899, were the
American attacks on this Filipino army north, east and south, breaking the ring and scattering its forces. No attempts could be made,


10


The Utah Battery


with the small force then present, to succor Spanish forces in provincial towns, until the real Luzon backbone of the Filipino Insurrection against the United States had been broken.
Such was the stage that, from August 1898 to February, 1899,
was being set for the tragic drama of real war, all the more tragic
because it was the outcome of inflammed passions, misunderstanding,
and misrepresentation. The Filipino leaders believed they had the
right to expect full and immediate recognition of their government,
and the removal of all American government from the soil of the
Philippines. On September 15, 1898, the Filipino Republic was proclaimed, its Congress opened, and General Aguinaldo elected its
President and Military Chief, the capital set in Malolos, Bulacan,
about 40 kilometers north of Manila. Soon thereafter the organization of Filipino forces in most of the provinces was begun, and
officers placed in command. Aguinaldo issued a number of proclamations in which he set forth the arguments which seemed to him
just and valid. In the next number will be found a part of the "manifesto" of the “Gobierno Revolucionario,” issued on the 5th and 8th
of January, 1899, which, following immediately after the Proclamation of the U. S. Military Governor. Gen. E. S. Otis, to the Filipino
people, constituted a virtual declaration of war.
During the period following the capture of Manila, and before
relations between the U.S. Army and the Revolutionary Government of Malolos had become too strained. American officers had
made trips into the territory surroundng the city, then held by the
Filipino forces, in order to contact Insurgent officers, hold confer

11


ences, and look over the country. They were not welcomed in Filipino camps, but none was molested or detained. On the other hand,
the Americans allowed Filipinos to enter freely into Manila, and
it was during this period that some Insurgent officers took advantage of this opportunity to organize secret forces within the city,
which forces, after the outbreak of hostilities, made serious trouble,
burning some of the “barrio" districts, and requiring some hard
work to hunt them down. For a few days they created a reign of
terror, especially felt by the peaceful residents who took no pleasure
in seeing their houses go up in smoke. While this outbreak within
the city did not greatly frighten our troops, it put an end to all of
the spirit of friendliness and ended the wanning confidence that had
marked the preceeding months. It was then and thereafter to be
grim warfare, and the “bolo-man" was to get no quarter.
It is difficult to say how much of the old spirit of the Bonifacio
Katipunan was yet alive as a force in the Insurrection against
America. Filipino troops used “the cry” all through the war; and
even afterward; and as late as the years following the capture of
the last outstanding detachments of the Army of the Revolution,
crimes were committed in the name of the extinct Society. The
Filipinos, outside the Tagalog provinces, had little enthusiasm for
the war, being for the most part forced to take part. The Americans, both soldiers and civilians (teachers and others) who were
later on duty in provincial towns, found them generally quite
friendly, often cooperative, especially eager to collect American
education and American money. Friendships began in 1900 between Americans and Filipinos that were sincere and have lasted
to this present day. We publish in this issue an article on the
Katipunan by our Historian, J. H. Bass, veteran of the war, constructor and educator during all the past forty years.
The events of the War of the Philippine Insurrection were written by a number of war correspondents who followed the troops,
among these were John F. Bass and William Dinwiddie. There
were photographers with each expedition. In 1900 Harper and
Brothers, New York, published a massive volume of 470 pages, in
which were collected the articles of these war correspondents, hundreds of reproductions of original photographs taken in many cases
under fire, supplemented by much other material. This volume is
certainly a treasure to those who possess it. We have fortunately
had the use of a copy, from which we shall take both facts and


12


pictures. As may well be supposed, the descriptions of the war
correspondents contain errors which we have corrected whenever
possible by consulting veterans who took part in the expeditions.
Such maps as we shall publish are reproduced from the latest accurate topographical maps of the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
In our February number we shall complete this general Introduction, following it by the first of two accounts descriptive of the
First Northern Advance, which began February 5, 1899, covering
the provinces of Bulacan and Pampanga, north of Manila. The story
of this advance is taken from General Funston’s book, and is told
mainly in terms of the work of the "Fighting Twentieth Kansas”
of which he was then the Colonel.
It will be the purpose of the American Oldtimers’ Magazine to
give a part of each number this year to an account of some important expedition of the year 1899 against the organized Insurgent
forces, and to publish such pictures as can be found. We are inviting the Historians of the States Departments concerned to send
us the histories of the States Volunteer Regiments which had service
in the Philippines. We also invite any veterans who will write short
stories of some important action in which they took part to send
them to us for use, if suitable, in our coming numbers. All this
will give us a fairly good history in terms of the man who carried the
rifle.
We expect that there will be some demand for the issue of
January, February and March from veterans in the States to whom
this announcement of our plan will come a little late. So we shall
hold a limited number of copies of each issue to fill orders for back
numbers. Every subscription to the Magazine will be dated to begin
with this January issue as long as our supply of extra copies lasts.





CAL. COOLIDGE


Prop.


LUZON CAFE
MERCHANTS' LUNCH
and
Tel. 20428 SHORT ORDERS


GOOSE'
Mgr.
305 Echague





13


THE STORY OF AUGUST 13, 1898
By ALBERT J. BRAZEE
1st Lt.—2nd Oregon Volunteers, and
Captain—35th Infantry, U.S.V.
(See Map of Manila on pages 34 and 35)


IMMEDIATELY following the victorious Naval Battle of May 1st,
1898, an effective blockade was carried out by the American
Squadron. If Admiral Dewey had not cut the cable from Manila
to the outside world, the historic Capture of Manila on August 13th,
1898, could not have taken place, as the protocol of peace was signed
at Washington on August 12th.
It is estimated that the Spanish land forces were less than
11,000 men. The Filipino forces, numbering about 12,000 men under General Aguinaldo, had surrounded Manila with entrenchments,
thus cutting off supplies and communication by land. They were
well armed with Remington and Mauser rifles and had some artillery
and machine guns.


Major General Wesley Merritt
14


The author as a young
The author as he
lieutenant
is now
The first expedition of the Eighth Army Corps, under command of Brigadier General T. M. Anderson, arrived in Cavite on
June 30th; the second, under command of Brigadier General F. V.
Greene on July 17th; Major General Wesley Merritt, Commanding
the Philippine Expedition, arrived with additional troops on July
25th. (See list of expeditions in this number).
General Greene’s brigade on July 31st occupied a line south of
Manila extending from the Bay east to the Pasay Road. This was
part of the insurgent line which they ceded to us. Additional
entrenchments were constructed about 100 yards nearer the Spanish
lines. General MacArthur’s brigade was strung out along the beach
from Pasay to Paranaque, in support.
There was a spirited night attack on July 31st in which the
Spaniards charged the American trenches and were repulsed by the
10th Pennsylvania and the Utah Battery. The 1st California reenforced the troops in the trenches and despite the heavy and galling
fire they had to pass through, never wavered. Several men were
wounded and Captain Richter was killed. The Spaniards were
driven back to their lines from which position they kept up an ineffective fire.
All negotiations with the Spanish Captain General for the surrender of the City having failed, General Merritt and Admiral Dewey agreed that the army should attack at 9:00 a. m. on August
13th, supported by the guns of the fleet.
Attack orders were issued to Major General T. M. Anderson
who was in direct command of the land forces. The first objective


15


Colorado Troops pitch camp


Spanish soldiers on balcony of barricaded houses
16


of General MacArthur’s brigade was Fort San Antonio Abad and
the trenches extending to the Pasay Road, while the first objective
of General Greene’s brigade was Blockhouse No. 14 and the trenches surrounding it.
At nine o’clock the land batteries began a terrific bombardment
which lasted nearly half an hour. The infantry then advanced and
carried the first line of resistance with comparative ease.
The fleet stood in towards Manila with battle flags flying and
crews at quarters ready for action. The landing force of the first
two battalions of the 2nd Oregon Volunteers, under command of
Colonel Owen Summers, accompanied the fleet on the Transport
Kwong Hoi. General Merritt and staff accompanied the fleet on the
S. S. Zafiro.
At 9:55 a. m. the Flagship Olympia fired on the fort. This
was followed by a bombardment from the fleet and the land batteries.
The fleet ceased firing about 10:30 as the enemy did not reply. Meanwhile the troops could be plainly seen advancing on the fort which





Brigadier-General
Francis V. Greene





17


The gun which destroyed Blockhouse No. 14


had already been vacated by the Spaniards who were retreating towards Manila.
When Colonel MeCoy stepped out of the fort, Major Charles
Keller, commanding the 2nd battalion of the 18th Infantry was passing rapidly towards Manila. MeCoy called out that he had orders
to take Manila first. Major Keller, continuing the march, called
back. “Why in hell, don’t you do it then? What’s holding you?”
The old cemetery at the entrance to Malate (observed later)
gave mute evidence of the fierce fighting in that vicinity, with its
bullet-shattered monuments and battle-scarred tombs.



GRANDMA GAVE US MUTTON SUET
NOW MODERN SCIENCE BRINGS US
Penetruting
PENETRO
Made With a Base of Old-fashioned Mutton Suet Containing Menthol,
Camphor, Methyl Salicylate, Turpentine and Thymol
Sole Distributors
THE PHILIPPINE NET & BRAID MFG. CO., INC.
367 JUAN LUNA 369
Phone 4-95-85 and 4-95-63
 O. Box 320



18


FALL OF MANILA
(Taken from the official report of Major-General Wesley
Merritt who was in charge of the American land forces
that captured Manila on August 13, 1898.)
I MMEDIATELY after my arrival 1 visited General Greene’s camp,
made a reconnaissance of the position held by the Spanish, and
also the opposing lines of the insurgent forces, hereafter to be described. I found General Greene’s command encamped on a trip of
sandy land running parallel to the shore of the bay and not far
distant from the beach, but owing to the great difficulties in landing supplies the greater portion of the force had shelter tents only
and were suffering many discomforts, the camp being situated in
a low flat place, without shelter from the heat of the tropical sun
or adequate protection during the terrific downpours of rain so frequent at this season. I was at once struck by the exemplary spirit
of patient, even cheerful, endurance shown by the officers and men
under such circumstances, and this feeling of admiration for the
manner in which the American soldier, volunteer and regular alike,
accepted the necessary hardships of the work they have undertaken
to do has grown and increased with every phase of the difficult and
trying campaign which the troops of the Philippine expedition have
brought to such a brilliant and successful conclusion.
The Filipinos, or insurgent forces at war with Spain, had, prior
to the arrival of the American land forces, been waging a desultory
warfare with the Spaniards for several months, and were at the
time of my arrival in considerable force, variously estimated and
never accurately ascertained, but probably not far from 12,000 men.
These troops, well supplied with small arms, with plenty of ammunition and several field guns, had obtained positions of investment opposite to the Spanish line of detached works throughout
their entire extent, and on the particular road called the “Calle Real,"
passing along the front of General Greene’s brigade camp and running through Malate to Manila, the insurgents had established an
earthwork of trenches within 800 yards of the Powder Magazine fort.
They also occupied as well the road to the right leading from the
village of Pasay, and the approach by the beach was also in their
possession. This anomalous state of affairs—namely, having a line
of quasi hostile native troops between our forces and the Spanish
position—was, of course, very objectionable, but it was difficult to
deal with, owing to the peculiar condition of our relations with the
insurgents.
As General Aguinaldo did not visit me on my arrival, nor offer


19


20


*
E.


his services as a subordinate military leader, and as my instructions
from the President fully contemplated the occupation of the Islands
by the American land forces, and stated that the powers of the
military occupants are absolute and supreme, and immediately
operate upon the political condition of the inhabitants, I did not
consider it wise to hold any direct communication with the insurgent leader until I should be in possession of the city of Manila.
especially as 1 would not until then be in a position to issue a proclamation and enforce my authority in the event that his pretensions
should clash with my designs. For these reasons the preparations
for the attack on the city were pressed, and military operations
conducted without reference to the situation of the insurgent forces.
The Spanish, observing this activity on our part, made a very
sharp attack with infantry and artillery on the night of July 31st.
Our position was extended and strengthened after this and resisted successfully repeated night attacks, our forces suffering, however, considerable loss in wounded and killed, while the losses of the
enemy, owing to the darkness, could not be ascertained.
The strain of the night fighting and the heavy details for outpost duty made it imperative to reinforce General Greene’s troops
with General MacArthur’s brigade, which had arrived in transports





Spanish Blockhouse
No. 14





21


on July 31st. The difficulties of this operation can hardly be overestimated. The transports were at anchor off Cavite, five miles
from a spot on the beach where it was desired to disembark the
men. Several squalls, accompanied by floods of rain, raged day
after day, and the only way to get the troops and supplies ashore
was to load them from the ship’s side into native lighters (called
cascos’) or small steamboats, move them to a point opposite the
camp, and then disembark them through the surf in small boats, or
by running the lighters head-on the beach. The landing was finally
accomplished after days of hard work and hardship, and I desire
here to express again my admiration for the fortitude and cheerful
willingness of the men of all commands engaged in this operation.
Under date of August 6th, Admiral Dewey agreed to my suggestion that we should send a joint letter to the Captain-General
notifying him that he should remove from the city all non-combatants within forty-eight hours, and that operations against the defenses at Manila might begin at any time after the expiration of
that period. This letter was sent August 7th, and a reply was received the same date to the effect that the Spanish were without
places of refuge for the increased numbers of wounded, sick, women,
and children now lodged within the walls.
On the 9th a formal joint demand for the surrender of the city
was sent in. This demand was based upon the hopelessness of the
struggle on the part of the Spaniards, and that every consideration
of humanity demanded that the city should not be subjected to bombardment under such circumstances. The Captain-General’s reply
of same date, stated that the Council-of-Defense had declared that
the demand could not be granted; but the Captain-General offered


of Fort. Santiago Abad after bombardment
Exterion
22


Air-View of Estado Mayor


to consult his government if we would allow him the time strictly
necessary for the communication by way of Hongkong. This was
declined on our part, for the reason that it could, in the opinion of
the Admiral and myself, lead only to a continuance of the situation,
with no immediate result favorable to us, and the necessity was
apparent and very urgent that decisive action should be taken at
once to compel that enemy to give up the town in order to relieve
our troops from the trenches and from the great exposure to unhealthy conditions which were unavoidable in a bivouac during the
rainy season.
The seacoast batteries in defense of Manila are so situated that
it is impossible for ships to engage them without firing into the
town, and as the bombardment of a city filled with women and children, sick and wounded, and containing a large amount of neutral
property could only be justified as a last resort, it was agreed between Admiral Dewey and myself that an attempt should be made
to carry the extreme right of the Spanish line of intrenchments in
front of the positions at that time occupied by our troops, which,
with its flank on the seashore, was entirely open to the fire of the
navy. It was not my intention to press the assault at this point,
in case the enemy should hold it in strong force, until after the
navy made practicable breaches in the works and driven out the


23


troops holding them, which could not be done by the army alone.
owing to the absence of seige guns. It was believed, however,
as most desirable and in accordance with the principles of civilized
warfare, that the attempt should be made to drive the enemy out
of his intrenchments before resorting to the bombardment of the
city.
The army was actively engaged in preparation during the 12th,
or the day on which Secretary Day and Ambassador Camdon were
signing the peace protocol at Washington, and on that day General
Merritt issued his order for the combined attack. The general plan
was for the fleet to satisfy "Spanish honor” with a spectacular bombardment till such time as the way seemed clear for the army to
advance with the least amount of resistance. The chief concern was
not in the work of getting into the city, but in keeping the insurgents out.
The morning of the 13th was like so many others in the Philippines; the wind blew and the rain fell, and a heavy mist lay along
the shore, giving a false outline to the range-finders on the fleet.
It was about 8:45 when the ships got under way, and at about the
same time the foreign vessels began to move in behind to witness
the fall of the oldest Spanish city in the Orient.
At about 9:30 the Olympia opened on the Malate fort with her

Gate—Walled City
24


5-inch guns, and the other ships quickly joined in, but the shots
fell far short—altogether too short to satisfy Spanish honor. The
little Callao, a Spanish gunboat which had steamed into Manila Bay
a few days after Dewey’s great victory, unaware of what had taken
place, and which was quickly surrendered and been converted into
a more serviceable American gunboat, stood in nearer the shore line,
and, unaffected by the mist, did some accurate shooting with her
small guns. The bombardment had continued but a few minutes
when the shots began to fall in the forts and the Spanish lines, and
at 10:25 Dewey ceased firing.
At 10:25, on a prearranged signal from our trenches that it was
believed our troops could advance, the navy ceased firing, and immediately a light line of skirmishers from the Colorado regiment
of Greene’s brigade passed over our trenches and deployed rapidly
forward, another line from the same regiment from the left flank
of our earthworks advancing swiftly up the beach in open order.
Both these lines found the powder magazine, fort, and trenches
flanking it, deserted, but as they passed over the Spanish works they
were met by a sharp fire from a second line situated in the streets of
Malate, by which a number of men were killed and wounded among
others, the soldier who pulled down the Spanish colors still fiying
on the fort and raised our own. The Spanish positions on the second
line soon gave way to the determined advance of Greene’s troops,
and that officer pushed his brigade rapidly through Malate and over
the bridges to occupy Binondo and San Miguel, as contemplated in
his instructions.
In the meantime the brigade of General MacArthur, advancing
simultaneously on the Pasay road, encountered a very sharp fire
coming from the blockhouses, trenches, and woods in his front, positions which it was very difficult to carry, owing to the swampy condition of the ground on both sides of the road and the heavy undergrowth concealing the enemy. With much gallantry and excellent
judgment on the part of the brigade commander and the troops
engaged, these difficulties were overcome with a minimum less, and
MacArthur advanced and held the bridges and the district of Malate,
as was contemplated in his instructions. The city of Manila was
now in our possession, excepting the walled town, but shortly after
the entry of our troops into Malate, a white flag was displayed on
the walls, whereupon Lieut.-Col. C. A. Whittier, United States Volunteers of my staff, and Lieut. Brumby, United States Navy, representing Admiral Dewey, were sent ashore to communicate with
the Captain-General. I soon personally followed these officers into


25


the town, going at once to the palace of the Governor-General, and
there, after a conversation with the Spanish authorities, a preliminary agreement of the terms of capitulation was signed by the CaptainGeneral and myself. This agreement was subsequently incorporated
into the formal terms of capitulation as arranged by the officers
representing the two forces. Immediately after the surrender the
Spanish colors on the sea front were hauled down and the American
flag displayed and saluted by the guns of the navy. The Second
Oregon Regiment, which had proceeded by sea from Cavite, was
disembarked and entered the walled town as a provost guard, and
the Colonel was directed to receive the Spanish arms and deposit.
them in places of security. The town was filled with the troops
of the enemy, driven in from the intrenchments, regiments formed
and standing in the streets, but the work of disarming proceeded
quietly and nothing unpleasant occurred.
Thus the 350 years of Spanish sovereignty in Manila was ended.


KENTUCKY
CAFE
WE TREAT YOU RIGHT!


JEFF MOSBY
Proprietor
Put Your Feet
Phone 2-38-26 318 Estero Cegado
On Our Brass Rail, Boys



Independent Shoe Shop
114 Echague, Manila, P. I.
T. G. HENDERSON, Proprietor

Miners Boots—all heights and sizes carried in stock, Hungarian Hob Nails, Rivetted Calks, Neetsfoot Oil, Rawhide
Laces.
Everything for the men that seek the gold.
Write for price list.
P. O. Box 2641—Tel. 2-21-77



26


ARTICLES OF CAPITULATION OF THE
CITY OF MANILA


Manila, August 14, 1898.
THE undersigned, having been appointed a commission to determine the details of the capitulation of the city and defenses
of Manila and its suburbs and the Spanish forces stationed therein,
in accordance with the agreement entered into the previous day by
Maj. Gen. Wesley Merritt, United States Army, American commander-in-chief in the Philippines, and His Excellency Don Fermin
Jaudenes, acting general-in-chief of the Spanish army in the Philippines, have agreed upon the following:
1. The Spanish troops, European and native, capitulate with
the city and its defenses, with all the honors of war, depositing
their arms in the places designated by the authorities of the United
States, and remaining in the quarters designated and under the
orders of their officers, and subject to control of the aforesaid United
States authorities, until the conclusion of a treaty of peace between
the two belligerent nations.
All persons included in the capitulation remain at liberty, the
officers remaining in their respective homes, which shall be respected
as long as they observe the regulations prescribed for their government and the laws in force.
2. Officers shall retain their side armas, horses, and private
property.
3. All public horses and public property of all kinds shall be
turned over to staff officers designated by the United States.
4. Complete returns in duplicate of men by organizations, and
full lists of public property and stores, shall be rendered to the
United States within ten days from this date.
5. All questions relating to the repatriation of officers and men
of the Spanish forces and of their families, and of of the expenses
which said repatriation may occasion, shall be referred to Government of the United States at Washington.
Spanish families may leave Manila at any time convenient to
them.
The return of the arms surrendered by the Spanish forces shall
take place when they evacuate the city, or when the American army
evacuates.
6. Officers and men included in the capitulation shall be supplied by the United States, according to their rank, with rations
and necessary aid as though they were prisoners of war until the
conclusion of a treaty of peace between the United States and Spain.


27


All the funds in the Spanish treasury and all other public funds
shall be turned to the authorities of the United States.
7. This city, its inhabitants, its churches and religious worship,
its educational establishments, and its private property of all descriptions are placed under the special safeguard of the faith and
honor of the American army.
F. V. GREENE,
Brigadier-General of Volunteers,
United States Army.
B. P. LAMBERTON,
Captain, United States Navy.
CHAS. A. WHITTIER,
Lieutenant-Colonel and Inspector-General.
E. H. CROWDER,
Lieutenant-Colonel and Judge-Advocate.
NICOLAS DE LA PENA,
Auditor-General Exemo.
CARLOS REYES,
Coronel de Ingenieros.
JOSE MARIA OLAQUEN FELIU,
Coronel de Estado Mayor.


THE SANITARY STEAM LAUNDRY CO. (INC.)


Phone
2-44-41


P. O. Box 529
MANILA, P. I.


The Sign of Cleanliness
LAUNDRY * DRY-CLEANING * DYEING


E


SMOKE
EL DRIENTE
Ghe CMManila Cigar








28


U.S. FORCES USED IN THE PHILIPPINES FOR THE WAR
WITH SPAIN AND THE PHILIPPINE INSURRECTION


EXPEDITION


Left
States


Arrived
Manila
May 25 June 30 1st Calif. Vol.


Data taken from U.S. Army Chronology
by Mj. C. H. Gearhardt and F. L. Bowen.
. Composed of ......
Commanded by


Left


Brig. Gen. T. M. Anderderson, U.S.V.


June 15 July 15? 1st Colo. Vol.


Brig. Gen. F. V. Greene,
U.S.V.


2nd Oregen Vol.
14th U.S. Inf. (5 Companies)
Calif. Vol. Heavy Art.
1st Neb. Vol.
10th Penn. Vol.
18th U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)
23rd U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)
Utah Vol. Art. (2 Batt.)
U.S. Eng neers (Detach.)
June 27 July 25 18th U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)
23rd U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)
3rd U.S. Art. (4 Batt)
U.S. Engineers (1 Co)
1st Idaho Vol.
1st 1st Wyoming Vol.
13th Minn. Vol.
Ist N. Dak. Vol.
Astor Battery
Hospital Corps (Detach)
Signal Corps (Detach)
The above would be all the U.S. forces in the Islands on August 13, 1898,
used in the capture of Manila.
Mj. Gen. E. S. Otis,
July 15 Aug 157 4th U.S. Cav. (6 Troops)
6th U.S. Art. (2 Batt.)
U.S.V.
14th U.S. Inf. (5 Cos)
Col. H. C. Kessler
July 19 Aug 19? 1st Montana Vol.
Brig. Gen. H. G. Otis,
July 23 Aug 30 1st S. Dak. Vol. (8 Cos)


Mj. Gen. Wesley Merritt,
U.S.A.
Brig. Gen. Arthur MacArthur, U.S.V.


July 29 Aug 30? 1st S. Dak. Vol. (4 Cos)
Aug 21 Sept 227 18th U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)
Oct 17 Nov 21 23rd U.S. Inf. (1 Batt)
Calif. Vol. Art. (1 Batt)
Oct 19 Nov 22 1st Wash. Vol. (4 Cos)
Calif. Heavy Art. (Detach)
Oct 27 Nov 30 20th Kansas Vol. (8 Cos)
Oct 28 Nov 26 1st Wash. Vol. (8 Cos)
Oct 30 Nov 28 1st Tenn. Vol. (7 Cos)
Nov 3 Dec 2? 51st lowa Vol.
Nov 6 Dec 6 1st Tenn. Vol. (5 Cos)
Neb. Vol. Cav. (1 Troop)


U.S.V.
Lt. Col. Lee Stover
Brig. Gen. Charles King,
U.S.V.
Mj. G. A. Goodale,
U.S.A.
Lt. Col. W. J. Fife
Col. F. Funston


29


Commanded by


Left


EXPEDITION . .. Composed of


Left


Arrived


States


Manila


Nov 9


Dec 7


20th Kansas Vol. (4 Cos)
Wyoming Battery


Nov 10


Dec 25


18th U.S. Inf.
Hospital Corp Detach.


The above would constitute the forces in the


Philippines at the outbreak of


the Insurrection, Feb. 4, 1899.


Jan 19


Mar 10


4th U.S. Inf.


Maj. Gen. H. W. Law

17th U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)


ton, U.S.V.


Jan 26


Feb 23


20th U.S. Inf.


Brig.-Gen. Lloyd Whea

ton, U.S.V.


Feb 1


Mar 4


22nd U.S. Inf.


Col. H. C. Egbert


Feb 2


Mar 21


3rd U.S. Inf.
17th U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)


Col. J. H. Page


The above 4 expeditions were used to reinforce the Northern Advance and


to garr


son Manila.


Feb 19


Apr 14


12th U.S. Inf.
7th U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)


Mar 24


Apr 23


9th U.S. Inf. (6 Cos)


Mar 28


Apr 28


9th U.S. Inf. (6 Cos)


Capt. C. M. Rockefeller


Apr 18


May 18


21st U.S. Inf
1st U.S. Art. (1 Battery)


Col. J. Kline


Apr 20


May 20


4th U.S. Art. (1 Battery)
5th U.S. Art. (1 Battery)


Mj. J. L. Tiernon


Apr 20


May 21


Gth U.S. Art. (8 Batteries)


Brig. Gen. E. B. Willis

ton


Apr 28


May 28


13th U.S. Inf.


Col. A. T. Smith


May 22


July 2


6th U.S. Inf.


Brig. Gen. J. C. Bates


May 31


June 30


16th U.S. Inf.


Lt. Col. W. F. Spurgin


June 22


July 23


24th U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)


Mj. J. M. Thompson


June 24


July 23


4th U.S. Cav. (2 Troops)


Brig. Gen. S. B. M.


14th U.S. Inf. (2 Cos)


Young


June 28


July 29


4th U.S. Cav. (2 Troops)
25th U.S. Inf. (2 Cos)


Mj. Charles Morton


July 1


July 31


25th U.S. Inf. (6 Cos)


Col. A. S. Burt


July 11


Aug 12


4th U.S. Cav. (Detach)


July 13


Aug 12


4th U.S. Cav. (2 Troops)


Brig. Gen. Theodore


24th U.S. Inf. (4 Cos)
U.S. Engineers (1 Co)


Schwan, U.S.V.


July 25


Aug 24


19th U.S. Inf. (8 Cos.)


Col. S. Snider


Aug 25


Sep 24


3rd U.S. Cav. (8 Troops)


Lt. Col. H. W. Wessels


Sep 8


Oct 11


34th Inf. U.S.V. (5 Cos)


Col. L. W. Kenaon


Sep 21


Oct 27


27th Inf. U.S.V.


Sep 23


Oct 21


30th Inf. U.S.V.


Sep 25


Oct 24


26th Inf. U.S.V.


Sep 30


Oct 27


33rd Inf. U.S.V.
32nd Inf. U.S.V (2 Cos)


Oct 1


Nov 1


32nd Inf. U.S.C. (10 Cos)


Oct 4


Nov 6


35th Inf. U.S.V.


30


Oct 5


Nov 6


29th Inf. U.S.V.


Oct 26


Nov 25


28th Inf. U.S.V.


Nov 3


Dec 2


37th Inf. U.S.V.


Nov 4


Dec 4


47th Inf. U.S.V.


Nov 2


Dec 31


49th Inf. U.S.V.


We have no notes available with which to fix the arrival of other organiza


tions during 1899 and 1900. Perhaps additional information will be sent to us
by members of other units not herein listed.—Editor.


EVENTS OF IMPORTANCE DOWN TO CAPTURE OF
MANILA
Oct. 31, 1896—First proclamation of Aguinaldo, head of the Revolutionary
Government against Spain.
Dec. 30, 1896—Execution of Jose Rizal on Luneta by Spaniards.
Dec. 14, 1897—Treaty of Biak-na-bato signed between Insurgents and Spanish,
ending Insurrection. Aguinaldo and other leaders accept banishment to
Hongkong.
Jan. 3, 1898—Commodore Dewey assumes command of U.S. Asiatic Squadron
then at Yokohama, Japan.
Feb. 25, 1898—Theo. Roosevelt, Ass. Sec. of War, cables Dewey his orders
respecting Spanish fleet at Manila in the event of declaration of war with
Spain."
April 21, 1898—War declared between U.S. and Spain.
23—President McKinley calls for 125,000 volunteers. U.S. consul Williams
in Manila given his passport and goes to Hongkong. Spanish General
Augustin calls on Filipinos to support Spaniards against America.
25—American squadron leaves Hongkong for Mirs Bay.
27—American squadron sails for Manila.
May 1, 1898—Battle of Manila Bay. Spanish squadron destroyed and Cavite
captured.
5—Filipino Junta in Hongkong decides on war with America if independence of Philippines is not given by Americans. Aguinaldo leaves Hongkong for Philippines on U.S. boat.
16—Major-Gen. Wesley Merritt assigned command Department of the Pacific.
24—Aguinaldo establishes dictatorial government at Cavite.
25—President McKinley calls for 75,000 additional volunteers.
June 10, 1898—Aguinaldo appeals to President McKinley not to abandon Islands to Spain nor sell them to any other power.
18—Proclamation by Aguinaldo organizing Filipino government in the provinces outside Manila.
21—Guam surrenders to U.S. Cruiser Charleston.
23—Aguinaldo proclaims purpose of his government to fight for independence
of Philippines.
July 15, 1898—One battalion 1st Calif. Inf. encamps at Malate, south of Manila.
31—Night attack by Spaniards on American position.
Aug. 1, 1898—2nd Div. 8th Army Corps, organized under command of Brig.
Gen. T. M. Anderson, with Brig. General MacArthur and Greene commanding brigades therein.
2—Spanish open fire on American forces.
(Continued on page 42)
31


OX
4
O
T1I
-
OX
I

O
M
5
o


E8
GG
S
0
N
S o



L 2

6o
-


G?
G
3


Q


E 8
*
O
 5


2
2.
3
2
*.



G


en


.*
p

O
O
2

S
6
9
E
Ed
L



2




3,"
S8
 O
S.
G
3.
F.
TC
S
S
" 
*
G
3

E
S
0
2
-


t E o
P 3

4
N
O 2l


-
13


3



s
Gd
23
52


S


C.


3


3


2


"3
2. C


5
6
2
5
F2
O
.-
5
 o
to 2
6
62
2
2.


O
5
O
2
e
E
2
2


2


2


2


Q)


3


3


2


S


S


1


9


"


2


89


O


2





5


0)


h


E


0)


8


—


T


3


I


5


4


8


5



EE
O

ce
2


 2


44
6O
S


O
3
6
O

-
O
D
 3


25


2
2


6


3
2
2

G
 -



*

&


T
Co
S
Q
60
E
3

3
5


)
¬
C 5
8


boE
2
EE
G


T
2

2
*
:2
G
Q)


2


E


-


si
H




* 9

3

2
 0
2

1
2
2
2
—
s
O—

-

o 3


3


E


S


5


to
*2


24


2


—






P


2


2





a


2


*


S. 80


3


*


2


60


P


.*


to


2
:


bo


0)
2



8





O

E


E
to


2


2


 9
 


E


O


5


-


O


g


2.


CO.


—


32


O


0


3


E


t


S


2
CO


S
2


to
O
O


O


AE


a








4



to


3


2


to


O





E


e


0)


2


2





3


S



—








9


2


P


A


3


3


2


E


E


2


E





O)
3





5-


S


3


2


5


2


2


2 ta


to


o


.


—


S


5


2


O


0)


5


O)


S


O


S

5


-
D


2


3





d


O


El


3


5


2





S


—


33


2

X
Oi
X


HI1S


Ilendren


LA LOMA
DA


MANILA
1898



d
A
AN
SINGALONG
MALATE)
PASAY
Fa-tO
AGA
-o14


The Baguio Express


Look Out For the Cars
(Continued from page 33)
for if the “driver” (that is what they called the engineer)
did not begin to slow down and set the brakes on the engine at
least two miles before reaching a station, the whole train was
likely to bring up not at that station but at the next. Indeed, in
the starting of such a train, a passenger of the last car need have
no worry, even after the engine had gotten well under way, and
he could calmly close a deal in bananas or encimadas, pocket his
clackers, light a cigarette and stroll leisurely back to his seat before the last car had begun to move. A Roman Galley, with its
hundreds of chained rowers, under the lash, in pursuit of a treasure
ship of Carthage, could not compete in noise with that train, as
the puffing little engine (maquina’, it was called) jerked tight,
one by one, those chain couplings.
Do you remember the story about the train and the carabao?
You don't? We thought, until last Occupation Day, that there was
not a veteran in the Islands who would let us tell it without hooting us down. But we were mistaken. There were several who


36


had never heard it. We shall not venture a repetition except in
answer to a vote of every survivor of those days.
The Manila-Dagupan Railroad began with a corner stone on
the Tutuban site, down in Tondo, on July 31, 1887. By November,
1892, the rails had reached Dagupan, and train service began. The
line, wherever possible, runs along the higher lands, avoiding both
interior river swamps and the marshes that reaches inland from
the sea. The line nodded distantly at the towns up the Pampanga
valley, across the Tarlac uplands and down the Agno valley, but
seemed unwilling to come into the intimate contact with them. The
English pounds sterling that went into its construction was reluctant to rub elbows wih the Spanish 'reales’ and 'perros’ that
circulated in the bosque, although a Hongkong dollar could be
changed for a billete and some clacker 'cambio' at any ticket-window. There was first, second and third class accommodation, practically the same as to hard seats and rugless floors, dim lights,
smoke and dust, but the real and big difference was in the human
environment. Once seven fellow passengers in the box-like compartment reflected the difference in the colors of the tickets. In
the first class, the impediment was mostly hand baggage, in the
second it was a conglomerate of bulky and untidy bundles, and in
the third were humans and chickens, pigs and whatever other
domestic animals were suitable for food. Years later the second class
was omitted.
The second and third 'wagons’ were usually over-crowded. It
is told that, when President Higgins, a pioneer Englishman, had
his attention called to this, with the suggestion that more cars be


The Mayon—for Southern Ports
37


added, he replied, "No use, they would fill them up just the same.”
In this day, forty years after, one may spoof at that little
railroad, as we did aplenty when we were in uniform and saw the
funny side of everything, regardless of hardships. But after all
it was a most useful little railroad, and our very first military
operations were directed toward its possession, reconstruction and
operation, in order that we could hold a line right up through the
country of the insurrection, cutting it into two parts. We had troops
strung along the line at every station and every bridge, with patrols between. These detachments were often attacked, but never
was the line cut, nor the train service interrupted expect by washouts. American train crews were made up of soldiers detailed for
the work. During the first two years trains ran as needed for the
transportation of military supplies, passenger, box and flat cars were
free for any and all who could get into them or hang on. The
people of the northern provinces swarmed into Manila, carrying food
to their city relatives, returning home with flour, cloth and sardines.
It is not generally supposed that the returns on the capital of
the English investors were encouraging. A new road, badly
damaged by war and floods, required a lot of repair when turned
back to the Company by the Military Government. Not very much
more than plain upkeep was undertaken. The World War broke
the backbone of the English finances, and the road was sold to the
Philippine government for P8,000,000.
The transfer of ownership opened a new era. Money for expansion was available, the demands for service, both in quantity
and quality, could be considered, and work begun on extensions of
line, improvement of track, new rolling stock of modern type. It
was near the end of the English ownership that several projects
were undertaken and later abandoned. One of these was a railroad to Baguio, most of the grading for which was done, but no
rails laid. Spurs to Camp One and Antipolo were laid down and
later torn up. But other branches were constructed and were
successful in tapping reh country. The dream of rails to Aparri
remains for the uncertain future, but heavy locomotives pull express
trains southward to Albay province, the nethermost tip of the
Island of Luzon, the last station under the smoke of Mayon volcano.
So it is that, with added ties and rails, with steamer service
to southern ports, and with trucks on feeder routes, the original
195 kilometers of transportation has lengthened into 7,500, the annual passenger traffic increased from 547,000 in 1892 to 10,158,619
in 1938. Where but 30,827 tons of freight were hauled in the first
year, 1,543,270 tons were handled in 1938. The capital, estimated


38


at about 12 million pesos in 1892, has expanded to about 110 millions at present.
Thus, on its 47th anniversary, in the year of 1939, the Manila
Railroad Company, a corporation owned and controlled by the Commonwealth Government, is giving real service of modern type.
There is now, barring flood damage, no interruption or delay in
the running of its trains, both express and ordinary. Its personnel
is up to date, its locomotives powerful, its coaches comfortable, and
its roadbed heavily ballasted. The provincial towns have grown
out to contact the stations and the stations have been rebuilt to
match the improved construction of the towns. The Company has
begun the building of neat hotels at points of tourist interest, several being already in service.
As Philippine population increases, as production mounts, as
travel becomes an ordinary every-day matter, the field for expansion and service is practically unlimited. Laoag and Aparri on
the north still wait for the toot of the engine, and some day it will
be heard along the hills of Ilocos and down the broad valley of
the Cagayan.
R. B. Blackman





Now on Display--
CHE. AOLEN
for 1940
eads the low priced field—
Again Chevrole
In Beauty, in Quality, in Value
Pacific Commercial Company
Distributor


2




39


A VETERAN
(Sent by W. H. REEVEs)


As a wife’s eyes fill when some sweet song
Brings Love’s young dream to mind,
As a traveler thrills at the thought of home
And the friends he left behind,
So leaps my heart when I hear the drums
And the reg’ment swings in view,
And I think of the time, in my golden prime,
When I was a soldier too.
And while the glittering ranks go past
I brace up straight and square,
With a toss of the head like an old troop-horse,
As I hum the marching air:
And after dinner that evening sure,
With an extra glass or two,
I prattle with the wife of my rollicking life
When I was a soldier too.
I'm winded now and over the weight,
And verging on three score,
And hardly a belt would fit my waist
In the quartermaster’s store;
But nevertheless, in the olden days—
(Let’s give the devil his due!)
No likelier lad the regiment had
When I was a soldier too.
When I was a soldier? damme, sir,
I am a soldier still,
A trifle stiff in the joints, maybe,
And a bit behind in drill;
But should the call go out for men
Ill be right there with you,
Once more to show our country’s foe
I’m still a soldier too.


will Stokes
in “Songs of the Services"
40


KATIPUNAN
By JAMES H. BASS
WHAT was the Katipunan? Old timers can remember the weird
stories told in the early years of the American occupation in
the Philippines concerning the Katipunan. Cut-throats said some.
Aguinaldo’s red pants soldiers affirmed others.
As a matter of fact, the Katipunan society was a political organization whose object was Philippine Independence. The society
was founded by Andres Bonifacio, born November 30, 1863 of humble parentage. His education was very limited. He was essentially
a self-educated man who loved good books. The Katipunan society
was founded on July 7, 1892. By the middle of 1894, it had attained to considerable number. The Katipunan was a strictly secret
society. So absolute was this secrecy that during the first days
of the society its members were generally unknown to each other.
Andres Bonifacio, the head of the organization was in a position
to know who were members, but the members did not know who
was their leader nor who were their fellow members. Later on
Emilio Jacinto entered the order and after his initiation the system
was changed. Municipal, Provincial and Central councils were organized.
The Katipunan society was modelled after the masonic organization. Membership was conferred with symbolic ceremony. One story


of the initiation of members was that the neophyte was made to
sign an oath with his own blood. He assumed a name for himself
by which he was known in the order. There were three degrees of
membership. The first degree was Katipun (Associate); the second
degree Kawal (soldier) the third degree Bayani (Patriot). A branch
of the order was organized to stimulate patriotism among the
women.
The doctrines of the Katipunan were of a high order.
Andres Bonifacio was the founder of the Katipunan but Emilio
Jacinto has been called the brain of the Katipunan. Before Jacinto’s entry into the order, the Katipunan existed under a crude or

41


ganization. Jacinto systemized the organization and made it an effective instrument of revolution against the Spaniards. The order
probably at one time could count its three hundred thousand members including the women. On August 19, 1896, the Spaniards
first discovered the existence of the Katipunan. These discoveries
precipitated revolutionary proceedings and on the night of August
26, Bonifacio called a meeting of the Katipunan at Balintawak where
he proposed that the revolution be immediately started. The revolution was begun on August 29, and spread rapidly, but its nucleus
was in Cavite. Emilio Aguinaldo an early member of the Katipunan society soon attained the first place among the revolutionary
leaders. An acute rivalry sprang up between Aguinaldo and Bonifacio, and the former was elected president at the convention at
Tejeros. Bonifacio refused to recognize Aguinaldo as president of
the Philippine Republic.
Bonifacio’s death is involved in considerable mystery. It is
known that he attempted armed resistance to Aguinaldo’s government and that he was captured by Aguinaldo’s men. He was tried
by court marshal and condemned to death but the sentence was commuted by President Aguinaldo to life imprisonment. One story
goes that Bonifacio was killed in attempting to escape. According
to another story, Bonifacio and his brother were taken into the forest
and there shot. The Philippine revolution of 1896 did not prosper
and finally peace negotiations were entered into at Biak-na-Bato
in Bulacan.
After the pact of Biak-na-Bato the Katipunan society seemed to
have spent its strength and from that time counted for little in the
revolutionary activities in the Philippines. The society continued its
existence for several years but had little influence upon the course
of affairs.


Events of lmportance . ..
(Continued from page 31)
6—Aguinaldo proclaims that his government controls the provinces and
holds Manila besieged; that peace and order reign under his rule; that
he has 30,000 men under arms and holds 9,000 (Spanish) prisoners. Concludes by proclaiming independence.
7—Gen. Merritt and Admiral Dewey demand removal of noncombatants
from Manila, and give notice of intention to bombard city.
9—Spanish authorities reply that they have no place to send the noncomtants. (Some however were placed on foreign ships) Formal demand
made for surrender of Manila. Foreign ships leave water-front. American fleet clears for action.
12—Protocol with Spanish signed at Washington, but not known in Manila
until after capture of city.
13—Manila captured by combined attack of American Army and Navy.


42


CHRISTMAS REMINISCENCES OF AN OLD-TIMER
By IRVING HART
(Continued from last month)
Ever drifting down the stream,
Lingering in the golden gleam,
Life, what is it but a dream?
Nothing else—for you and I.”
WHEN the regiment at long
last and after innumerable
delays, reached Seattle, Washington, a great reception was given us,
Captain Robinson, the Army
Quartermaster at that place—with
the consent and approval of the
city authorities—having fixed up
one of the largest parks, with
every convenience possible, for our
brief resting place and comfort,
which lasted for almost two weeks.
We finally—and reluctantly—went
aboard the S.S. "St. Paul", bidding
farewell to our friends; and, to
some of us, forlorn and weeping

sweethearts.
Irving Hart
As the 3rd was the first regiment of Cavalry to come to the Philippines, bringing our large American horses with us, it required four steamers to convey us, the St.
Paul, the smallest one of the lot, bringing the soldiers and officers,
of which there were about eight hundred, (8 troops) which was twice
the number that a boat of that size should carry, hence there was a
good deal of crowding, and, of course, a super-abundance of cussing
and growling as well.
Our first port of call was Dutch Harbor, Alaska, but before
arrival at that place an incident occurred that was indeed exciting.
And oh how well I remember it. It was a Sunday morning,
the sea smooth and like a piece of glass, with hardly a ripple on it,
suddenly, without warning of any kind, the whistle of the steamer
blew, sailors began to lower the boats, while still others laid out
the hose for water, and then, of course, someone shouted "F-I-R-E”
which was taken up by a hundred more and pandemonium reigned,
the soldiers trying to embark on the lowering boats, with the sailors
fighting with all their might and main to prevent it. It was all
over in a few moments as it turned out to be only the prescribed


43


“fire-drill” required by International law, but there were a goodly
number of black eyes and bloody noses before it ended, while one
man, a soldier, was seriously injured.
Eight days after leaving Seattle the steamer dropped anchor in
Dutch Harbor, finding a goodly number of other boats there also,
among them being two English gun-boats, stationed there to protect
the sealing industry.
We unloaded our horses, turning them out to graze and eat
their heads off, which they did for four or five days to their heart’s
content. The soldiers and officers, however, soon tired of visiting
the one store found at this small coaling station, and the one woman
who reigned supreme there, and looked about to find trouble or anything to break the monotony of the trip.
The English sailors also were looking for trouble, and several
times there were fights that lasted until someone was placed hors
de combat and given all that he was looking for.
Challenges, of course, were hurled back and forth, until finally
the officers of the English boat sent a challenge, in writing stating
they had one good boxer aboard, who was willing to meet anyone
that the American would pit against him. More than that, they
wrote, they would back this up by putting up plenty of cash in
favor of their unbeatable man.
This challenge was, with alacrity, accepted, and a suitable reply
was drafted, setting forth the rules to be observed, number of rounds
to be fought, etc., stipulating only that the General Manager of the
coaling station, a good sport and an impartial man—a Norwegian—
act as referee.
When everything was arranged, the money posted, and the men
all on shore to witness the event, our man, Sergeant John McBride,
of G Troop, 3rd Cavalry, an ex-professional boxer, (who several
years ago died in San Lazaro Hospital, Manila), was, with a guard
of honor, led forth; as the most of us—or at least some of us—
thought, to be severely beaten, because he was only a middleweight,


KRIEDT PRINTING COMPANY
Printers: Bookbinders
Engravers g
Bulletin Bldg., Calle Evangelista
P. O. Box 859
Phone 2-29-59





44


while his opponent, the Britisher, was a veritable giant and a heavyweight.
The officers of the English boats were there en masse, putting
up all their available cash in favor of their man, and hooting and
hollering, and belittleing our champion.
It was soon over, however, as Sergeant McBride was altogether
too fast for the Britisher, finally succeeding in getting in a nice uppercut to his opponent’s jaw, which took all the fight out of him, and he
was carried away by his crest fallen companions a badly beaten man.
The English officers were sports, however, and took it all in
good part, congratulating the victor and, I think, the most of them,
shaking hands with him.
The next morning at daylight we started on the second lap of
our journey, for Kobe, Japan, the gun boat sirens blowing us a long
farewell, even though we carried away plenty of their cash and had
compelled them to admit defeat—a very hard thing for an Englishman to do.
All went well with us until we neared the coast of Japan, and
then one morning, like a thunder-clap, trouble of a serious kind,
started.
It appears the boat was under charter, by the U. S. government,
at a stipulated figure, to convey us to Manila, including, of course,
subsistence.
And that "subsistence" part of it, appeared to be anything in
the shape of food that the Chief Steward and the cooks saw fit to
serve us.
It came to a climax one day when a so-called stew, composed of
rice and prunes, and pork, all cooked up together, was served us.
Then a mob, led by an Irish Sergeant, and a former Mess Steward,
invaded the ship kitchen, demanding other and more suitable food.
The big, blustering German, who called himself the Chief Cook,
met them at the door with a big butcher knife in his hands, threatening to cut the heart out of anyone, that dared to come near him.
He was soon disarmed, however, and then, taken to the ship’s
side, he was unceremoniously thrown overboard and told to go to
Hades, or words to that effect.
A hue and cry was raised, the steamer stopped, boats lowered,
and the man—who happened to be a good swimmer, picked up and
his precious life saved. The ship’s officers were indignant, however, and demanded the immediate arrest and court-martial of everyone involved.
Army officials—who had no complaint to make of the food
served to them—awoke from their lethargy, and started an investi

45


gation, which ended by removing all the ship’s cooks and helpers,
substituting army cooks in their places. After that, we sure did
have plenty of well cooked, and good substantial “chow."
But, upon the ship’s arrival at Kobe, another difficulty arose,
as the officers of the ship absolutely refused to proceed on to Manila, unless the army cooks were removed and their own men placed
there instead. This Colonel Wessels refused to do, so for more than
two weeks we were detained at that port, waiting instructions from
Washington, and San Francisco, California, where the main offices
of the boat were located.
At last, everything satisfactorily arranged, and all, with the
exception of the ship’s officers, happy and contented, the ship’s bow
was pointed southward, and we sailed majestically through the
Inland Sea of Japan, passing enroute, and in plain sight of everyone, the ill-fated S. S. “Charleston" that only a few weeks before,
had run on the rocks and was lost, fortunately without the loss of
a single life.
Our boat, after an almost two months trip, on the morning of
October 5, 1899, dropped anchor in Manila bay, and that afternoon
we were all loaded on small boats and conveyed ashore, landing on
Malecon Drive, at, or about, the same place as the Bachrach Garage
now stands, and from that place, all dripping and wet, we were
marched to the Muelle de la Industria, near the old Custom House,
and loaded, wet, tired, and hungry, into beautiful and artistic box
cars, and with Comrade Frank Moffat at the throttle of the engine,
taken—and shaken—to San Fernando, Pampanga, just as far as it
was safe to go on the old Manila and Dagupan Railway, which, undoubtedly, many of the old-timers well remember.
The most of us had not eaten a bite since early morning, and
we were just about as hungry as the average soldier can get, but
there was no food of any kind available and we were forced to go
to bed supperless, cussing out everybody and everything, and wishing that some responsible party might be taken out and shot, or,




Use


E

EA
VERICHROME


For Best


FILM


SNAPSHOTS





46


perhaps, that it would have been far better had we never been born.
The next morning at daylight everybody was up and about,
the army cooks having fixed up a fine meal for us, with plenty of
good hot coffee to go along with it, to put us in a good humor and
ready to fight for Uncle Sam, if called upon to do so.
And, from that time on, being an integral part of General Lawton’s Northern Expedition, and his so-called "Flying Column,” we
marched, and counter-marched, and waded in mud up to our horses
bellies, occasionally swimming wide and turbulent rivers, losing both
comrades and horses, but determined, do or die, to catch up with
General Emilio Aguinaldo and the so-called Insurrectos, and thus
bring to an end the so-called "Insurrection" But although we
chased him, back and forth, through a half-dozen Provinces, as far
north as the town of Batac, Ilocos Norte, he managed to keep out
of our clutches, although we did capture at Tayug, Pangasinan the
immediate members of his family, sixty bull carts loaded with his
belongings—and, later on, in the far-away mountains, beyond San
Nicolas, the P150,000 of insurgent funds, which in his hurried flight,
he had buried, to keep it out of alien hands. But that is a long
and an interesting story, which I think I will reserve for next month,
and then tell it as it was never told before.
(To be continued)

PUBLISHED WITH PLEASURE
My Dear Editor,
Herewith is a little poem composed by my beloved wife and sent to
me when I first came to Manila and while she was still looking after our
litile brood in Iloilo. I appreciate it so much that I would like to let
my friends enjoy it too. I hope you will like it as well as I do. I have
several others from her pen which I think are equally appropriate and
A. J. H.
enjoyable!
When You're Away
When the quiet dusk comes close,
Around our little home
And the supper’s cleared away
And we are left alone,
I read the nightly story
Of Tom, or Huck of Kim
And tuck our small boys into bed,
And turn the lights to dim,
And wonder what you’re doing now
If you’re longing for your own,
And the time to come when nights will be
Mrs. A. J. Hill.
No longer spent alone.


47


ANOTHER OLD-TIMER RUMINATES
C. H. CROWE
IT is assumed by almost everybody that an old-timer must have
come over with the army—that he has been a soldier. But there
are others who claim the title, and they were never soldiers. They
were the first teachers who came to the Philippines.
Many of these teachers may have had superior airs and were
"members of the Bureau of Education". But how about that one
who was limping up the Benguet road before it was a road? He,
tired and sweaty, was way behind a bunch of those "superiors" and
a road man asked, "Are you another member of the Bureau of
Education?” “Hell no,” was the answer, "I’m a teacher and have
you got anything here to drink?” Many teachers were quite human.
Conditions were quite different some 30 odd years ago. Then
we had to get police to round up enough pupils to open a school.
Now it is necessary to have police on hand to keep the school from
being swamped with children. Some of the first Filipino teachers
had remnants of Spanish Education that popped out surprisingly
at times.
One Filipino teacher with the remnants of previous Spanish
training had become a Protestant and used to conduct services in
near-by barrios on Sundays. He was a good teacher, too; that is,
good for that time. One day at his school he was conducting a
spelling class. The teacher wanted to show how well instructed
his pupils were. They stood in a row with little Maria at the foot
of the class. She had to stand on a bench to be anywhere near
as tall as the others. All missed a certain word and the teacher
became indignant. Little Maria with her bright eyes snapping was
waving her hand wildly. At last the teacher could contain himself
no longer. He said, "Jesus Christ! Does no one know how to spell
except Maria?” To a young man just from the States this was a
most surprising expression especially from a teacher. I nearly fell
off the chair but it was not long before I learned that “Jesus” was
a very common Spanish expression. I may add that later Maria
went to Manila and studied law, which was unusual for a girl in
those days.
The first year I was here seemed to have the worst rainy season
in history. Neither my clothes nor myself got dried out till the


48


dry season. Many times I had to get off my pony in the middle
of a mudhole, get out the best I could and let the horse do likewise.
Not long ago I went over the very same place in an auto at seventy
miles an hour. However, we did not complain. It was all in the
game to get wet, muddy, hungry, eat unusual food, sleep on a bamboo floor, and generally rough it.
One time I decided to have a sort of athletic meet between two
towns of my supervising district in Bulacan province. Of course,
we had no equipment but could run races. We met half way between the two towns on a nice level road. The boys ran all right—
all just as fast as the slowest runner. I was quite indignant, and
when I asked what was the matter, the teacher explained that his
boys were polite and did not want to win from a neighboring town.
Can you beat it? Well it probably was my fault for not making
more careful explanations and preparations, but who would ever
think there was anyone who did not know what a foot race was
all about?
Teachers’ meetings were held once a month—thirty teachers
from the three towns and barrios. There are probably double that
number in one town now. In this meeting the work was outlined
for the next month—so many pages for each day or week. We
found that this was quite necessary as some teachers would take
their pupils through the whole book in a month or so and be ready
for promotion to the next grade. Of course some teachers were
quite efficient. These we tried to get to explain their methods at
these meetings. They were often reluctant to do so, explaining,
“Then the others will be as wise as I am”. But little by little they
developed and became proud to help out their fellow teachers.
There was one school—the highest in the Philippines—way up
in the mountains of Sabangan. The trail was visible for a long
way on either side and the river was way below. My pinto pony
was well known by everybody and usually when I arrived at the
school there was quite a congregation of men, women and babies to
greet the “Supervising".
One day there was the usual number of Igorot women nearly
all with babies, naked as the day they were born and carried in a
blanket slung over the shoulders of the mothers. In fact the mothers
did not have much more clothing than the blanket. The class in
the school was having conversational English and I stepped out the
door and took a little naked baby into the class as an object lesson:


49


This is a baby.
This is the baby’s hand.
This is the baby’s foot.
The baby can smile.
Etc., etc.
The mother fluttered around outside like an old hen with one chicken
in danger. However the school children must have explained what
it was all about for the next time I called there was a host of
mothers, all anxious for their babies to be used in the class. I looked
them over carefully this time and selected one of the cleanest, for
they were in general pretty dirty. Well, the children must have explained why I shook my head at one baby and then chose another.
So the next time I put in an appearance, from a distance I could
see quite a commotion in the barrio. Women were scurrying to
springs and to the river and when I arrived there were plenty of
babies and all were clean. I had unintentionally given a lesson in
hygiene.
One time in Bontoc my horse developed a sore back. I could
not get another and decided to hike to Baguio, leading the horse and
thinking I might pick up one somewhere along the trail. The first
stop was to have been at a laborer’s camp where the Mt. Data rest
house was being constructed. However, I overestimated my hiking
powers for night came on before I was anywhere near the camp.
Traveling in the dark over a narrow mountain trail is not the most
pleasant thing. Seeing a light beside the trail, I called out and three
Ifugao road workers (camineros) came out. The shack was an "A”
shaped, grass affairs about six by eight feet and five feet at the peak.
The light I saw was an open fire inside. When they understood the
situation, they invited me in. There was a grassy slope where the
horse could graze. One of the men offered me his bed, which was
a rough hewn plank, a foot wide and about five feet long. However,
with my saddle blanket on the ground and the saddle for a pillow,
I made out. It was plenty cold up there and that fire, kept going
all night in the enclosed hut, made it just comfortable. Some have
asked if I was not afraid. The answer was “No, indeed. I was
safer there than in Tondo, Manila.
The next morning I arrived at the camp and got a cup of lukewarm coffee (?). No horse there. The next place was the Loo
school. No horse there either. However, at Kabayan there was a
nice, black, fat pony. I was in clover—I thought. The pony I found
to be tender footed and if you ever rode a tender footed horse on
mountain rock trails, you know what that means. My heart was in
my mouth half the time as he insisted on walking on the outside of


50


the trail where it was soft and also much easier to slide off into
space. I certainly had a hard time trying to steer the beast any
where at all. Getting off to walk at one most dangerous looking
place, I made a further discovery. The horse was blind in one eye.
No wonder he was fat. Probably no one ever rode him. Well,
anyway, I arrived in Baguio.
Going from Baguio to Cervantes over the old trail was not so
easy either. Down that twelve-kilometer Ambuclao hill was always
to be dreaded. There were also two bad rivers to cross which were
often impassable. Leaving the mountain trail at Loo and being
caught by the dark and a rain was not pleasant either. This was
my first trip over this section. I could not trust the strange horse
but my little white fox terrier proved a God send. He would trot
right down the middle of the trail and if he got more than two meters
away he was out of sight in the dark and I would have to call him
back. In some places the trail was muddy and slippery and of course
crooked. I could hear the wind in the trees straight up above on
one side and faintly hear running water straight down on the other—
how far I did not know—but it sounded far enough. Then we came
to a river. I did not know if it were a mile wide and as deep, but
Keting unhesitatingly plunged in and barked to let me know he was
safe on the other side. It was not wide nor more than breast deep
but plenty swift. So, the horse took me across and at ten o’clock
I was in the presidencia in Mankayan where was a dry bed and hot
food. You may be sure that Keting got a good chow that night.
In those days the lgorots were very trustworthy. Everything
from the lowlands to Cervantes had to be brought up by ox carts
or cargadores. The Ilocano doctor had sent down for some dried
fish. When the cargadores arrived, having been delayed by bad
weather, there was no fish left. The Doctor said, “I should have
known better than to have Ilocano cargadores bring up eatables.
The Igorots would not have touched any of my food.” One time I
left Baguio with over P1,000.00 all in silver change. This was in
two canvas bags in an unlocked suitcase. Before leaving Baguio the
Igorot cargadores asked for their pay (P1.50 each) as they wanted
to buy something to take home. I opened up the baggage and paid
them. I did not see them for three days but not a cent was touched.
Such was the Igorot’s honesty at that time. Old writings of early
or pre-Spanish days refer to the honesty of the cargadores and banqueros in Manila and Laguna at that time. But times do change.
When I moved to the Mountain Province there were 13 carga

51


dores to carry our few belongings from Baguio to Cervantes. However, these men would go only from one town to the next, and one
had to carry plenty of change as paper money would not be accepted.
1 remember one night, in Buguias in particular. We arrived late
at night and, as usual, I handed them the change in a lump sum to
divide amongst themselves. However, my wife thought they were
having some difficulty so she squatted down to help them out. There
they were—13 Igorots fully dressed in their gee-strings, their bodies
glistening with perspiration in that flickering fire on the ground
floor, and a white woman dressed in all the civilized acouterments.
All had their heads together as though in some serious devotion.
What a picture it made!
Those years in the Mountain Province were the most pleasant
of all the years spent in the Philippines. Probably I was just the
right age and at the right cycle of life to enjoy adventure and to
appreciate the sterling qualities of the primitive. There were hard
and dangerous trips and many a time both I and my horse were over
our heads in crossing rivers but we always got across. It was all
in the game but I would not like to lead that kind of life right now.
Autos and aeroplanes whisk one along where we used to take
as many days as it now takes hours. Where we used to depend
upon tins of "salmon de vaca” and unforgettable chicken in any
state—half raw to dried up or burned up—there are now hotels and
rest houses where good meals are provided. But that we still are
going strong points to the fact that such food and life in these days
was not so bad for a human after all.
We old-timers are too apt to be critical and say that the country
is going to the dogs. I can remember that my grandfather thought
life was becoming too fast when people began to have driving horses
instead of oxen or plow horses. My father thought that bicycles
were a “damned nuisance” scaring horses and letting boys run all
over the country. In this jazz age I think it a shame the way the
youngsters are running wild with their cars. My son will probably
lament the fact that his son has taken to the air, is using telepathy
and the like. Well, the world progresses and we old-timers should
learn to adjust ourselves to changing conditions and wait with "peace
profound" for our next reincarnation on earth where, undoubtedly,
we will have to confront conditions now undreamed of.
Cebu, Nov. 29, 1939.


52


LOST HORIZON—PHILIPPINE SHANGRILA
THE MYSTERY OF OLIVITE
By RICHARD R. HILL.


(NE would never have dreamed
of coming upon the outskirts
of a town. No smoke arose to
the sky, telling of the activities
of a people. The silent forest
simply fell back a little, and the
empty road swerved toward the
mountains of Olivite, with its
mysterious caves.
As a stranger, belated as it
were by many years, I stood upon
the threshold of this silent village of the Adarnistas, separated
by a forty-eight hour stretch
from Bongabon, capital of the
Province of Nueva Ecija in
Spanish times. It is but fortyeight hours from Manila to
Aparri; where one finds much
of what one has left; but the
forty-eight hours I had last traveled had stripped me of all
the familiar Philippines I had ever known. Biking and hiking, I
had come almost to the boundary line of the province, and into
the solitudes of Olivite, but the distance covered was not that of
miles. I had left behind me all the present, and I had marched
back into the past.
It was six miles from the last jungle community of the “Edens
and Adarnistas” with its drifting population, where bartering is
the only means of exchanging goods. The inhabitants lived and
mingled in a very humble life. There dwelt a hermit, lying solitary
at the foot of the mountain. He awaited my arrival, on the edge
of the forest on the rim of the grand Eden Mountains. He had
heard of our coming, and had sent word that room be prepared in
the Travelers’ Lodge. But before we went on, would we not look
at the old “enchanted" spring, just behind his hut?
There it seemed that time was running very slow—had almost
stopped. It might forever be noon here—this terrible noon of the
tropics, with sky of brass, and no stirring. I lifted my eyes to


Richard Hill.


53


bchold the Adarna caves, haunted by banished Spaniards, now
venerated by the mountain people.
In and outside the caves were bones and skulls, said by the
old man, to be those of the refugee Spaniards, found there and killed
by the Ibilaos. The Adarnistas had collected these bones and piled
them in the cave. Pilgrims who visited the cave must be guided
by this old man, whom they called Alfonsino. He spoke no dialect
we could understand, but our guide translated for him into Tagalog
and Ilocano.
Sunlight shone between the twisted columns of stone that
llanked the main gate of the cave. From these, weather-stained and
battered by time, the stone stairs ascended to the inner part of the
overhanging mountain. A foul odor issued, coming, I decided, from
the crumbling deposits under foot. On these I walked, as on a thick
carpet, with sinking feet. Becoming accustomed to the darkness, I
could see vast colonies of bats which hung to the walls, flying about
noisely when disturbed, then returning to flatten themselves against
the rocks.
On the mountain top stood a well constructed church of the Adarnistas. Here, as in the caves, no one barred the way, and I walked
into its dim interior, as quiet as the forest outside. The Adarnistas
are a religious people, and I heard only the chanting and prayers
of the holy ones. Here it seemed was the deep loneliness of a time
long past, that will never come again to the lands beyond the mountains.
Hundreds of pilgrims climb the hard road every year to the
summits of these Eden mountains, there to visit the old shrines of
their mysterious faith. They drink at the pools that lie in depressions of the rocks, believing that they will be made free from sickness and evil. They bathe in other pools that they may be cleansed
of moral impurities.
These Adarnistas are a religious and peaceful people. They
wear necklaces from which hang a cross, a heart of Christ, and a
llag. They cultivate small holdings of land and raise all kinds of
crops, coffee, corn, rice, tobacco. In every thatched cottage is heard
the sound of the loom, for they are very proficient in the textile art.
They grow their own cotton and the indigo plant for dye. They
also extract dyes from their forest trees. They weave and make
all clothing, which is of bright colors.


54


We followed a road and presently turned into a path leading
through a dense tropical forest, at the end of an hour reaching the
outskirts of the giant trees, many a hundred feet in height, the
vines climbing them and looping from one to the other. On the
peak of the mountain we found some remarkable ruins dating from
Spanish times. These are attributed to "Senor Jimenez” a former
Spanish outlaw. They were partly caves, in which were the broken
remains of saints and patrons. Nearby is a spring of sulphurous
water, said by the old man to cure itch, wounds and other ills.
The next day, my last in Olivite, a great deluge of rain fell.
The people who had been working in the blistering heat hurried
homeward, their clothing streaming, holding palm leaves over their
heads. It was tropical nature pitted against man, victorious, relentless. As they passed they seemed to have just been washed up from
their graves.
When one sees the evening stars rise over the forests of Eden,
one forgets that death is always eating at the roots of life. It seems
that the doom has been stayed—if but for a little while longer—


55


surrounded by the protective forests and the rugged mountains, from
the decay of time, the march of progress, and the intrusions of men.
Editor's Note—From Mr. Richard Hill, the son of Percy Hil, who, before his
death contributed many stories to the Oldtimer, we have the following additional facts. The Ardanistas are a sect, praoticing a somewhat fanatic
religion. They have no fixed residence, staying only a year or two in one
place. They live on the mountain sides and number about 5000, dress
similar to the Moros in bright colors, and speak a dialect different from
any other people. They may be the remnants of a people formerly in the
lowlands, pushed back by the later Filipino arrivals.
The sketch we publish herewith locates these Ardanistas geographically.



y
TAGATTAY

the
RUTURE VACATION
RESORI
of the Philippines
Those who succeed
always build for the

future.
Lef us show you what 
we have fo offer.
H. H. BUCK
227 Calle David



4


E. E. ELSER
INCORPORATED
Insurance
Of All Kinds
Moserco Bldg.
MANILA, P. I.
Phone 2-24-28








ED. PERRENOUD
SWISS WATCHMAKER
No. 19 Escolta





56


THE NEW INFANTRY DRILL REGULATIONS
From Bamboo Breezes, Cavite Navy Yard.
By MAJOR JOHN KALUF, U.S.M.C.
F you have been observing the Marines out on the drill field lately
you may have paused to wonder what strange evolutions were
taking place. Close observers may have seen something in the manner of placing the rifle upon the shoulder the like of which was never
witnessed before except among the rawest of recruits at the Boot
Camp. What appears to be a travesty upon good form on the drill
field is nothing more than the new infantry drill regulations, established by the U.S. Army and adopted by the Marine Corps, being
put into operation.
Gone are the complicated movements of squad, platoon and company. Gone are the familiar "Squads-right” “Right front into line",
and "On right into line” which caused many an old-time drill sergeant to take up drinking in a serious manner. Gone, in fact, is the
old familiar 8-man squad, for a squad no longer consists of a corporal and 7 privates but is now "a group of soldiers organized
primarily as a combat team". There may be 12 men in a squad
and there may be 5, for flexiblity is the keynote of the regulations.
The squads no longer fall in two ranks with the number one squad
on the right, number two squad next in line to the left and so on.
Instead the first squad forms a line at arm’s length interval and
faces the front. The second squad falls in behind it also facing
the front, the third squad in rear of the second and the fourth in
rear of it. When they march off they do a “"Right (or left) face—
Forward-march.”
The manual of arms has been reduced to a few simple move

LUZON BROKERAGE CO.


Derham Bldg.
Port Area


MANILA, PHILIPPINES


PO. Box 591
Tel. 2-24-21


LICENSED CUSTOMS BROKERS
BILLS OF LADING ISSUED TO ALL
PARTS OF THE WORLD
AUTOMOBILES AND FURNITURE STORED



57


ments designed to place the rifle on the shoulder with the least
amount of physical or mental effort and confusion. Marchings have
been whittled down to the bare necessities, having for their purpose
only to get the men from here to there. The awkward squad will
probably disappear from the military scene and the dumb recruit
has at long last been given a break.
Old timers may shudder with apprehension at these new-fangled
changes. Many of us will recall with pleasant memories seeing the
Army Kaydets or the Midshipmen do an "on right into line" with
that precision of movement commonly referred to as clock-like. But
unhappily those things no longer have a place in modern warfare.
There are too many other and more important things to be taught
to allow much time for complicated foot movements. Particulariy
is this true for our country which maintains no large standing Army
but relies upon calling up from civilian life the bulk of its defense
force and is anxious to place that force in the field with least amount
of delay. How many man-hours were wasted during the World War
teaching recruits complicated foot movements, intricate squad,
platoon and company movements and how to make a lot of noise
when bringing the rifle to Present-Arms, will never be known. Valuable time that should have been utilized in teaching a man the rudiments of armed combat was wasted on the parade ground. And
then, to be perfectly frank, nobody ever was able to do a "Squadsright" the way the book said anyway.
Precision of movement is still essential as a factor in the teaching of discipline and it is still retained in the new drill regulations
that have been adopted. But the tail no longer wags the dog. In
the old days there wasn’t much for a private to learn or at least so
it was thought—and he might as well spend his time on the parade
ground perfecting his drill as lying on his bunk and crabbing about
the chow. There seemed to be some tie-up between precise movements and straight lines and soldierly virtues and—for the sake of argument—maybe there was. But how many men were uselessly killed
during the Revolutionary War and the Civil War by slavishly following the teachings of Frederick the Great, will never be known. Men
were supposed to become infused with courage when marching
shoulder to shoulder and presenting a solid front to the enemy’s fire.
You died “by numbers” in those days. We have been a long time
breaking away from those ideas. In fact, during the World War—in
1917 to be exact—we were teaching bayonet exercises to cadence and
in a skirmish line we were taught to maintain a straight line with one
yard intervals. Of course, when the casualty lists started coming in


58


we soon changed all that. Nothing like a good war to clear out the
non-essentials.
Another good reason for the change in the drill is that infantry
units are no longer strictly rifle units. In other words there is a
variety of weapons found among the infantry units which defies
uniformity of manual of arms or foot movements. In the infantry
battalion you will find rifle companies and machine gun companies
or heavy weapon companies. In the rifle companies you have rifles,
automatic rifles, machine guns and mortars. In the infantry regiment you will find almost anything except artillery and aircraft.
Even tanks are classified as infantry weapons. Obviously it is difficult to group any such outfit into so many packages of so many
men each. The idea is to form combat teams of such size and composition as will most effectively put the various weapons in operation
whether they be squads of five men or twelve.
These new regulations are not merely something new that has
blossomed forth over night with the late limited emergency. They
have been in process of trial and development for several years past
at the Infantry School at Fort Benning. They are another indication of progressive thinking on the part of the Army and their willingness to make changes when such changes are in the interest of
efficiency. It is a healthy sign. The following sentences quoted
from the beginning of the manual speak a great deal:
“Interpretation should be based on these general provisions, and
all should learn to use this manual as a guide to common sense solution of minor points which are not specifically covered in the text.
Much discussion over trifles or failure to make appropriate adaptation indicates a failure to grasp the spirit of the regulations. Higher
commanders should encourage subordinates to make minor adjustments calling on higher authority for interpretation.


AMERICAN-MADE


Juality Goods


FOR PERSONAL
OR HOME USE.
ALWAYS THE
BEST FOR LESS


BEURS


89-91 Escolta, Manila
AELEON
EEENE


59


LOST MEN


When a man gets out of touch with his family and friends,
when he no longer lets them know occasionally where he is, how
he is, what he is doing, nor receives from any of them news of his
family, he is a lost man.
The world is not large enough that a man can get lost unless
he deliberately intends it to be so. There is no place on this earth
from which mails do not go, and where mails may not arrive. But
one elects to hide, or in sheer neglect never drops so much as a card
to those he left behind, he is a lost man.
To the Pioneers Club in Manila, come often requests for information that will lead to the finding of some boy who left home perhaps forty years ago. We do our best to find some trace of him in
the places mentioned as where he might have gone. The oldtimers
of the Pioneers Club have known, in all probability, very nearly all
Americans who have come to the Islands. When none of us can dig
out of memory the least recollection of any such person, then indeed
the man is lost.
Trips through the provinces, if one pokes into the far corners,
will often uncover traces of these lost men. They are living in some
distant barrio, probably in so near a state of poverty that, even as
neighbours, they count for nothing. The people know that there is
an "American" at such a place, they may know his name—if it be
his right one. But he has ceased to have a standing as an American.
He has cut his lines and burned his bridges. The path to his door
is trodden by no feet of his countrymen. He is a lost man.
We sometimes wonder how many of these lost men there are
in the Philippines. We try to picture to ourselves the circumstances
that caused them to lose themselves. We speculate on the conditions
they live under, what passes in their minds, what memories may
occasionally stir them to sadness and loneliness. But we have no
means of finding them, and no hope that they will ever return. So we
have to reply to some brother or sister or friend in the States with
the saddest of words. "No trace of this man can be found."
On my desk lies a letter from a sister, asking about her brother
who came, as she supposes, to the Philippines many years ago. She


60


says, "He went away one day, saying that he would return within
a year, but now sixty-one years have passed, and I have never seen
him again.
There are cities in the Far East that have, at one time or another, been well called “The Port of Missing Men.” There was a
time when Manila could well have been given this dubious distinction. To it drifted many of these lost men, some of whom have undoubtedly remained high and dry on the beaches, or have crept back
to rot in the hinterland. Most of them lived as they could, doing
little or no work, and many have left their progeny behind them when
they changed their locations, or found their last resting places in
some obscure cemetery. Their children have had no chance, nor any
hope, nor the slight honor of bearing a name of any worth, even
in a small locality.
Burial by their countrymen or comrades they will not have.
They will get no stone to mark their grave. Lost men men while
yet alive, they are doubly lost when dead, for none of the living will
for long remember even their names.












That home and garden which you always
dreamed of—
San Juan Heights
is the best place for it.
odllonall hongtav Gl,, hiie.


680 Ave. Rizal


P. O. Box 961
Manila


Tel. 2-15-01






61


CAMP JOHN M. STOTSENBURG, U.S.W.V. HONORS
ITS PAST COMMANDER, J. P. HEILBRONN WITH
A NECROLOGICAL SERVICE
At the regular monthly meeting, Camp Stotsenburg No. 2, V.A.
P., United Spanish War Veterans, held a special service in the hall,
Plaridel Temple, for Comrade J. P. Heilbronn, Past Commander of
the Camp.
The Commander’s Station and the Altar was draped in black.
A wreath of flowers was laid on the Altar, and the Burial Service
Ritual was conducted by the Camp Officers.
Present were also some of the members of Lawton-Egbert Camp,
No. 1, U.S.W.V., and the Department Commander Alva J. Hill, with
Comrade B. H. Brown, Department Quartermaster, both of whom
made talks appropriate to the occasion. A short biographic sketch
of the life of Comrade Heilbronn was read by Comrade Past Dept.
Commander Bellis.
GENEROUS RESPONSE
The Officers of the Pioneers' Club wish to thank all the loyal
backers of the Club for their generous response to our Christmas
appeal. While, at this time, there are many appeals, Americans in
the Islands do feel that there are a few that are the more important,
perhaps, because they mean more Christmas cheer and help for our
own countrymen and their families.
It is very encouraging to the officers of the Pioneers' Club to
know that the American community is behind them. We have many
oldtimers to whom the years have brought much less than they hoped
for twenty or thirty years ago. Whatever the circumstances, we
draw no lines at Christmas. There are men, with wives and children, to whom a little help comes as a Godsend. There are the
families of oldtimers who have passed, to whom a better dinner on
this Day Of Days means more than we can say.
The officers of the Club, and all who have stood behind them,
are thankful that, through the action of our President, Col. H. R.
Andreas, it was possible to carry the Club through the past
year, to strengthen it, to make it more responsive to the calls that
come to it for help. There is no other organization in Manila, nor
in the Islands, that covers the field occupied by the Pioneers' Club.
We Americans are determined that its mission shall not falter nor
fail, a home and a center for the assistance of those who need its
service.


62


ristmas Dinner—Pioneers Club, Dec. 25, 1939


Now that I’ve played the game and lost—
Played with an error that laid me low:
Shall I again recount the cost—
Count when the score I already know?
Shall I retrace the steps I made,
Frantic because once I slipped and fell;
Am I to be henceforth afraid,
Living the life of a never-do-well?
Life is a game that all must play.
Forward and upward with all our might;
Only mistakes can show the way,
When we are willing to play it right.
CHARLES SUMMERS
COMPLIMENTS OF AN AMERICAN FRIEND


63


LETTER FROM THE BOSOUE
Dear Editor Old Timmer
I am sur glad yu printed my leter last munth, and if yu liked
it, here gos fur another.
I wuz glad to red about my frend Mac Nut getin along so wel
in Washinton. He is sur a swel guy, and I hop he gits all he gos
after. I an prowd that I cud shak his hand 2 times whil he wuz
in the Filipines. Onst wuz when we told us vets good-buy, and
the 2nd tim wuz when he again sez good-buy boys. I am telin my
kids that I 2 tims shuk the hand of a President of the United States.
It wuz a grat honur.
I see in theFre Pres that Ramos has got hiz, whih he sur had
a cumin, al rite. They hed beter be carful in Billibid or he wil mak
al the prisenors communists.
So the kids of our rich famlys are goin to Mindanow tu becum
gud farmers. But iz they takin ther cars an al ther silk cloz. Thes
boys wuz al born with silver punch bols in ther mouths, whih they
wil now hay tu chang fur woden platers.
I sur wud hay liked to be at that uratory contest when Pres.
Qazun spankt them kids that wuz uratin aginst the piece and cekurity
of the Filipins. Thez yung uraturs shud not talk polyticks, but shud
devot ther brit minds to prazing ther techers. Or wuz it the techers
what tot them what to say in ther speches?
Iz it posibal Mr. Editor that hey iz wimmen wha dont say thank
yu when a man givz them hiz set in the bus? I jus cant belev it.
If I wuz the man whih she did not sa thank yu, I wud jus sa it to
her insted for her bein so grashus an condesending to sit herself
in the sam plaz wher wuz louzi me.
I wish the Wether Buro wud quit putin up typhun signuls an
let uz hay sum pece so I can raze enuf korn to pay my persunal
taks for 1940. When it cumz to this taks buznes, I am fur reaxmanashun. Well you jus kep up owr litel magizin an tel us al what
goz on in gud old Achogway stret. Sum da I wil cum to Manila and
drop in to see yual.
Yewers,
Old Timmer


64


OLDTIMERS' MAIL BOX


NC
THE UNITED STATES HIGH COMMISSIONER
MANILA
The Pioneers' Club
559 Calle Echague
Manila.
Gentlemen:
I should like to be listed as a member of the Pioneers' Club, not
because I am an “oldtimer" as I haven’t been here long enough to
earn that title, but because I think you are doing a noble work. ....
Happy New Year
Sincerely,
E. C. Ross
It is indeed very encouraging to the officers of the Club to
have these evidences of appreciation come in from men whose good
will helps us to carry on. Our membership file carries the names
of many American residents of the Islands who know the Pioneers"
Club and stand behind it. Many thanks, "Newtimer" Ross, and
may you remain with us long enough to really become a genuine
oldtimer.

Comrade Edwin M. Campbell, 109 Edgewood Ave. Buffalo, N.Y. is
secretary of Pasig Out-Post, Society Army of the Philippines
thanks us for information needed by the Historical Society of Kenmore, which we obtained for him. We do our best along this line
Thanks for your subscription, comrade.

Guy C. Dorsey, a comrade in Seymour, Indiana, was attached to the
Hospital Corps and served in Aparri, Cagayan, and with the 16th U.S.
Inf. in Echague, Isabela Province. Wants to hear from old comrades, Walter R. McAdoo, Harry Dukes, Dorsey Thickstun, Arthur
Hileman, Sergts. Biltz and Carswell, or any other of the 16th.
Aparri and Echague have changed but not as much as Manila.
The provincial towns are still provincial. We will be glad to have
your “story.”
-
William H. Reeves, 1441 N. Alameda St. Burbank, Calif., says our
magazine gets better with every number. He sends us some poems
which we will file for future use. Also recommends some books


65


such as “Songs of the Service” “Jungle Patrol” by Vic Hurley,
who wrote also “Men in Sun Helmets” and “Southwest of Zamboanga" and “Bullets and Bolos” by John R. White.
George W. Cole, whom he asks about, formerly in business in
Manila, is reported dead.
-
H. H. Gammon, West Paris, Maine, reports having done some good
work showing our magazine to comrades who attended the National
Encampment in Atlantic City, where he seems to have enjoyed himself immensely.

Z. Zeisler, 525 W. 150th St., New York City, asks about the Katipunan Society which he remembers as having made things lively in
the Islands formerly. We publish an article about it this month.
Bonifacio Day, in memory of the founder of Katipunan, is celebrated
every year in the Philippines on November 30, an official holiday.

J. H. Beeman, comrade veteran of F, 30th Inf., now at Emporia, Kansas, sends his subscription in “honest to God good old American dinero" He was in the Islands from 1901 to 1908, four years a member of the Manila Police, Address, 748 Lincoln St.

No. 7 of The Campaigner of '99, published by Waller Camp No. 83,
Philadelphia, U.S.W.V., is a publication right at the head of the
many which veteran organizations print. It is sent by J. D. Keiper,
the Circulation Manager, and is welcome to our exchange list.

Comrade W. D. Rogers writes a two-page letter to accompany the
Year Book of the 38th U.S.V. Regiment, beautifully printed and a
real credit to the men who got it out. The whole personnel, alive
and dead, of the regiment is accounted for. Out of the original
1337 men, about 700 are still living. The picture of the regimental
band shows five Filipinos. Comrade Rogers has a daughter married
to Sgt. R. E. Bisbee, who is in the Finance office, Fort William MeKinley. He corresponds with Chas. N. Hodges, Iloilo, a former comrade. A short history of the 38th that he sends will be published
later when we come to the U.S.V. regiments. He mentions a former comrade, Robt. B. Hill, who he thinks may have died in Manila.
Can anyone supply information?

Comrades, in the Islands and in the States, will do well to send us
their addresses ask information of lost comrades, especially those
yet in the Islands. We cannot promise results, but you never can tell.


66


THE  
MAGAZINE
NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS
If there is a cross in
this square, you will
know that your subscription will expire with the
next number. So, in order not to
miss any number, renew at once.
Send by Postal Order.
In Philippines P2.00
$1.25
In U. S. A.
Foreign
$2.00
Please do not send us U. S. checks,
which cannot be cashed in Manila. Sana
postal money order.


THE PIONEER'S CLUB
President Col. H. R. ANDREAS
Vice-Pres. G. L. RICKARD
Treasurer . . A. E. TATTON
Secretary R. B. BLACKMAN
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Col. H. R. ANDREAS
G. L. RICKARL
A. E. TATTON
R. B. BLACKMAN
MEMBERSHIP COMMITTEE
T. J S. B. STEVENS, Chairman
Member
J. C. COWPER.
* *
ALBERT M. EASTHAGEN
HOUSE COMMITTEE
B. H. BROWN. ... Chairman
W. D. WOODROOF . . Member
J. F. MADDY . . . . . Member
AUDITING COMMITTEE
T. J. S. B. STEVENS Chairman
E. A. GEBERT . ... Member


TCEEON
CIn
SAN FRANCISCO DEL MONTE 
SUBDIVISION
Six kilomettrs from Plaza Goiti. Residantial lots for P1.50 per squure
meter and up. Pnyment in sixty
monthly installments. Bus trunsportation: Electric and Telephone Services. Good Ronds: Free water:
School; Market. All the advantages
of City and Country are avallable.
A limited number of two-storied strong
material houses with 3 hed rooms.
veranda, sala. dining-room, kitchen,
bath and water closet for sale on
casy terms; lots from 200 to 500
square meters. Small down paymenvith regular monthly installments.
No interest. Now under construction.
Henlthful climate and benutiful scenery. Much cocler than Manila.
The New National Highwny and othel
new ronds to Diliman and University
City will conneet with this Subdivision.
SAN FRANCISCO DEL MONTE
INCORPORATED.
Main Offica
227 Calle David
Tel. 2-16-36
Branch Office
San Francisco del Monte. Rizal
Tel. 2-42-94



URATSO
Neckwear & Shirts


Like the Pioneers that
Built our lands, GRAYCO


Neckwear & Shirts, WEAR
WELL and LAST LONG.


A TRIAL will convince you,


They are sold at all good shirt
dealers.
E


AP M. DAVIS &. CO.
541 M. Bnc. Nacional


67


Compliments


of


Kneedler Realty Company

operating
KNEEDLER BUILDING


Bay View Hotel


Leonard Wood Hotel





 


IBarner, Barnes &
Co., Itd.


Plnilo


Hondon — Manila
Cehu


Bacolod










ORIAS


Refined


Pure Cane
SUGAR


2 and 10 lb. pockets and
in tablets


CALAMBA SUBAR
ESTATE





SUGAR, BESICCATED COCONIT, COCONUT ON.
COPRA AND INDUSTRIAL AICOHOL.


factories: Caniubang, Laguna
Office: Moserco Building, Manila.



WIGHTMAN PHINTING COMPANY. Muniin


PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF
THE PIONEERS' CLUB OF MANILA


TWO FEBRUARY BIRTHDAYS


9
VOL. VII
No. 4
FEB. 40


TWENTY CENTAVOS


Compliments


of


Alantitc, Culf & Pacic


sompany



of


Manila





Economical Refrigeration
with e modern

A LE
SERVEL
*
E
lana
ELECTROLUX
Gas Refrigerator
No moving parts in its
O
freezing system; no expensive repeirs.
MANILA GAS CORPORATION
I



First AgamCHEVROLET
for 1940
The Leader in Beauty, in Quality and in Value
On Display af Chevrolet Show Rooms
Pacific Commercial Company






PAMBUSCO
FURNISHES VETERANS FAST, SAFE
COURTEOUS AND CLEAN
TRANSPORTATION BY
BUSES
TO ALL CENTRAL LUZON PROVINCES.


Kids just love it because it
tastes good!
For Sale At All Good Drug
Stores
Agents
INHELDER, WALCH CO.. Ltd.



MINE CARS
RAILS
RAILBENDERS
SWITCHES
and
AAll accessories for
Mine Railways
Stocks in Manila
for
Immediate delivery


s The Gregg Company, td.

P. O. Box 117—Manila, P. I.


Warchouse & Office
Calle Tomas Claudio
Pandacan


hra


2








Member—
American
Bankers
Association.


Correspondents in
all the Principal Cities of
the World.


Transacts all classes of banking business
FOREIGN & DOMESTIC
and
Offers trust services of every description


E. BYRON FORD
President
Monte de Piedad Building
Manila, P. I.


P. O. Box 150
Tel. No. 2-12-55





EE


ORIAS


Refined


Pure Cane
SUIGAR
SOLD IN


2 and 10 Ib. pockets
and in tablets


American
Oldimrrer


A MONTHLY MAGAZINE PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PIONEERS' CLUB
OF MANILA, P. I.
Telephone 2-78-04
FEB. '40


Published at No. 559 Calle Echague, Manila.
Edited by R. B. BLACKMAN, Co. F. 35th U.S.V.


vol. Vil


Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at the
Manlla Post Office on Jan. 4, 1934.


No. 4


ON A SOLDIER FALLEN IN THE PHILIPPINES
WILLIAM VAUGHN MOODY (1869-1910)
Streets of the roaring town,
Hush for him, hush, be still
He comes, who was stricken down
Doing the word of our will.
Hush! Let him have his state,
Give him his soldier’s crown.
The grists of trade can wait
Their grinding at the mill,
But he cannot wait for his honor, now the trumpet has been blown;
Wreathe pride now for his granite brow, lay love on his breast of
stone.


Toll! Let the great bells toll!
Till the clashing air is dim.
Did we wrong this parting soul?
We will make it up to him.
Toll! Let him never guess
What work we set him to.
Laurel, laurel, yes;
He did what we bade him do.
Praise, and never a whispered hint but the fight he fought was good;
Never a word that the blood on his sword was his country’s own
heart’s-blood.


A flag for the soldier’s bier
Who dies that his land may live;
O, banners, banners here,
That he doubt not nor misgive
That he heed not from the tomb
The evil days draw near
When the nation, robed in gloom,
With its faithless past shall strive.


Let him never dream that his bullet’s scream went wide of its island
mark,
Home to the heart of his darling land where she stumbled and sinned
in the dark.
The above poem was written during the heat of the elections of
1904, when the question of the war in the Philippines was still uppermost in the attention of the American people, and when the
immediate independence of the Islands was unfortunately made a
leading political issue of a very much misguided party and its
leader. And the issue was not alone the granting of immediate
independence, but there went with it a strong condemnation of all
that had been done in the Islands since February 4, 1899, and a
stinging rebuke for all those who had had any part in it.
Today we have no quarrel with the past, nor with those who
have passed. The “Great Commoner" and many of his followers
have gone to their graves; and the men who supported them in Congress have been laid away in tombs far grander than any built for
Spanish-American War heroes. The poet who wrote the passionate
words of the poem above (we copy from an American Anthology)
went to his reward thirty years ago. His lines, straight from his
heart, no doubt, are today embalmed in several collections, so we
may, unbegrudgingly, accord him his little halo of immortality.
In the years 1899 to 1904 there was built up in our United States
of America, a strong belief that our army in the Philippines was
doing a despicable deed—a savage conquest of innocent, peace-loving
people. Or, in its milder form, and from another angle, our soldiers
were thought to be the tools of a heartless imperialism—the greed
of our great industrialists, who were reaching out for colonies and
trade. And strange—but yet not strange—the fertile soil out of
which all this propaganda grew was the yearning of thousands of
mothers’ hearts to have their boys at home again.
If there was any deep sadness to come out of the war in the
Philippines it was not the deaths that made heroes of our soldiers—
heroes for an hour—now only remembered when our bugles blow
taps on Memorial Day. It was that so many of us found life in the
Islands, even under military discipline, a wine of forgetfulness; that,
when retreat was sounded and the regiments went on board their
transports, there were so many who put off the uniform and remained
forgetfully behind. An old mother writes (or it may be her grandchild who pens the words) "Do you know where my son, John is?


6


He left me forty-two years ago, promising to come home in a few
months, and I have never seen nor heard from him since.”
We see all things differently as they run into the diminishing
perspective of time. The wounds which the poet imagined made
in “the heart of his darling land” were not even hits; but there
may yet be, here and there, in our American homes, old and feeble
mothers whose hearts have never healed of the deep ingratitude they
suffered from thoughtless sons.
Peace to the past. Peace to the fallen. Peace to those who
made and now make propaganda for their own pride or selfishness.
Peace to those who would have betrayed their country that their
party might prevail. As to those detracters who have gone before,
so also to those who today,—fortunately too few to be powerful—build
barricades on the road of our national progress, and plant mines
for our marching hosts—and who will also soon follow into oblivion,—peace.
Today, in the light of the past, we see that it was not only a
fortunate series of events that brought to the people of the Philippines a measure of freedom and opportunity they never before
dreamed of—save in illusions—and which more than repair their
cost, high as it was; but also in the light of the present, the record
stands, not as the greed of imperialism, but as a national act of
generosity that will never dim with the passing years. Compared
to the actions of some nations of today, the pacification of the Philippines was humane, worth all its cost—and a thousand times more.
R. B. Blackman.





BE WISE
Bikalize with BLKASELTZER





LUZON BROKERAGE CO.


Derham Bldg.
Port Area


MANILA, PHILIPPINES


P. O. Box 591
Tel. 2-24-21


LICENSED CUSTOMS BROKERS
BILLS OF LADING ISSUED TO ALL
PARTS OF THE WORLD
AUTOMOBILES AND FURNITURE STORED



A GENERAL VIEW OF THE PHILIPPINES


HEN the occupation of Manila had been completed, August,


1898, there were several Spanish garrisons scattered among
the Islands, which were holding out, waiting for relief from Spain
or from the Americans. Other Spanish detachments had been taken
prisoners by the Filipino forces. But at this time the Filipincs
in arms against Spain were not organized into a consolidated force.
On each of the islands they were in operation under their local
leaders, independently of any general orders from the newly established military government set up by General Aguinaldo.
There was a Spanish garrison at Baler, on the east coast of
Luzon. Another Spanish force held Iloilo on the island of Panay,
and there were Spanish soldiers in Zamboanga.
An expedition sent to relieve Baler lost Lieutenant Gilmore and
fourteen men who were captured by the Filipinos, the story of which
will appear later. Iloilo was taken by the Americans after unnecessary delay, but the Spanish garrison had already abandoned the city
and gone south to Mindanao. Cebu surrendered to the Americans
without a defense. Zamboanga’s turn came soon afterward, and
makes a separate story.
In the other islands there was so little organization and responsibility among the Filipino forces that they were considered as mere
outlaws, and dealt with in most cases as such. The only case recorded where General Aguinaldo sent aid and reinforcements to a
southern city was Iloilo, but this did not enable the Filipino forces
there to successfully resist American occupation of the place.
The Moros of Mindanao and Jolo had never been conquered by
the Spaniards, and were not organized for war against the Americans. They had no desires other than to be let alone. But, left
to themselves, they were a menace to the peaceful Filipinos of the
other islands. The clean-up of Mindanao and Jolo was a war in
itself, not to be considered as a part of the Philippine Insurrection,
and was not to end when the Insurgents on the other islands had
been defeated or had surrendered. Some of the hardest and blocdiest
fighting in the Philippines took place in this large southern island
where the country was then mostly jungle, without roads, and almost
entirely unexplored. And that, too, is enough for quite a long story,


in which we shall meet some men who were later to become famous.
The Philippines (note that they are no longer known by the
name of Philippine Islands) are little more than a dot on any world
map of moderate size. But their 1300 miles from north to south,
when put on a map of their own, make a gcod showing. Two large
islands, some twelve of good size, and hundreds of smaller ones—
not shown on our map—are the home of a population of about 16,-
000,000 people, who are by minor characteristics and language
divided into tribes. Spanish and English are the only common languages spoken on all the islands. A man of northern Luzon does
not understand any of the dialects spoken south of Manila. The
people of Panay, Negros or Cebu cannot talk with those of Luzon
or Mindanao.
The Philippines are the tops of a chain of submerged mountains,
separated by shallow seas. Almest all the islands are mountainous
in their central parts, with narrow coastal plains and short rapid
rivers. This made it difficult for the roving bands of outlaws to be
rounded up and captured. There are, in many of these islands,
parts yet unexplored, inhabitated by mountain peoples of the Negrito
type who still live as did their ancestors before the arrival of the
first Malays from the islands of Malaysia.
The Philippines are rich in natural resources, agricultural and
mineral. Manila is the natural trading center of the countries to
the north, west and south. But the scattered islands, the long coast
line, and the many ports make them difficult to manage as a whole,
vulnerable to attack, and easily captured by any strong invading
force.
Note—The map we publish as our frontispiece is in skeleton form. When we
come to describe particular campaigns in some of these islands, we shall
publish maps more in detail, but veterans of these campaigns will have to
fill in many places from memory.


OCCIDENTAL HARDWARE COMPANY, INC.
636 Azcarraga and 787 Juan Luna, San Nicolas, Manila
TELEPHONE 4-88-73
We carry a complete line of BEST QUALITY artificial
leather, fabrikoid, rubber cloth, oilcloth, for automobiles,
trucks, buses, barber chairs, dentist chairs, cushion seat
material.


LOWEST PRICES.





EVENTS OF IMPORTANCE
(Continued from January)
August 14, 1898—General Merritt’s proclamation to the Filipino people.
15—Institution of civil government in Manila and Cavite under U. S.
Military Authorities.
25—First Division of Eighth Army Corps organized, Brig. Gen. T. H.
Anderson commanding.
28—General Merritt assumed duty of Military Governor, and transfers
command of 8th Army Corps to Maj. Gen. E. S. Otis.
Brig. Gen. MacArthur relieved General Anderson in command of
2nd Division, 8th Army Corps.
29—Major General E. S. Otis becomes Military Governor of the Philippines.
30—Brig. Gen. H. G. Otis assigned command of First Brigade, First
Division.
September 8, General Otis demands withdrawal of all insurgent forces from
city of Manila and suburbs.
" 13—Conference between General Otis and a Commission from General
Aguinaldo on the above demand.
15—Insurgents withdraw from Manila, except Paco and Pandacan, but
remain in the suburbs, building trenches, mounting artillery.
October 9—General Anderson and Staff, proceeding in a launch up Pasig River
ordered to return by Insurgent guard.
" 10—General Otis demands retirement of insurgent forces from Paco
and Pandacan.
" 14—Eighth Army Corps reorganized to include newly arrived troops.
" 25—Filipino Troops retire from Paco and Pandacan.
December 13—Petition of Spanish businessmen of Iloilo to Gen. Otis asked that
an American force be sent to occupy the city.
" 23—Expedition leaves for Iloilo, under Brig. M. P. Miller.
n
24—The Spanish garrison abandons Iloilo and insurgents take possession. The 1st Separate Brigade under Gen. Miller arrives at Iloilo,
but insurgents refuse to allow it to land, and the instructions of
Gen. Miller forbid hostilities.
31—Merchants and foreigners in Iloilo petition Gen. Miller to postpone
landing in order to avert firing of city by insurgents.
January 4, 1899—Proclamation by Gen. Otis to people of the Philippines.
5 and 8—Proclamations of General Aguinaldo, in answer to that of
Otis.
21—A third proclamation by General Aguinaldo.
(Note—The substance and some quotations from these proclamations are given in another part of this number.)
February 4, 1899—Beginning of hostilities between American and Insurgent
forces, at San Juan bridge, resulting in general engagement along
the entire front, Caloocan to Pasay.
5—American advance against Insurgents in Caloocan, San Juan, Santa
Ana, San Pedro Makati, and other suburbs of Manila.


10


February 6—Efforts of Judge Torres and Colonel Arguelles, residents of Manila
to arrange a peace parley were unsuccessful.
1)
6—American forces capture blockhouses along water supply line and
occupy the Santolan Pumping Station on the Mariquina River, east
of Manila, thus assuring the water supply of the city.
8—General Miller directed to capture Iloilo by force if necessary.
9—Action by a battalion of Idaho Volunteers and California Artillery
at San Roque, near Cavite.
10—General advance of American lines north of Manila toward Caloocan. Hard fighting. Insurgents retreat, resisting stubbornly.

EXTRACTS FROM GENERAL ORDERS


G. O. No. 3.
Manila, February 7, 1899.
The burning of houses and of other property of the civil population is
strictly prohibited. No transportation may be siezed except in an emergency,
and for which receipt must be given.
G. O. No. 6.
February 23, 1899.
All civil inhabitants of Manila must be inside their homes by 7:00 P.M.
March 1, 1899.
G. O. No. 8.
Organization of the Military District of Visayas, to include Panay, Negros
and Cebu, under command of Brig. Gen. Marcus P. Miller.
Col. James F. Smith, 1st Calif. Vol., assigned service in Military District
of Visayas, Island of Negros, to enlist and organize police force of 200 men
from among Filipinos.
3rd Battalion of 1st Calif. Vol, regiment to sail on Transport St. Paul,
under Major H. T. Sime, for service in Negros.
March 17, 1899.
G. O. No. 14.
The forces organized into two divisions, First and Second.
FIRST DIVISION, Major General H. W. Lawton, commanding.
1st Brigade, Brig. Gen. Charles King. Composed of 1st Washington Volunteers, 1st N. Dakota Volunteers, California Volunteers, two battalions.
2nd Brigade, Brig. Gen. Samuel Ovenshine. Composed of 6 troops of 4th
U.S. Cavalry, 14th U.S. Inf., 1st Idaho Vol., one battalion 51st Idaho
Vol.
3rd Brigade, Brig. Gen. Loyd Wheaton. Composed of 3rd U.S. Inf., 22nd
U.S. Inf., 2nd Oregon Vol.
SECOND DIVISION, Major General Arthur MacArthur, commanding.
1st Brigade, Gen. H. G. Otis. Composed of two battalions 3rd U.S. Artillery,
20th Kansas Vol., Ist Montana Vol.
2nd Brigade, Brig. Gen. Irving Hale. Composed of 1st Colorado Vol., 1st
Nebraska Vol., 1st S. Dakota Vol., six companies of 10th Pennsylvania
Vol.
3rd Brigade, Brig. Gen. Robert H. Hall. Composed of 4th U.S. Inf., 17th
U.S. Inf., 13th Minnesota Vol., 1st Wyoming Vol.
Dyer’s and Hawthorne’s Batteries to First Division. Utah Artillery Battalion to Second Division.
Provost Guard for Manila composed of 20th U.S. Inf., eight companies of
23rd U.S. Inf.


11


April 1, 1899.


G.O. No 18.
Transmitted—
Washington, March 31, 1899
OTIS, MANILA
Receive for yourself and for the officers and men of your command the thanks
of the President for the success which has accompanied our arms in the Philippines, and for the gallantry so conspicuously displayed by the officers and soldiers in the recent actions and the capture of Malolos. Those who have fallen
are deeply mourned by the Nation for which they sacrificed their lives.
William MCKinley.
G. O. No 27. Amends G. O. No 6, changing hour from 7:00 to 8:30 P.M.
May 15, 1899.
G. O. No 28.
The 23rd U.S. Infantry is ordered to Jolo, Jolo, to relieve the Spanish
garrison at that place.
G. O. No 29. Brig. Gen. R. P. Hughes assigned to command 1st Separate
Brigade, Military District of Visayas, to relieve Brig. Gen. James F. Smith.
G. O. No 30. Provides for discharge in the Philippines of men in the Volunteers who so request, and for regulars, whose service enlistment has expired.
(To be continued)


THE PRINCIPAL CAMPAIGNS ON LUZON
THE capture of Manila, August 13, 1898, was followed by six
months of unrestful inactivity. It was neither peace nor war.
The events prior to the taking of Manila, the circumstances accompanying it, and the results of the enforced activity of the American
forces, waiting for the Treaty of Peace—held up by orders from
Washington not to do more than keep public order in Manila—all
combined to create a situation which apparently was to have no
solution save war. The Spanish-American War was officially ended
in April, 1899, by the signing of the Treaty of Paris, but already
the War of the Philippine Insurrection had begun, not only in overt
military operations, but also in active organization on the part of
the Malolos Government. While the American forces within Manila
limited their activities to police work, the forces of the Republica
Filipina were arming and constructing works of defense.
But it was clear, from August 13, 1899, that there were only
three solutions. The first—return of the government of the Islands
to the Spaniards, was possible—but was not to be seriously considered. Spain’s dominion in the Philippines was thoroughly discredited and broken. It was the natural end to misrule, here as in
Cuba. Spain had failed to send her statesmen—or did not have
any to send—to these two colonies, and her poor administration
had so weakened her position as to make it irrepairable.
The second possible solution was to turn over the Islands to


12


ISLAND OF LUZON


13


the Malolos Government. This would have resulted in a
situation for which the United States Government could not, in
honor, face the international demands for protection of the persons
and property of their nationals in the Philippines. The tragedy of
the situation after August 13, arose from the expectation of the
Malolos Government that the Islands were to be turned over to
them. Subsequent events plainly showed how poorly this government was organized, and how small a part of the people of the
Philippines were in support of it.
The third solution was the extension of American rule over the
entire archipelago, establishment of order and economic development,
in preparation for a future in which the people could be educated,
trained in self-government, and raised to a higher standard of living.
The period of waiting for the selection, by Congress of one of
these solutions—and it was seen that it must be the third—was not
to continue until the ratification of the Treaty of Paris, and then
to pass into the phase of negotiations and agreements. It ended
abruptly on February 4, 1899, in a clash—and a war—brought on
by the impatience of the leaders in the Malolos Government, fearful
that their ambitions were not to be realized. It was not that their
dreams were unpatriotic or unworthy, but that they could not see
that the American Military Governor in Manila lacked authority
to treat with them, and that only the United States Congress had
this authority. They were unwilling to wait for the action of Congress.
Hence, after the break of February, 1899, there was only one
way for the American Military Government to act, and that action
began without delay. It was not to be conquest, but pacification.
There could be no agreements with the Malolos Government, for,
in the opinion of General Otis, this government did not have the
moral right to speak or act for the whole people of the Philippines.
Events, as they slowly unfolded, proved the correctness of his opinions. During the few months after the outbreak, many of the
Filipinos who had supported the Malolos Republica Filipina, had
left it and had been replaced by more radical and less responsible
men. It is significant that today, among all the public holidays declared by the Commonwealth Philippine Government, the day on
which the Malolos Assembly declared for the independence of the
Philippine Republic, is not observed, nor is any other event of the
insurrection that began in 1899 commemorated by a public observance.


14


MANILA, FEBRUARY 4 to MARCH 25, 1899
"
(See Map—“THE NORTH ADVANCE"


THE outbreak that occurred on the night of February 4, 1899,
A
start of the Insurrection against the American Military Government, began at San Juan bridge. This outbreak was foreseen
and prepared for, although the exact point where it might be expected to begin was not known.
The Insurgents wished to force the American troops to begin
the war by firing the first shots, thus making it appear as an American act of aggression.
The Nebraska Volunteers, with other troops, were stationed in
Santa Mesa, west of the San Juan River, which empties into the
Pasig River about one mile below the San Juan bridge. Insurgent
troops occupied all of San Juan and also all positions around Manila, close up to the city limits, indicated on the map by a light
dotted line. (See the map of Manila published in January number.)
An officer and a private from the Insurgent lines attempted
to cross the bridge between Manila and San Juan, refusing to stop
when challenged by a Nebraska sentry. The latter fired on them,
and, as if this was the waited signal, the whole Insurgent outpost
opened fire, which rapidly extended north and south involving the
whole line.
From the night of February 4, until the 10th of February, the
fighting was hot, the Americans pushing the Insurgents back until
the American line on the 10th was about as shown on the map by
the heavy blockline. The two points of greatest advance were Caloocan and San Juan. Later the line between Caloocan and Malabon
was contracted somewhat, due to the swampy nature of the country,
leaving an opening near Malabon through which a large body of
Insurgents slipped into Manila later, creating a dangerous situation.
By February 10th the American lines had extended so far as
to make them dangerously long for the number of troops employed.
No further advances could safely be made. The forces were then
reorganized and put into waiting against the arrival of expeditions
then enroute and due to arrive in February and March.
It will be noted that, on the east of Manila, a salient was made,
and American forces extended along the road to Marikina as far


15


LEGEND
Rivers .
Roads 
Hailrord 
Amevican Line Febto ---
Dates of Positiona Mav 2s To 31,
ahawn along, ote


Csan o



FAs
y
GuAdalurSiti.
Fek
**
BASAY
ER
--



16


as the Santolan Pumping Station at the Marikina River, where the
Manila water supply came from. This advance to Santolan was
written up by a war correspondent who was with the troops, and
it makes a good story.
There was no bridge across the upper Pasig River, and the
river was not fordable. Hence there was no probability that any
part of the Insurgent forces south of the Pasig could be moved to
reinforce those on the north, or vice versa. The American therefore, fell into three divisions, the north, the east and the south.
That on the north centered at La Loma Church, that on the east
on the Marikina Road, and that on the south at San Pedro Makati,
by the south bank of the Pasig.
The north line was held by the Second Division under General
MacArthur, and was made up of 20th Kansas on the left, then, in
order, toward the right, the 3rd Artillery (as infantry), the Montana Volunteers, the Pennsylvania Volunteers and the South Dakota Volunteers. A part of the Utah Battery occupied a place between the 3rd Artillery and the Montana Regiment. There were
a few other detachments.
The east line, both sides of the Marikina Road, was made up
of the 1st Nebraska Volunteers Regiment, the First Tennessee
Volunteers, the Colorado Volunteers, the South Dakota Volunteers
(part) and a part of the Utah Battery. With them was one battalion of the 23rd Regulars.
The south line was composed of the Idaho Volunteer Regiment,
and the Washington Volunteer Regiment brigaded under General
King; the 1st California (two battalions), on the south end of the
line and the North Dakota with four companies of the Wyoming
Volunteers and one company of the 1st California in reserve behind the line. These were under General Ovenshine; and the whole,
constituting the First Division, commanded by General Anderson.
Inside of Manila, acting as Provost Guard, were the 13th Minnesotas, the 1st Oregon Regiment and part of the 23rd Regulars.
The whole force, probably about 15,000 effectives, faced an Insurgent line estimated at from 20,000 to 25,000 men. There were also
American forces in Iloilo, numbering 2338 men and 77 officers.
By referring to the table of expeditions arriving in the Islands,
it may be seen what additional forces were available by March
25—more than a month later—when both the First and Second Divisions were reorganized and everything was ready for the general
advance, especially that northward into Bulacan and Pampanga.


17


MANILA TO SAN FERNANDO, PAMPANGA
First Northern Campaign of the American Forces after
the Outbreak of the Philippine Insurrection
February A, 1899.
PARt I.
THIS Magazine begins the Stories of the Regiments Series with
an account of the push northward, along the railroad, with
special attention to the 20th Kansas Volunteers, not because this
Regiment was the only one—nor the most important—in the movement, but because its valiant and dashing Colonel Funston has left
us a better record of its movements, and of the whole expedition,
of which it was a part, than has appeared in print for any of the
other units which participated in the campaigns.
The data here used is taken from the “U.S. Army Chronology”
which was published in seven installments, in the magazine, from
October, 1938 to April, 1939. It was compiled by Major G. H.
Gearhardt and F. L. Bowen from the records in Fort Santiago, Manila.
We published in January a table showing the dates of arrival
of the American forces, and the Officers in command. By reference
to this table it may be seen just what American forces were in the
Islands at the time of the outbreak of the Insurrection (Feb. 4,
1899), and what additional units arrived later to take part in this
and the following campaigns of 1899 and 1900. (Our “Events of
Importance” in this number will help the reader.)
The positions occupied by these various units and the campaings in which they took part will, it is hoped, be brought to light
in other brief histories to be written by the Historians of the Regiment engaged. By a study of the map we publish this month,
and another to be published next month, it will be seen that the
first Northern Campaign was a thrust into the heart of the enemy
country northward along the railroad from Manila toward and as
far as Dagupan, Pangasinan. The first phase of this movement
ended with the capture of San Fernando, Pampanga. But there
were, on both the east and the west of this salient along the railroad great areas of unconquered country.
The movement began with the pressing back of the ring of Insurgent forces that closely surrounded the city of Manila. On the
north the American forces reached Caloocan, only a few miles north
of the Manila boundary line. On the east, by February 10th, San
Juan and the country north for a short distance was cleared, and
the Americans were in possession of the pumping station on the


18


Marikina River (just off the map on the right). But the country
around Novaliches and northward through the higher lands and
mountains up to the Angat River was Insurgent domain, as were
the mountainous parts of western Luzon, Bataan and Zambales
provinces.
It may be wondered why it was possible for the American forces
to make this long and narrow northern salient and hold it between
Insurgent forces on both sides. But, once the railroad and the towns
along it and near it had been taken by the Americans, there was
never any serious or effective attempt ever made by the Insurgents
to retake it or to cut off the American forces stretched out for so
far along the railroad to the north. The reason is, of course, that,
with the capture of Malolos, followed so soon by the occupation of
San Fernando, Angeles, Tarlac and other central Luzon cities, the
Insurgent forces were cut in two parts, their major forces defeated,
their military government forced to be ever in retreat, with no
place nor opportunity to collect supplies or concentrate ferces strong
enough to risk general engagements.
Once in possession of the railroad, it was put in repair, and
American forces sent northward in sufficient force, and with uninterrupted supplies, so that further movements, both eastward and
westward, could be undertaken from good bases. Thus was the
heart of the food producing area of Luzon speedily subjected, and
the Insurgent forces were broken into small bands which were poorly
supplied with munitions and food. The natural result was that the
war then changed from open engagements between organized forces
to the pursuit and final capture of the small bands of Insurgent
bushwhackers. By the middle of 1901, the guerilla war was ended
and all Filipino forces of any importance had surrendered, or were
captured.
We publish in this issue a map of Luzon, the principal island
of the Philippines, on which the military movements described in
this and the following article (March) are indicated by shaded areas,
in order to show at a glance the extent of territory that was the
theatre of the stirring events herein described.
Again, it may be wondered, after seeing in the table the number of American troops which arrived in the Islands up to the end
of 1898, why the defeat and capture of all the Filipino forces might
not have been merely a matter of a few months. Why did it take
well into 19012
The answer is that there were other Insurgent forces in many
other of the numerous Islands, and a considerable number of regiments and battalions had to be sent to these other centers of


19


trouble. Then, too, in guerilla warfare, it is necessary to occupy
the principal towns with garrison forces in order to assure protection to the civil population, and to set up centers from which
small flying columns can operate against the elusive bushwhackers.
The average town needed at least one company, and the larger ones
required two or three. There must always be a garrison strong
enough to repel any attack that might be made in the absence of
a part of the force out after the guerillas. The lack of sufficient
Spanish troops in Cuba during the insurrection there was the reason why the Spaniards made so poor a showing, often suffering
serious set-backs and being driven, in sheer desperation, to savage
measures that so enraged public opinion in the United States. There
is little of the spectacular in guerilla warfare. It requires, if peace
is to be restored, a strong force covering all the conquered country,
that the population may be assured protection and opportunity to
go about their work.
It is hoped that this series of the histories of the State and
U.S. Volunteers, and of the Regulars also, will give a-picture of
the war of the Philippine Insurrection in terms of the soldiers.
Military history,—old style—has always been a record of the doings
of generals, and seldom do we have any information of interest
as to the doings of the privates and the non-commissioned officers.
These histories, with the stories they reveal, will get us acquainted
better with the men who carried the guns, did the hiking, suffered
the heat and hunger, and took it all as it came. No volunteer army
in all the history of the world has ever made so fine a record in
service, and so human in its treatment of the non-combatant peoples
it covered with its protection and kindness.

THE FIGHTING TWENTIETH KANSAS
FREDERICK Funston, who was to reach the rank of BrigadierGeneral, U. S. Army, began his military career as a filibuster captain with the Cuban insurgent forces in Cuba. How he got there,
what he did there, what he saw there, are parts of a story he tells in
his book, "Memories of Two Wars”. The end of his Cuban experiences
was a breakdown in health early in 1898, and a return to his Kansas
home with the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel in the Cuban Army.
When the United States declared war on Spain, Funston was
called by the State Governor of Kansas to help organize the three
regiments to be furnished by that State. The first of the three was
numbered the 20th, following the 19 regiments that had been furnished by Kansas for the Civil War.


20


The 20th Kansas was mustered in at Topeka, with only those
who had enlisted from the Kansas militia in uniform. Colonel
Funston was still in civilian clothes. Going to attend the muster-in,
he was stopped by several sentries, as visitors were not allowed.
Finally, finding a sentry who was willing to call the officer of the
guard, he was duly recognized and passed. The Colonel’s hopes to
get on detached service in Cuba with the Fifth Army Corps were
dashed by an order from General Miles, then Commander-in-chief
of the army, to proceed with his regiment to Camp Merritt, San
Fransico, for service in the Philippines.
Hence in due time the transport Indiana passed Corregidor on
the evening of November 30th, 1898. On board was the regiment
that was to make itself famous as the Fighting Twentieth Kansas,
dressed in already-badly-faded blue uniforms, equipped with Sprinfield rifles and ammunition of smokeful powder. So smokeful was
it that, a few minutes after firing began in any engagement, the
men were completely enveloped in a cloud of dense and choking haze.
The regiment was quartered in buildings in Manila, and its
details went to the outpost line, stationed on the extreme left west
of the Manila-Dagupan Railroad.
This outpost line, facing the encircling Insurgent trenches, had
orders to bear insults and threats in silence, and under no circum

21


stances to allow themselves to be drawn into a fight. The initiative was to be left to Aguinaldo’s forces, among whom the desire
to start something was daily growing stronger. Plenty of incidents
happened that might easily have led to open hostilities but for the
patience of the American troops.
THE INSURRECTION BEGINS
The outbreak came on the night of February 4, 1899, beginning at the San Juan bridge, from where the firing swept southward and northward along the entire line. So began the Philippine
Insurrection.
That same night the entire 20th Kansas moved up to the line.
The advances of the next few days brought it up to Caloocan in a
series of hard-fought skirmishes and stubborn fights with Filipino
forces of equal strength, considerable training, remarkable courage,
and armed with Mauser rifles with smokeless shells. Funston regrets the enlistment by the Insurgents of several companies of Igorrote spearmen, whose useless sacrifice was pitiful. Perhaps they
were expected to strike terror into American hearts, but when
Springfield slugs crashed through their shields and tore them to pieces,
they left the trenches and did not stop until they reached their native mountains. If the fire of the Insurgents was superior, their
smaller size told heavily against them in the hand-to-hand struggles
that so often decided the outcome of encounters.
On February 10th the regiment with its support of Idaho troops,
moved against the Caloocan trenches, with the First Montana and
Third Artillery (the latter as infantry) connecting it to the right
with Hale’s brigade near La Loma church. The Insurgent trenches
were shelled from vessels of the fleet and by such artillery as was
on the American line of advance. This day’s work resulted in a
new line north of Caloocan and in sight of Malinta Hill, the regiment’s left on the Caloocan-Malabon road. Owing to its surrounding swamps, this narrow road was the only way an attack on Malabon could have been made, hence that town was still held by the
Filipino forces. On February 1Ith the regiment entrenched, with
a redoubt of the Utah Artillery in front. No further advance was
made, awaiting the arrival of more troops from the States to hold
the Manila lines and free the forces on the advance for the northern
campaign. On March 24th the new advance line was reformed, the
First Montana regiment shifted to the right, the Second Oregon
took the place of the Kansas regiment, which moved off to La Loma


22


Church, later to take its place between the Montanas and the Third
Artillery, which had not been moved.
It was just before this reformation that a strong column of Insurgents had made a flank movement around the American left and
entered Manila, fighting its way against the U.S. troops left to guard
the city, and penetrating deeply into north Manila. It was during
this surprise attack that much of Tondo and other outlying parts
were burned. Until these well armed Filipinos were stopped and
defeated, the American forces on the left wing were actually cut
off from Manila.
The new left wing of our line was now the 22nd U.S. Infantry
and the 2nd Oregon, a separate brigade under Brig. Gen. Wheaton,
under the command of Major General MacArthur. When on the
following day the assault was made on the Filipino trenches, the
22nd Oregon lost more men in the fight than was suffered by any
other regiment in any one battle during the Insurrection.
The American line continued to the east, with another brigade
under Brig. Gen. Robert H. Hall, the entire force of four brigades
with nine thousand men, facing along a front of eight miles, an
equally strong and much better armed Insurgent force, well protected by trenches and outworks. So were set out the contending


forces that were the next day to fight the most extensive battle of
the war of the Philippine Insurrection.
THE ADVANCE TO MALOLOS
On the morning of the 25th of March, 1899, the Second Division
began its advance northward to Malolos. It was opposed by the best
of the Filipino forces under General Antonio Luna. By this time
Americans had been supplied with cartridges of the semi-smokeless
type
Funston speaks of the evident training and courage of the opposing forces, many of which had been in native regiments of the
Spanish army. Funston does not think much of their marksmanship, but praises them for the tenacity they showed in defending
their positions. He says that, so long as these original forces were
intact, during the first four months of the fighting, no criticism of
their courage could be made, and it was only after most of these
veterans had been put out of service, and their places taken by
raw recruits, that the morale of the Filipino army was shattered.
The Americans deployed and the platoon units advanced by
alternate rushes, not yet firing as the distance was still too great.
When the Kansas regiment came to within the range of its rifles,
“Commence Firing" was blown. Alternate forward dashes and
platoon volleying while prone on the ground, showed well for the
Presidio training of the regiment. Funston records the strange
case of a man who, while lying down, was hit by a Mauser bullet
which passed down his body, struck his heavy belt and continued
on down in his leg to the knee. “It is disturbing to be shot through
the body in the orthodox manner, but it is enough to make one
positively peevish to have a hele drilled through him lengthwise.
Astonishing to relate, the man recovered in a short time.”
When within 200 yards of the enemy line, “Charge” was given
and the Insurgent outposts were taken. It was here that the mascot
of Company G distinguished himself. This bull-dog beat his company to the enemy line.
The advance continued toward the Tuliajan River over sloping
ground. The main position of the Insurgents was strongly intrenched on the opposite side of the stream. The Americans rushed
forward to the bank, threw themselves flat, and began a terrific
fire. The opposing lines were only fifty feet apart. The position
was so hot, and the loss so heavy, Funston ordered an attempt to
ford the river, which proved to be up to the mens’ shoulders. As soon
as a considerable number of our troops were on the other side the
enemy fled. The Kansas lost two killed and thirteen wounded. In


24


the trenches were found 29 Filipino dead and thirty rifles. As the
other brigades of the line were still engaged, the Kansas stopped
its advance and waited the development of the general movement
forward.
On the morning of the 26th the regiment shifted position up the
river and begun a westward march along the road from the Novaliches ford of the Tuliajan river toward Malinta. Firing was
heard from Malinta where Wheaton’s brigade was encountering well
intrenched forces. The Third Artillery, just ahead of the Kansas,
deployed and began firing into the flank of the retreating Insurgents
that Wheaton had forced out. The Kansas was ordered by General
MacArthur to deploy on the right of the Third Artillery. But the
regiment could not come within Springfield range of the fleeing insurgents, and the going was so hard that many of its men fell out
exhausted. One man was killed in this affair. Funston deeply regrets that there was no cavalry at this time to take up the pursuit
and capture the retreating forces.
AT MALINTA
The march was resumed in column to Manila, arriving there
soon after the finish of the fight in which Colonel Egbert of the 22nd
Infantry was killed. Meanwhile Hale’s brigade had taken Meycauayan in what Funston describes as a beautiful fight, during which
some of the Mauser bullets, fired high by the Filipinos, fell two
miles away among the Kansas regiment and 3rd Artillery, wounding
one man.
As the Insurgents retreated they burned their own towns of Malabon, Malinta and Meycauayan, acting on General Luna’s orders.
This destruction of the property of their own people, under the idea
that such action would delay or inconvenience the advancing Americans, was the practice of the Filipino forces during the whole campaign. It was a costly and useless sacrifice of their own homes, not
warranted by military necessity, as it was the dry season and the
Americans could camp and sleep quite comfortably in the open.
On the 27th the northern advance was continued by the Second
Division with the brigade of Gen. Otis (of which the Kansas was a
part) on the left of the railroad, and Hale’s brigade on the right. The
order of the Otis brigade was first the 3rd Artillery on advance, then
the 20th Kansas and behind came the 1st Montana. The advance
of the 3rd Artillery soon contacted the enemy, drove them ahead,
and stopped to ccok the chickens they had captured. But being
obliged to move on before the broilers were finished in the cooking.
the treasure fell to the first battalion of the Kansas.


25


MARILAO
As the forward movement was continued, a strong firing developed from the left front, which was later found to come from
trenches on the opposite side of a deep river. As the river, which
was the one at Marilao, was not at first seen, the Kansas rushed
forward, only to be halted on the bank of an impassable stream,
and found themselves in a very tight place. Several men were
wounded, two mortally. The Americans had to withdraw until a
crossing could be found. But soon, while this was being done, three
companies, C, H and I returned to the river bank and poured so
hot a fire on the trenches that the Filipinos were not able to do
any more accurate shooting. In a short while a raft was noticed
on the opposite bank, farther along, and some of the 10th Pennsylvania, who were at the place, swam across and brought it over.
Funston and 21 men of Co. C crossed on this raft and advanced on
the trench covered by the artillery. They found that the Filipinos
had already raised the white flag. Twenty-four Insurgents were
found killed and thirty-two were taken prisoners. The 20th lost
but one man in the fight. Farther up the river the First South
Dakota had a stiff encounter and lost 7 killed and 25 wounded. The
Kansas marched along the river up to near the railroad bridge. As
the regiment reached the bridge and began to cross on the bare
stringers, (the ties had been removed) it was attacked by an Insurgent force. Under fire, both the Kansas and the 3rd Artillery
got across and formed a firing line. An attack in force was awaited
from the Filipinos, but it was not delivered, because Col. Stotsenburg, with the First Nebraska, had flanked and turned the enemy
left and forced a general retreat.
BOCAUE
The advance here halted for a day in order to repair the railroad bridge and track so that trains could bring up supplies from
Manila. On the 29th the march was resumed to Bocaue, capturing
the trenches there after a hot fight, and also the railroad bridge.
Several regiments crossed this bridge and prepared to continue the
advance. The Bigaa station could be seen two miles up the line and
it was observed that Filipino forces were entraining. The American
artillery opened in this point, but in spite of the confusion resulting,
the trains got away. Bigaa was burned by the retreating Filipino
troops.
GUIGUINTO
The next resistance encountered was at the Guiguinto River,
but it was not stiff, and the almost undamaged bridge was saved


26


Kansas Regiment arrives at Malolos


from a fire that had been set on it. It was just after crossing the
bridge however that the 10th Penn, and the 20th Kansas found themselves under a heavy and accurate fire from Insurgent trenches too
far away for the range of their Springfields. So these regiments
deployed and rushed, the former on the left of the railroad, the
latter on the right. As the Americans could not be held back by a
river, but continued their rushes, the Insurgent trenches were soon
deserted. In fifteen minutes of fighting the Kansas lost two men
killed, one officer and 18 men wounded.
ON TO MALOLOS
The next day there was a halt for distribution of rations and
ammunition. The men were much interested in the captured trenches, which were about the best found anywhere during the war.
When the march was resumed the following day, no more Filipino forces were met with, and camp was made at evening within a few miles
of Malolos, the Insurgent capital. Fermidable trenches and redoubts
were seen in front, and it was thought that the resistance would be
desperate.
But the next morning, after an artillery preparation, the advance was made and scouts found these trenches and works deserted.
From this point the division commander sent Funston and a few
men forward to feel their way into Malolos. They encountered practically no resistance, and soon found themselves in the town plaza


27





Colonel Harry C. Egbert,
22nd Regulars, killed at Malinta, leading a charge. The
monument marking the spot
is decorated every Memorial
Day.





with the buildings that had been used as headquarters by Aguinaldo
and his Congress burning. There had been no defense of Malolos
after Guiguinto. The Insurgent government and army had moved
on north to San Fernando, Pampanga.
This ended what we know as the advance on Malolos. The
capture of the town was not in itself of importance. But it was
the fall of the only town where the Filipino Republic found more
than a few weeks rest.
(To be continued)
Note for residents of the Philippines and tourists:—To follow the advance
described in this article, take Manila North road out Rizal Avenue extension,
with La Loma Church on the right. The Tuliajan River is crossed on a bridge
marked Rizal-Bulacan Boundary. Malinta, where Colonel Eghert was killed,
is a short distance north of this bridge, on the left of the road, and the monu

28


ment that marks the spot where the fight was hottest and Egbert fell, leading
his regiment may be reached by a narrow, but passable road.
The North Road follows closely the railroad, bearing to the west after
Bigaa, but much of this present road was not in existence in 1899. Passing
Guiguinto, the road followed by the American advance turns off left at Santa
Rita, going directly to Malolos, while the main road continues north to Quingua
(now renamed Plaridel) to cross the Angat-Quingua River north of Quingua.
Next month we will publish a map covering the country north of the map in
this number, showing the territory over which the last part of the advance to
San Fernando was made.
Hundreds of thousands of people, Americans and Filipinos, have passed
over this road since 1901, and have, from their cars or from the train, seen
the country in which the events here described took place, without having the
least idea of what they were, what they meant, or of the lives lost all along
the way. History was written on these blood-drenched fields but the years
have erased it from the memory of even those who lived along the route and
who saw some of the battles.



ED. PERRENOUD








SWISS WATCHMAKER
No. 19 Escolta



You Will be Gled to Know


of our BARGAIN FLOOR


“Old Timers” have been coming regularly for
“thrifty” shopping. A large sales floor is devoted to
books, office and school supplies, toys, fountain pens,
etc. All at special prices.


Do your Shopping at the



Philippine Education Company
Bargain Floor: Third Floor
101-103 Escolta, Manila
EVERY DAY IS BARGAIN DAY


29


THE RAGGEDY MAN FROM KANSAS


Oh, the flags are in the windows and the folks are on the street,
And I hear a bugle call, that never blew retreat,
And the girls begin to cry and the men begin to cheer,
The 20th! The 20th! The Kansas boys are here.
Chorus:
Oh, the raggedy man, the raggedy man,
He swam a bit and forward ran,
The raggedy, raggedy Kansas man.
There’s lads who crossed the Tuliahan and fought at Malabon.
And chased the Tagal bolos through the jungles of Luzon.
By yonder darkstained blouses and dusty suits of brown
The “Ragged men from Kansas" again have come to town.
Chorus: Oh, the raggedy man, the raggedy man, etc.........
There’s Eddie White and Trembley, who swam the Rio Grande,
And sprinkled on its farther bank a touch of Kansas sand,
There’s Adna Clark and sixteen men who held Tondo road at night
When flashing, roaring cannon set the dusky way alight.
Chorus: Oh, the raggedy man, etc.........
Malolos and Bocaue’s trench know the Kansas yell.
San Fernando, Santo Tomas the Kansas story swell,
They've Kansas day at Bacolor and from where those rifles roam
To a thousand Kansas mothers they bring their valor home.
Chorus: Oh, the raggedy man, etc.........
Upon the bridge at Marilao they left their hero dead,
Where swift and sharp the Mausers angry message sped.
Oh, “he didn’t know a lemon and he didn’t know the tide,"
But half a world a watching knows how the Kansan died.
Chorus: Oh, the raggedy man, etc.........
At Guiguinto’s fierce battle yon flag in glory flew,
What roaring rifles kept it—all Luna’s arm knew—
And high it swung o'er Caloocan, Bag-Bag and Marilao,
“Those Ragged Pops from Kansas!", for God they’re heroes now.
Chorus: Oh, the raggedy man, etc.........
They swarmed o'er ramp and rice field with battle all aflame,
Beneath the mystic Southern Cross they wrote the Kansas name,
And so from tropie forest return o'er ocean wide
To Kansas wives and sweethearts who wait with loving pride.
Chorus: Oh, the raggedy man, etc.........
For the raggedy man, the raggedy man,
Who swam and fought and forward ran—
“Rock Chack Jaylawk"—The Kansas man.
DAVE LEANY.


30


PROCLAMATIONS
Major-General E. S. Otis, to the People of the Philippines.
January 4, 1899
INSTRUCTIONS of his excellency, the President of the United
States, relative to the administration of the affairs of the Philippine Islands, have been transmitted to me by direction of the honorable the Secretary of War, under date of December 28, 1898. They
direct me to publish and proclaim in the most public manner, to the
inhabitants of these Islands that in the war against Spain the United
States forces came here to destroy the power of that nation and to
give the blessings of peace and individual freedom to the Philippine
people; that we are here as friends of the Filipinos, to protect them
in their homes, their employments, their individual and religious
liberty; and that persons who, either by active aid or honest endeavor,
cooperate with the Government of the United States to give effect
to these beneficent purposes will receive the reward of its support
and protection.
.. . . The following two paragraphs recite the instructions of the President of
the United States, and the third quotes the last paragraph of his instructions.
The proclamation concludes as follows;
"From the tenor and substance of the above instructions of the
President, I am fully of the opinion that it is the intention of the
United States Government, while directing affairs generally, to appoint the representative men now forming the controlling element of
the Filipinos to civil position of trust and responsibility, and it will be
my aim to appoint thereto such Filipinos as may be acceptable to
the supreme authorities at Washington.
“It is also my belief that it is the intention of the United States
Government to draw from the Filipino people as much of the military force of the islands as is possible and consistent with a free
and well-constituted government of the country, and it is my desire
to inaugurate a policy of that character. I am also convinced that
it is to intention of the Unitecl States Government to seek the establishment of a most liberal government for the islands, in which the
people themselves shall have as full representation as the maintenance
of order and law will permit, and which shall be susceptible of development on lines of increased representation and the bestowal of
increased powers, into a government as free and independent as is
enjoyed by the most favored provinces of the world.


31


“It will be my constant endeavor to cooperate with the Filipino
people seeking the good of the country, and I invite their full confidence and aid."


FIRST PROCLAMATION OF PRESIDENT AGUINALDO, issued
from Malolos, January 5, 1899. (A free translation)
A proclamation of Major-General E. S. Otis, of the United States,
published yesterday in the newspapers of Manila, obliges me to make
this reply in order to make clear my most solemn protest against
all the contents of said proclamation, under my duty to God, my
political promises to my people, and my relations, personal and official, with the North American Nation.
General Otis calls himself, in this proclamation, Military Governor of the Philippines, and I protest, once and a thousand times
with all my energy, against such authority.
I proclaim solemnly never to have given my promise, neither
in Singapore nor in Hongkong, to recognize the sovereignty of
America in this country.
On the contrary I state that I returned to the Philippines on
an American war-ship, on the 19th of May of last year, with the
purpose of making war on the Spaniards in order to regain our
liberty, as I made known in my proclamation of May 24, 1898, and
again in my proclamation of June 12, which was confirmed by the
American General Merritt, predecessor of General E. S. Otis, in the
proclamation he issued to the Filipinos some days before demanding
of the Spanish General Jaudanes the surrender of Manila, in which
he stated clearly that the sea and land forces of the United States
had come to give us our liberty by defeating the Spaniards.
Once for all, nationals and foreigners, you are witnesses that
the sea and land forces of the United States present here have recognized in fact the belligerent status of the Filipinos, not only
paying it due respect, but also public honors before all Consuls
and foreigners. (See Note at end of 2nd Proclamation)
As the proclamation of General Otis refers to instructions issued
by his excellency, the President of the United States, in regard to
the administration of affairs in the Philippines, I solemnly protest
in the name of God, Fountain of all Right and Justice, who has
given to me the authority to lead my dear brothers in the difficult
work of our regeneration, against the intrusion of the Government
of the United States in the sovereignty of the islands.
I protest also for the Filipino people against this intrusion be

32


cause, in electing me President of the Nation, this duty has been
put upon me to sustain, even to the death, its liberty and independence.
And lastly, I protest this act—so unexpected from the United
States Government—by all the past events of my relations with the
American authorities; that I was not brought here to make war
against the Spaniards for the benefit of America, but for our own
independence, to which the said authorities pledged me their support.
So we must all understand, dear brothers, in order to unite all
our noble aspirations with the force of conviction, determined never
to turn back on the glorious road we have covered.
A SECOND PROCLAMATION, by President Aguinaldo, follows on
January 8. It recites the military acts of the naval and land forces
of the United States which are taken by the President as hostile
to his government, and concludes as follows;—
“My government cannot remain indifferent under this violent
and aggressive usurpation of a part of its territory by a nation that
has called itself the champion of oppressed nations; hence we are
ready to open hostilities if the American forces intend to occupy
by force any part of the territory under our jurisdiction.
“I denounce these acts before the world, so that the universal
conscience may point out who have been the real oppressors of this
country and the rights of humanity.
“All the blood shed be on their own heads.”
EMILIO AGUINALDO.


(Note—Admiral Dewey, in a letter to Senator Lodge, dated from Washington, Jan. 30, 1900, states there was never any discussion of independence between himself and Gen. Aguinaldo, nor were military honors ever accorded by
him to Gen. Aguinaldo, nor salutes rendered to the Filipino flag.—Ed.)



AMERICAN-MADE
Juality booas


FOR PERSONAL
OR HOME USE.


ALWAYS THE
BEST FOR LESS




BLORS


colta, Manila


33


BATTLE SCENES DESCRIBED
—
Prepared from the account by War-correspondent, John
F. Bass, dated Manila, February 6, 1899, the day after the
outbreak at San Juan bridge.
“IT is not that we defeated the army of the Republica Filipina at
every point, for the outcome of the encounter was never for
a moment doubtful; it is not that the Filipinos fought bravely, and
that their bodies cover the rice swamps about Manila from Fort
San Antonio Abad to the hill of San Juan del Monte, and from
San Juan to the sea at Tondo; it is not the heroism of the Fourteenth Infantry in their long fight for the possession of Pasay, or
the brilliant charge of the Washington regiment into San Pedro
Makati, or the gallant dash of the Nebraskas and Tennessees over
the bridge of San Juan and up the hill on the other side, or the
equally magnificent charge of the Third Artillery up to the Chinese
church (south of La Loma—Ed.)—it is that every officer and every
soldier of the United States army did his duty, and did it with
the dash which is a peculiar characteristic of our race. .....
The Nebraska camp lies in the east salient of Manila facing
San Juan with the San Juan River between, and its position exposed it to fire from three sides. To the south, across the Pasig
River, is the town of Santa Ana (a district of Manila—Ed.), further
up is San Pedro Makati. On the same side of the river three blockhouses appear among the bamboos, and several churches, occupied
by insurgents, are seen in the distance; while across on San Juan
hill are the water reservoirs, also in the hands of the insurgents.
On the left are a powder-house and a block-house, parts of the
insurgent line.
In the neutral zone that had been marked out previously as
not to be entered by either party, was a village which had recently
been occupied by the insurgents. Colonel Stotsenburg, going to
protest to the Filipino officer in charge, was called a coward because
he declined a personal encounter, but he laughed and walked away.
The American soldiers had, for many days previous, endured in
patience the taunts of the insurgents that they were afraid to fight
and would soon be driven into the sea. But when the break came,
this village suddenly went up in smoke, and the insurgent forces
were driven out by the angered Nebraskans who quickly payed
off the score.
Americans, both officers and privates, had begun to believe that


34


the Washington Government intended them to suffer this unendurable situation indefinitely. February 4th decided that in their favor.
Forces were ready to move to the front within a half-hour after the
first shots were fired at San Juan, the 14th Infantry being among
the first to go forward. In a few moments after the outbreak, the
good-natured and apparently lazy American soldier had become suddenly alert and determined, and no movement went without sharp
challenge. Manila within was carefully patroled in every part, for
it was known that many insurgents were inside the lines, waiting
for a favorable time to start trouble.
At Santa Mesa Colonel Stotsenburg placed his men who at once
dug in, and, on a hill to the rear, Lieutenant Webb, Utah Battery,
was setting up his two 3.2-inch guns, moved into position by the
men—horses not having been furnished. Under fire, on an exposed
hill-side, the Utah men dug the gun-pits and built the barricades
of sand-bags. It was the dry season, and the ground was baked.
so picks swung into the hard earth. Of course they grumbled for
(Continued on page 39)


Ontpost trouble at San Juan Bridge, Feb. 4. 189s
35


1


Major General Elwell S. Otis—U.S.V
Brigadier General, U. S. Army.


Battle Scenes Described
(Continued from page 35)
lack of sleep and at the poor prospect for breakfast, but Webb assured them of both after the work was done.
At four next morning, with a late moon and coming dawn, the
battle began in earnest. By the early light a large body of insurgents was seen coming down San Juan hill toward the bridge,
which was held by a company of the Nebraska regiment. They
started over the bridge, but were met by a withering fire from our
Springfields, and forced to retreat. Without discipline and organization, they nevertheless had plenty of courage, and they charged
the second and third time, but each attempt to take the bridge was
a failure. This fight happened before it was light enough for good
shooting, the American "long-toms" spitting fire into the darkness
and giving the enemy a very good mark to shoot at. The Nebraska
company lost one killed and seven wounded.
When daylight came, and the Nebraskans could see, they kept
the insurgents well down behind their trenches, and the latter began
to shoot high, their bullets going over our front lines and falling
among the troops in Santa Mesa. Colonel MCCoy’s Colorado troops
came up near the Pasig River to re-enforce our right.
As Webb’s battery opened on the bridge, one of his men fell,
shot through the head, the breast-work of sand-bags not being
high enough to protect the battery. But the insurgents were forced
to give up further attempts to capture the bridge. The battery
next turned to the block-house south of the bridge, preparatory to
a charge by the Colorado regiment. In this second position the
guns had no protection. Another man fell, shot through the lungs,
but the guns were served and the block-house put out of commission. When the Nebraska regiment charged it met little resistance.
The insurgents had just brought up a big gun to the position
of the burned village already mentioned. Its first discharge gave
a great puff of smoke, revealing its exact position to Lieutenant
Webb. From his gun went a shell directed to the spot, which exploded just in front of the insurgent gun and put it out of business.
Then the shelling of the bridge was resumed. After a short time
word was sent to Webb to elevate his guns as the Nebraska regiment was to charge over the bridge, so he set the range further
up on the hill ahead of our troops.
Then the Nebraskans started, by twos and threes, crouching
and running, met on the bridge by a storm of bullets from the insurgents. But over they went, taking cover behind the water-pipe
on the other side. When more had followed, they tried for the hill,
39


but found it too hot. Just then two Nordenfeldt guns under Captain
Gibbs rumbled across the bridge, followed by a battalion of Tennessees under Colonel Smith, who died on the bridge, not from a
bullet, but from a heart-stroke. It was one of the most unusual
happenings of war.
The Nebraskans and Tennessees, with the guns, then charged
the hill, the insurgents abandoning their positions, and by noon the
American troops were eating their lunch at the reservoir that occupies the top.
The afternoon was devoted to cleaning up the country south of
the San Juan hills to the Pasig River. The Tennessee men did a
good job, overlooking neither insurgents nor stray animals—
chickens and pigs.
Next attention was given to the blockhouses north of the San
Juan bridge, and two Utah guns, from Sampaloc cemetery, shelled
them and the insurgent trenches along their line. (This is called
the Balic-Balic cemetery, and has been closed—Ed.) After the
artillery had done its work, the Colorado and South Dakota regiments advanced and cleared the country, the American sharpshooters
picking off the retreating insurgents as they fled.


San Juan Bridge after Shelling, Feb. 5, 1898
40


The American troops now had possession of all enemy positions
from the Pasig River north for a distance of two miles from San
Juan bridge, as far as the north line.
On this north line the 20th Kansas had, by 9.30, evening of
February 4th, moved out along the road west of the railroad (Juan
Luna Street—Ed.) a full mile in advance of the rest of the line.
They met hard resistance, the insurgents charging six times to within
one hundred yards of their front, each time melting away before
their Sprinfields and the fire of one gun of the Utah Battery. The
right of the American line then moved to take the La Loma Church
which was ahead of them. (A photograph of this country taken
from the Chinese Cemetery, not clear enough to reproduce, shows
the entire country from the Chinese Cemetery to La Loma Church
without a building. All this is now occupied by the La Loma and
Del Norte cemeteries, but through on the west by Rizal Avenue
Extension.—Ed.)
The line-up on this advance is given in the description of the
map in this number. The 3rd Artillery followed a line of dikes
with swamps on both sides, fell into a cul-de-sac, and lost 25 men.
But they got themselves out, and practically in battle-line, until then
not having fired a shot. The discipline of the Third Artillery was
perfect—no shooting except on command of its officers. When the
Artillery, acting as infantry, came out of the jungle, they found a
strong body of insurgents in the Chinese cemetery firing on the
Montanas and Pennsylvanias to the right. They then opened with
volleys on this insurgent position, and with the shells from the Utah
Battery, under Captain Grant, caused the insurgents to abandon
their position and retreat to La Loma Church. Captain O'Hara led
his Third Artillery men in this attack.
The Montana and Pennsylvania regiments had a hard fight.
They had met strong insurgent forces at the Chinese cemetery, protected by the stones and barbed-wire, pouring a flanking fire on
them, while ahead was the strong defensive position of the enemy
at La Loma Church. As soon as the 3rd Artillery had captured
the Chinese cemetery, about 2.30 P.M., South Dakota mopped up
the rest of this ridge, Colonel Frost with his regiment getting this
finished at 3.00 P.M. Then the Dakotas went on toward La Loma,
arriving there a little ahead of the Pennsylvanias under Colonel
Hawkins and Major Bell. The insurgents fled northward, followed
by the Third Artillery until it was recalled.
The road followed by the Kansas Regiment, west of the railroad, was swamp and jungle. (The swamps are now productive
fisheries, and the jungles have been cleared and built on.—Ed.)


41


Their constant firing kept the insurgents on the move, preventing
them from taking careful aim, hence the American loss was not so
great as was to be expected. The insurgents had been told—and
they believed—that they had nothing to fear, and the Kansas men
taught them a lesson. Their greater numbers, their better rifles,
and their trenches, were useless against the impetuous rushes of
Funston’s regiment.
The counter-attacks made by the insurgents were, however,
made with their best forces, and in large numbers, with the idea
that the Second Division,—the north line under General MacArthur
—would call re-enforcements from the First Division, South line,
and weaken our strength there so that an attack could be successful
on the American positions south of the Pasig River. On the 5th
of February therefore, about 6000 insurgents made a furious attack
on the First Division, under General Anderson.
This attack, via blockhouse No. 14, and the “Bloody Lane",
a name given to the road leading past Singalong Church, covered
the same ground where the Americans had suffered heavy losses
during the capture of Manila. On each side of the road is a jungle.
(Much of this is now cleaned up and built on.—Ed.) But the
American troops of the First Division did not act on the defensive.
They at once assumed the offensive, keeping the insurgents well
under cover so they could do no accurate shooting.
At 10 A.M. a general charge was made on the insurgents who


Utah gun in action.—Santo Mesa, Feb. 5, 1899


were then occupying the old line of Spanish works. The Monitor
Monterey shelled these works from its position in the Bay. North
Dakota and one battalion of the 14th Infantry had good going across
open fields, but the second battalion of the 14th had to get through
a tangle of bamboo and thorn-bushes under heavy fire. Lieutenant
Mitchell led his men down “Bloody Lane", fell mortally wounded.
saying, "Never mind me: go ahead.” In front of Bockhouse No.
14, lay six dead and eleven wounded American soldiers.
Lieutenant Miles then took the lead with Companies M and 1,
and at 50 yards from the blockhouse found the fire so heavy that
he took cover and called for volunteers. Eight men sprung forward
and followed this officer, rushed the blockhouse and drove out the
insurgents.
Having taken these old Spanish trenches, a new insurgent line,
better made, was discovered in their rear. A road and open land
made it too costly to charge these second trenches, so one gun of
the 6th Artillery, and the guns of the Monterey pounded the insurgent position without dislodging them. Then came orders for
General Ovenshine’s brigade to flank the trenches. Under fire his


43


0)


S


A.


8


2


44


men crossed swamps waist-deep, but soon found a place from
where they could pour a fire into the trenches from the flank. When
they came out on the Pasay road the enemy had left their position.
American losses were 12 killed and 34 wounded. Our flanking
movement was new tactics to the insurgents. They fled and did
not stop until they reached Paranaque, four miles to the south.
General King’s brigade was along the Tripa stream for two
miles. On the other side of this stream was open country in front
of the insurgent position at the English Cemetery near San Pedro
Makati. To the left was Santa Ana, also occupied by insurgents,
who had two Krupp guns which, however, they only fired a few
times. The insurgents held a strong bastion fort. Lieutenant
Hawthorn had a battery of the 6th Artillery at Blockhouse No. 11 (?)
using the guns left behind by the Astor Battery which had already
gone home. Captain Dyer had another battery of the 6th. (The
composition of the American line is given in the notes that accompany the map in this number.)
At 8 A.M. General Anderson gave the order to advance. The
line waded the Tripa stream and came out on open ground. The
Remington rifles in the insurgent line revealed their exact position
and the American batteries opened fire over the heads of our advancing troops. The Californias advanced so rapidly that they got
into Santa Ana and cut off the retreat of the insurgents, taking


Paco Church Before its Destruction
45


many prisoners. The bastion was carried by the Idaho and California regiments, a hundred dead were found inside left by the
retreating insurgents who attempted to swim the Pasig, losing many
in the water. By 11 A.M. King’s brigade was in San Pedro Makati, having cleaned up all the country for three miles.
The enemy behind our lines, in Paco, occupied the church and
shot at ambulances, provision and ammunition carts on their way
to the front. Captain Dyer shelled this church as the only way to
dislodge the insurgent sharpshooters who were doing considerable
damage. The church was totally destroyed. No churches, however,
were ever fired on by the Americans unless they were being used
by the enemy for defensive positions.
This firing of insurgent sharpshooters on ambulances was, of
course, in violation of the rules of warfare among civilized nations,
which General Aguinaldo had declared would be observed. We now
know—as we did not then know—that there were some insurgent
officers and men who did not respect General Aguinaldo’s orders,
but who conducted their part of the war in their own way. It was
to the lack of rigid discipline, the sine qua non of a real army, that
many of the questionable acts of insurgents were due. It was this
lack of discipline that weakened the insurgent cause and caused
it to finally loss all the support of the people behind its lines.


Geographical Note—On the map we published in our January number, the
Estero (creek) Pandacan forms the large loop within the larger north loop
of the Pasig River, enclosing the district of Pandacan, which it separates
from Paco on the west. At the south-east part of the loop of the Estero
Pandaoan, the Estero Tripa, mentioned above, enters, coming from the south
boundary of Manila, joining with the Estero Paco, which bounds the Paco
district on the west. The later-built Manila South Railroad (Manila Railroad
Company) comes down through Santa Mesa, crosses the Pasig and goes through
Pandacan and Paco, then turns south and follows the west bank of Estero
Tripa. The fighting described in the last part of the above article, took place
east of Estero Tripa, across the city boundary and on to San Pedro Macati.
Paco Church stood on the east side of Estero Paco. It was completely
destroyed, and today new church buildings occupy the old site. Almost all
this south-east part of Manila, swamp and jungle forty years ago, is now
filled, laid out in broad streets and built up with residences, colleges and the
fine Rizal Stadium. On our map published last month, PASAY was mistakenly
placed. It is south of Manila and outside the city limits.—Ed.)


46





QUEION CII
E. E. ELSER
* SAN FRANCISCO DEL MONTE
INCORPORATED
SUBDIVISION


Insurance
Of All Kinds

Moserco Bldg.
MANILA, P. I.



Phone 2-24-28




TAURITA
the
RUTURE VACATION
RESORT
of the Philippines


Those who succeed
always build for the *
Y
future.
Lef us show you what 
we have to offer.

M. H. BUCK
227 Calle David



Six kilometers from Plaza Goiti. Resid ntial lots for ₱1.50 per square
meter and up. Payment in sixty
monthly instaliments. Bus transportution: Eleciric and Telephone Services. Good Ronds: Free water:
School: Murket. All the advantngos
of City and Country are available.

A limited number of two-storied strong
material houses with 3 bed rooms.
veranda, sala. dining-room, kitchen.
bath and wuter closet for sale on
casy terms: lots from 200 to 500
square meters. Small down payment
with regular monthly installments.
No interest. Now under construction.
Healthful climate and beautiful seonery. Much cocler than Manila.
The New National Highway and other
new roads to Dilimun and University
City will conneet with this Subdivision.
SAN FRANCISCO DEL MONTE
INCORPORATED.
Main Offica
227 Calle David
Tel. 2-16-36
Branch Office
San Francisco del Monte, Rizal
Tel. 2-42-94



1


GRAYCO
Neckwear & Shirts
Like the Pioneers that
Built our lands, GRAYCO
Neckwear & Shirts, WEAR
WELL and LAST LONG.
A TRIAL will convince you.
They are sold at all good shirt
dealers.


P M. DAVIS & CO.
541 M. Bnc. Nacional





 E 


47


SPANISH AMERICAN WAR NURSES
From “The Volunteer”
In 1898 when war was declared on Spain, and our boys were
volunteering for service, the American trained nurses offered their
service to the Government. We were thanked, but told that there
was no place in the Army for women. A few months later, however, when hundreds were down with typhoid and malaria fever,
and the death rate alarming, the doctors realized that a trained personnel was absolutely necessary to cope with the situation. Unfortunately the call was sent to the Red Cross instead of calling in the
Graduate nurses who had already volunteered. The Red Cross at
this time had no trained nurses, or trained personnel of any kind.
All sorts of women volunteered, and many were accepted without regard for their qualification. This was a mistake which was soon
recognized. There is a vast difference when it comes to caring for
the sick.
Again the nurses volunteered and 1650 were mustered in, and
as soon as possible were sent to Camps and Hospitals where they
were so badly needed.
Few people realize the splendid work done by them. Their record made is a matter of history. So well was the Government
pleased with the record made, that plans for the incorporation of
Graduate Nurses frem accredited Hospitals to become a part of the
regular army was set in motion, and soon became an order. This
pioneering work was not easy, there were many hardships to go
through, and prejudices to overcome and very little medicine, supplies or food to do with.
The Spanish American War Nurses were the first women in the
history of the world to become a part of any regular army, and
we are proud to have been a part of the only 100 per cent Volunteer
Army in the world.
Of the 1650 nurses mustered into the service in 1898, less than
five hundred are alive today.
Dr. Anita Newcom MeGee was superintendent of the Army
Nurse Corps in the Spanish War period. She did much to promote
the Army Nurse Corps. Later she was Honorary President and
Legislative Representative of the Spanish American Nurses.
—Julia Hinkle, Department Historian.
48


THE VOLUNTEER


Let poets sing the many joys all caused by Cupid’s Dart;
Let those who may declare the praise of Science and Art;
Of all the many pleasures great, which fill this earthly Sphere,
It is the acme of my bliss to be a Volunteer.
“To arms! to arms!” the country cries, and quick he heeds the call!
To rally round the Stars and Stripes he hies him great and small;
To plant the flag on foreign shores, and travel o'er the sea,
While others stay behind and yell: “Just give them hell for me.”
He’s off, and o’er the briny deep, the stately vessel spins,
Gone are alas his noble dreams, and now the fun begins;
So grave and serious he finds the charge he has to keep,
That all else that his system holds he empties in the deep.
On land the story is the same, no rest his soul can gain;
He celebrates the wee small hours by fighting in the rain;
By day, wrapped up in flannel suits, he sits around and sweats,
And makes out requisitions for light clothes he never gets!
So lives our noble Volunteer! and when the war is o’er,
And once again he sets his feet on old Columbia’s shore,
He finds he’s habit’s creature, he has lost all sense and tact,
And shocks his friends by showing that he don’t know how to act.
If to assuage his thirst he now, should wander to the bar
He practices a little trick he’s brought back from afar;
He drinks his beer, then at the man he slowly winks his eye,
The while he seeks the door and says: "Dinero bye and bye!”
And gone are his domestic tastes; his bed he seeks no more,
He breaks his poor old mother’s heart by sleeping on the floor;
He calls his sister "moocher,” his manners are the worst,
And when he hears the dinner bell, he yells: “What squad eats first.”
Oh, all may sing the glory great of being a Volunteer!
But when again the Country calls, we’ll all be deaf, I fear;
We’ll climb up on the street car roof the suckers for to see,
And as they pass we too will yell: “Just give them hell for me!”
O. H. FERNBACK,
First California, U. S. V.
49


CHRISTMAS REMINISCENCES OF AN OLD.TIMER
(Continued from January)
By IRVING HART


Irving Hart


MANY conflicting and incredi
ble, as well as pathetic,
stories have been written, and
published, about the large sum of
money belonging to the insurgent
government, which was placed in
the hands of General Emilio Aguinaldo, and by him—and his associates—carried with them, as their
war-chest. While they were being
pursued by the American Army,
and, from time to time, forced to
abandon the towns they had been
holding, fleeing to remote and outof-the-way places, and even to the
mountain tops, they knew full well
they would have to give up the
chase.


Some there are, even to this day, who declare and believe that
the Insurgent money, amounting to something like One-hundred and
Fifty Thousand Pesos, was never lost nor was captured by Americans; but that, if the truth was told, it could be found right here,
in or near Manila, and in the hands of a favored few, who, to cover
their tracks, had spread the report that it was captured by the
Americans, which, they declare, was not the case.
So, as I promised last month, and as I, by chance, know something concerning it—and its ultimate disposition—I will endeavor to
recount the small, but important, part I played in it, which, come
what will, I can never erase from my memory.
We, of the Third Cavalry, under the command of Colonel Henry
W. Wessels, Jr., had, for months, relentlessly chased the Insurgent
Army, first to one Province, and then to another, until at last we
arrived at the town of Umingan, Pangasinan, finding there Lieut.
Matthew A. Batson, with his Macabebe Scouts.
Lieutenant Batson—who spoke Spanish fluently—informed Colonel Wessels that he had done some scouting and that he had positive


50


information that General Aguinaldo, with his entire Staff and about
two-thousand soldiers, were at Tayug, Pangasinan, a near-by town,
but were so well armed, and strongly intrenched that he feared,
with the small number of men at his command, to attack them.
Third Cavalry Troops had, from time to time, been left behind
to garrison small towns that we had taken, while still others, because
of illness, had been sent back to Manila. At that moment there
were less than two-hundred men available and able to give battle.
The Colonel, however, after conferring with the other officers,
decided to advance and charge the town.
So orders were given, and at 3.00 A.M. the following morning,
we secretly, and as quickly as possible, saddled our mounts and
started on the march, none of the Troopers allowed to hold converse,
nor even smoke a cigarette.
At daylight on that eventful day we charged the town, our large
American Cavalry horses clearing the wide—and deep—trenches,
that had been constructed for defense purposes, as if they were
playthings. The Insurgents—the majority of whom had never before seen horses of that stature—took one agonizing look at them
and went skedaddling for parts unknown. They evidently thought
that we were demons and that it was the wisest thing to do.
Confusion and pandemonium broke out when the Troops arrived
in the town Plaza. General Aguinaldo, with his entire Staff, with
the exception of Don Antonio Montenegro—whom we had already
captured,—escaped, but left behind, much to his regret, his entire
family, military equipment, including the large printing plant that
was publishing "La Independencia", the Insurgent newspaper; sixty
bull-carts loaded to capacity with personal belongings, consisting of
dresses, jewelry, money, and the like all of which were confiscated,
but, by orders of General Henry W. Lawton, later on, were returned
intact, to their rightful owners—including General Aguinaldo.
Orders were immediately issued to search the town, which, for
us, turned out to be a gold mine. We located some sixty or more
Spanish, and two American prisoners, who were immediately liberated—and given a good substantial meal. They were, so they informed us, at the point of starvation. We found, however, a goodly
amount of supplies, as the town had been utilized as a distributing
center for the Insurgent Supply Depot. In the large and spacious
Convent, and other store-houses, we found box after box filled with
Spanish uniforms and shoes; several thousand sacks of (spoiled) rice;
3,500 lbs. of American flour; two American (Singer) sewing machines;
7,500 lbs, of salt, dried fish, salmon, tobacco, etc., all of which was
confiscated. The salt especially, (which was at that time, in the


51


interior towns, extremely scarce), came in very handy, every soldier
laying in a supply to last him a month or more.
After the search was completed the march for San Nicolas and
San Fabian, our objective, was resumed. But we were detained
by the liberated Spanish prisoners, among which were several hysterical ladies, screaming and refusing to be left behind. They gesticulated and implored, stating that if we leave them behind the Insurgents would surely return and massacre every one of them.
They also insisted—nay demanded—that we turn about and convey
them, if possible, clear to Manila.
While the officers were debating as to what steps to take, Lieut.
Babson, with his Macabebe Scouts, arrived from Umingan, bringing with him dispatches from General Otis, Commanding General
in Manila, ordering Colonel Wessels to "Stop in Tayug and rest his
horses.
This raised somewhat the ire of the Colonel. He had, only
that morning, received word that at least a part of the Insurgent
Army was bivouacked in San Nicolas, only three kilometers distant,
so I was selected as a messenger, (because I never was, from a
military standpoint, a real soldier), to proceed to Umingan, meet
Captain Dade, (of the 3rd Cavalry), who was in command at that
place, and hand over to him for transmission a telegram which read:
(I am quoting from memory only), "Otis, Manila, General Aguinaldo
is reported at San Nicolas, only three kilometers distant. He is.
I am informed, exhausted and without transportation of any kind.
Believe that capture of the General is probable if we have, or are
given, authority to advance. Men and horses are in good condition
and not in immediate need of rest. Respectfully request that I
be granted authority to resume the advance. (Sgd.) Wessels."
The Signal Corps had, in some way, connection with Manila,
and the next day I returned to Tayug, taking with me dispatches
which were in effect a reiteration of the former one, namely: "Do
not advance. Remain where you are and rest your horses." And


E






52


orders were, of course, obeyed, although it was thought at the time
to be a serious military blunder. In the two-week interval while
we "rested our horses” the Insurgent Army secured transportation
and left for parts unknown.
Later on, however, on information furnished us by a Filipino
guide, Janario Galot, and a carabao driver, Nicolas Fernandez—
the last named a deserter from General Aguinaldo’s army—it was
learned that General Aguinaldo, after his miraculous escape from
Tayug, had proceeded to Bayombong, stopping enroute only long
enough to bury, in a secluded spot, something like P150,000.
Now, after forty years have passed and gone, I will divulge a
little secret—one that I have never mentioned, or written about
before.
Troop "F” of the 3rd United States Cavalry, was not in Tayug at the time telegrams were received, telling us to remain in
the town, and to rest our horses, so I was called aside by my First
Sergeant, and secretly handed a letter, addressed to Captain George
A. Dodd, Commanding Officer of Troop "F” He told me to secure
a small pony, of which we always had several, take with me two
days ration, and proceed, secretly, to a place where the Captain, with
Troop F, was reported to be, and to hand over the letter to him.
But, in case I could not locate him, I was to destroy the letter and
not, under any circumstances, permit it to fall in the hands of any
other. I was also admonished to "keep my mouth shut.”"
It’s too long a story to be told at this time, but, accompanied
by the two guides, Galot and Fernandez, I finally located the Captain
and handed him the letter. He took it, read it over carefully, took
it to a fire, that was burning at the time, and destroying it. He
then thanked me for bringing it to him, and once again I was told
“to keep my mouth shut,” which I have done, until now I know,
for a certainty, that all the participants—except myself—are dead
and in their graves.
Bidding farewell to the Captain, and the two guides, Galot and
Fernandez, who, by the way, had been promised a good-sized reward if they located the treasure, (which they afterwards received),
I left them to the tender mercies of Captain Dodd, who had the reputation of being a hard disciplinarian. I returned to Tayug, thinking, perhaps, that I might get a call-down, but when I met the
Colonel, he only smiled and asked me “If I was able to catch any
rabbits?” I answered, "Yes, Colonel, I was able to catch one, and
a big one, but he afterwards escaped, and I don’t know where he
is now.” He understood exactly what I wanted to say. He was,
in many ways, a wonderful man.


53


Troop "F” guided by Galot and Fernandez, finally located the
exact spot where the treasure was buried, and, with cavalry sabers—
as there were no other tools available—unearthed the buried boxes,
twenty-four of them, loaded them on bull-carts, and departed for
San Fabian, which, they understood, was located somewhere on the
West coast.
But oh, what a terrible trip it was. The roads—such as they
were—almost impassable—it is not to be wondered at that at times
some of the boxes would fall off the bull-carts, and, striking the
ground real hard, would break wide open. I did not witness this
myself, and only know it from hearsay, but I do know that there
was, afterward, considerable Spanish gold—and even some Mexican
Pesos—among the soldiers, who unblushingly admitted where it
came from. They said that they would have taken more if it had’nt
weighed so much.
The twenty-eight boxes, reduced, so I was informed, to twentyfour, when it finally reached San Fabian, were loaded on a Naval
vessel, or commercial boat, I am not sure which, and brought to
Manila, never to fall in the hands of General Aguinaldo, or any
of his followers again. So all the sentimental nonsense and misleading statement that have been published regarding it should not
be given credence. This money was captured and confiscated, and
its capture, without a scintilla of doubt, shortened the life of the
Insurrection. I have sometimes wondered, however, just what would
have happened, if Colonel Wessels had not secretly taken the bit in
his teeth and disobeyed orders—for that’s what it really amounted
to. He helped, in a large way, to end the insurrection. May he—
and others like him—rest in eternal repose.
(To be continued next month)
Note—Our forces had strict orders against looting, that is, taking property
from the people. It may be argued that this was not looting—the money
having been captured. Of course the U.S. Military Government was the poorer
by what was lost. It has been stated by some of the men that the silver
pesos soon became so heavy that they spent them rather recklessly, or gave
them to the people.
The above incident happened on General Lawton’s advance north from
San Isidro through Cabanatuan to Tayug, which is east of Dagupan. (See
the map Island of Luzon, campaign No. 2.) The time was November, 1899.
At the same time General Wheaton captured San Fabian, just north of Dagupan, and moved east toward Tayug, marked campaign No. 3 on the same
map. General Lawton left Tayug, returned to Manila, in early December,
undertook another campaign north-east from Manila, and was killed at San
Mateo, north of Marikina.—Ed.


54


GOLD PLACERS
By C. H. MCILVAINE
THERE is no other metal on earth that has the glamour of gold.
 whether in the form of manufactured articles, gold coin or in
its raw state, it holds the same alluring charm for civilized people
of all nationalities. From the earliest records of human history
it has been regarded as the most precious metal. It has a peculiar
fascination for us all and effects those whose business it is to handle
it constantly, as much as it does those who seldom see it. Men
of all races gladly suffer indescribable hardships for it; steal for it;
kill for it; die for it!
At all places in civilized countries where gold is known to exist
in river gravels, it seems to be the dream and ambition of many to
find a bonanza placer where, for the effort of washing the gravel
and sand, they will recover enough gold, in a short time with a
minimum of labor and expense, to make them rich.
This idea seems to be particularly prevalent in Western people
recently arrived in the East where they become conscious of placer
mining by hearing it constantly talked about or by witnessing natives pan many of the streams for gold. Many of these people—
including mining men who should know better—have the idea that
they are in a "NEW" mining country and as such, the placers should
be exceptionally rich. A little delving into oriental history would
soon teach them that, the Far Eastern countries are the oldest mining
countries on earth and that placer mining in the East, has been
practiced for thousands of years by these people whose methods of
hand mining have never been equalled for efficiency by any race.
The placers of Sumatra, Java, Borneo, Celebes, Siam, Burma
and the Philippines, are known to have been fabulcusly rich but the
bonanza placers were all harvested some two thousand years ago
by Hindus, Malays and Chinese miners. The Chinese mined the
Philippine placers at least a thousand years ago and what they left,
the natives have been mining ever since. Wherever you may travel
in Far Eastern countries, you will find natives panning the streams
for gold but the quantity they glean from these streams is so small
that, their mining should be regarded as pastime instead of an occupation for livelihood. Were it not for the constant erosion of
the banks and benches along these rivers and the resorting of the
material, allowing the gold liberated to concentrate in the streams,
and replenish annually the gold recovered by the miners, the art
of panning would long since have been forgotten by the people living
in those regions.


In the Philippines, the Netherlands Indies and other Far Eastern
countries, rich commercial placers do exist. Many such are now
being exploited and many more will be found and developed into
dividend-paying mines but they will all be mined with modern
placer mining machinery on a big scale and there is very little possibility that any placers will be found in these countries that will
be called bonanza placers in the sense that they could be profitably
mined by hand methods as practiced by the bonanza mining of California and Alaska during the gold rush days or by the more efficient methods of the Chinese placer miners.
Throughout the history of gold mining, civilized man has found
bonanza placers only in regions up-to-then occupied by savage tribes
who, altho they may have known of the existence of the metal, had
no use for it in their scheme of life. This statement will hold true
thru all the ages of authentic history from the earliest times to the
present day.
When such places were first explored by civilized man (whether


56


Hindus, Malays, Chinese or Caucasians) and the rich gold deposits
discovered, gold rushes to those places occurred in a short time and
many of the First Comers became rich over night, as it were, and
the place, no matter how unknown or remote it may have been
before the discovery, became known and famous to all the world
in a short time.
Several famous gold rushes in new bonanza fields have
occurred in our own time. Notably, California, Alaska, Australia
and British New Guinea. At all of these places the conditions for
the discovery of new bonanza fields is proved, the country had been
continuously occupied by savage or semi-savage people and gold was
not discovered until the advent of civilized man at these places, as
the gold was on or near the surface and was the undisturbed accumulation of ages of natural erosion and sorting.
In bonanza fields such as these, all a man needed to win great
wealth, provided he struck a rich pocket, was a shovel, a crude sluicebox and a strong back. Many of the First Comers at these places
secured enough of the yellow metal to make them rich for life, but,
many others, lacking the rugged constitution and temperament to
withstand the privations and hardships of the mining camps, the
extremes of heat or cold, found death instead of riches. Many of
the boys of the Alaskan gold rush, froze to death. Some of the
pioneers in the New Guinea field were captured, cooked and eaten by
cannibals. Many of the prospectors in Australia met death at the
hands of the bushmen. Fever, disease and pestilence tcok their toll
in all the bonzana camps and when and if others are found, history
will repeat itself because the same environment will prevail.
All of the above mentioned bonanza placers were exceedingly
rich in gold yet, they were all quickly mined to a degree where
it was no longer profitable to mine the remaining gold by the crude
hand methods practiced in those camps. The old Eastern miners
employed more efficient methods and depleted the gold content of
the places they worked much more thoroughly than did the Caucasian miners because they were satisfied to work for much lower
wages. Also, many of the ancient placers were worked by slave labor.
The gold however, was not completely exhausted but what remained was too sparsely disseminated in the gravel to allow a paying recovery for the work necessary to mine and wash the quantity
it was possible to handle in a day’s work by the methods employed.
Also, the greater bulk of the metal was laid down under water or
overlaying strata and beyond the reach of the hand miners.


57


These reservoirs of placer gold which were inaccessible to the
old time hand miners, makes possible our present day mechanized
placer mines. The invention and use of excavating machinery capable of mining and washing huge quantities of low grade ore cheaply
enough to allow a fair profit to the operators, came into being soon
after the hand miners had depleted the accessible gold from the
modern bonanza fields. The history of modern gold dredging is a
constant procession of improvements in the machinery used and the
devices for catching and saving the coarse and fine gold obtained
in placers. Placer land of almost any topography may now be mined
by an efficient machine specially designed to mine that particular
type of deposit.
Modern gold dredges are equipped with replaceable bucket lips
for long life, stackers for transporting the stones to a safe distance
from the dredge, gold tables for catching and holding the gold and
jigs for recovering the very fine gold. They are powered by steam
or electricity from power plants on shore. They can successfully
operate at depths exceeding sixty feet and according to size, can
mine from 40,000 to 300,000 or more cubic yards of material per
month.
For dry land placers where floating dredges are not feasible,
there are many forms of dragline buckets, dipper excavators and
huge steam shovels. Where the topography precludes the use of
any of these machines, and where a sufficient head of water is obtainable, powerful hydraulic giants are used to mine the deposit and
hydraulic elevators are used to raise the material to levels which
will permit sluicing and the disposal of the tailings.
The stories and legends of men who became rich over night in
the bonanza fields of recent discovery and the glamourous accounts
of their exploits seems to persist in the public mind and has established the impression that, a placer is a poor man’s opportunity to
get rich quick with little or no capital investment or other preparation and that placers for the indigent hold a decided advantage
over lode mines in that, the money begins to come in as soon as
work commences.
In reality, nothing could be farther from the truth, in regions
long occupied by civilized man. The blocking out of a placer and
the acquisition of the necessary dredge or other type of mining
machinery, the power plant, machine shops, housing and the hundred
and one other items necessary before any mining commences, gene

58


rally exceeds the capital investment required for lode mines of equal
magnitude.
Modern placer mining is now and always will be legitimate
BIG BUSINESS. It is NOT a poor man’s enterprise. It has nothing to do with LUCK. Before any investment is made other than
the testing of the field, the value of the raw material, the cost of
production and the probable gain, are figured from reliable data to
a surprising degree of accuracy in the same way that other big
business ventures are launched.
That many new and profitable commercial placers will be found
and developed into paying mines is a certainty. The finding of
these will be a logical endeavor for intelligent prospectors and the
successful ones will be amply rewarded. When a prospective field
is found it should be well tested by drilling if possible, and all the
data as to available yardage, gold values, physical characteristics etc.,
should be complied in a comprehensive and convincing manner before an attempt is made to interest capital. Not only is convincing
proof necessary to secure capital for the project but, having the
proof, gives the prospector an advantageous position as regards
bargaining for his rightful share of the enterprise.
Bonanza placers should be regarded as phenomena with due
regard to the peculiar circumstances which prevented the discovery
of the gold until a late date by civilized man and not as something
possible to find in countries now civilized.
New bonanza fields will no doubt be discovered and it is possible that some who read this article will join the rush to the new
field. It is known that parts of Netherlands New Guinea, Tibet,
Siberia and other now little known and remote parts of the earth
contain gold in great quantities. The conditions for the discovery
of bonanza placers obtain in all of these places but the possibility
of bonanzas being discovered in civilized countries is almost nil.
The places mentioned have not been properly explored for mineral
wealth by reason of their inaccessibility, hostility of the natives,
disinclination of the present government authorities to permit exploration on reasonable terms or for other reasons.
When and if bonanza placers are discovered in any of these
countries, comparatively few men will reap the easy gold harvest
but the amount of gold they will recover, will be negligible as compared to the production of the mechanized mining which will follow
in their wake.


59


LITTLE LOST POP


He was lost!—not a shade of doubt of that;
For he never barked at a slinking cat,
But stood in the square where the wind blew raw:
With a drooping ear and a trembling paw,
And a mournful look in his pleading eye,
And a plaintive sniff at passer-by,
That begged as plain as tongue could sue:
“O, Mister! Please may I follow you?”
A lone wee waif of a tawny brown
Adrift in the roar of a heedless town.
Oh, the saddest of sights in a world of sin
Is a little lost pup with his tail tucked in.
Now he shares my board and he owns my bed,
And he fairly shouts when he hears my tread;
Then, if things go wrong, as they sometimes do,
And the world is cold and I am feeling blue,
He asserts his rights to assuage my woes
With a warm, red tongue and a nice, cold nose
And a silky head on my arm or knee
And a paw as soft as a paw can be.
When we rove the woods for a league about.
He’s as full of pranks as school boy let out;
For he romps and frisks like a three months' colt,
And he runs me down like a thunderbolt.
Oh the blithest of sights in the world so fair,
Is a gay little pup with this tail in the air!
-Arthur Guiterman.


Noon Time is Lunch Time
That’s the logical time to drop in at the
ASTORIA TEA ROOM
Exquisite Noon-Day Lunches
We Assure you of Irreproachable Service
f Delicious Pastry
Best of Refreshments
106 ESCOLTA
(Opposite Phil. Education Co.)
American & European Service





60


VETERAN OLDTIMER PASSES
We regret that the first month of this New Year brings a loss
to the Pioneers' Club in the death, at San Miguel de Mayumo, Bulacan
province, of Comrade Fred T. Lawrence.
Lawrence was a member of the 35th U.S.V., landed in Manila
November 6, 1899, saw service in Bulacan and Nueva Ecija, took
his discharge in the Islands, settled in San Miguel, principal scene
of his soldier service, first as a teacher in the Bureau of Education,
later to resign and open his own educational institution, the Biacna-bato High School in San Miguel.
No man, Filipino or American, has ever won so high a place
in the esteem and love of the people of San Miguel. Lawrence was
always on the front line for good government and order, and for
civic improvement. When he died, although entitled to burial in
the Veterans’ Plot at Cementerio del Norte, he wished to lie in the
San Miguel Cemetery.
At his funeral the whole town turned out to honor his memory,
and a large number of his friends and comrades went up from Manila. Comrade Lawrence was a credit to his regiment, an honor to
his country, and an adopted son of San Miguel de Mayumo. None
of the Americans who have remained these forty years in the Philippines will leave a finer record than our departed Oldtimer Lawrence.


“I wrote my name upon the sand
And trusted it would stand for aye.
But soon, alas, the refluent sea
Had washed my feeble line away.
1 carved my name upon the wood,
And after years returned again.
I missed the shadow of the tree
That stretched of old upon the plain.
The solid marble next my name
I gave as a perpetual trust.
An earthquake rent it to its base,
And now it lies o’erlaid with dust.
All those had failed; I was perplexed.
turned and asked myself, what then?
If I would have my name endure,
Ill write it on the hearts of men.”
Anonymous


61


LETTER FROM THE BOSOUE


Deer Editur—
I am sure glad that I liy in the provinc and not in Manilla. 1 day
not long ago I went don to see a frend who lives in nu Manila and
has a prety good car, so he sezs to me, lets tak a rid down to the
Piunear Club and eat a good jigs diner. So I sez O K an we start
out in his gac bugy. Cumin down Santay Mesa I seed they wuz
buildin somethin, an I askt Bill what’s that? He sez that iz a pasover so az nobody haz to stop fur the trane. Gud ide saz I, but I
bet yu darn fu of them runtz of horces ar goin to mak that graid.
They wil just slip an rol clen to the botum. Wel, sez Bil, it will
sure be a joly plac fur the kids on roler skats.
I wuz lukin fur the old kar barn by the Rowtunde but I se no
hide or hare of it, and ther iz anuther gaz stachun in same plac.
I sez how cum, wher they goin to keep the muls fur the stret cars?
Preti sune we cam to Keyapo and a cop sez yu go down thet
stret, so Bil droy that way, and nex cornir another cop sez down that
stret, an we folod the arows, turnin an turnin til we both wuz so
dizi it sur luked lik a Mary go round. An finuly when we had to
stop caz we wuz out of gac, we did nut hay no mor eyde wher we
wuz nor a rabut. And when we askt a cop he sez yu see them 2
rods, this one wil tak you to Mandy Lu Yun, and the other will take
you to Mary Kina an I sez to Bil to tak ani one no diference so long
az they wuz both good sports. But yu can bet yur botum doler we did
not brake no trafik rulz. The trafik rulz is wundrful an the cops smil
an salut, thinkin alredy maybe abot nex Chrismus. It sur must hev
cost the Chef of Pulic a lot of hard wurk, an hiz captins tu, so I ges
they neds a vacashun. An Bil sez whin they git to the Statz tu studi
trafik buzinez, they wil see that the cops ther tend to ther duti an
dont luz no tim wachin the numbers of the cars an doin fanci saluts.
Whin we gets back to Bils hous in nu manilla, we luks at the
engin an we sez the durnd thing wuz turnd plum aroun makin so
many cornirs beleve it or knot. Nex tim we goz to Manilla, sez
Bil, we goz in the buc, an we sur gits ther cauz I never seed no
polis nevr say nuthin to a no buc.


52


Yurz P.O.R.L.Z.
OLDTIMMER



OLDTIMERS' MAIL BOX

Comrade Frank M. Miller, (Co. M, 4th U.S.Inf.) Box 441, Atlantic
Beach, Florida, sends a list of the members of his company in the
States with whom he is in contact, asking that a copy of the Oldtimer
be sent to them. He wishes to see E. D. W. St. Claire again, and
would inform him of the death of their former comrade Frank S.
Ottis a retired Master Sergeant. He sends regards to all Oldtimers
in the Islands.

John T. Clark, Puerto Princesa, Palawan, renews and says he enjoyed the writings of Colonel Andreas, St. Claire and deBurgh. The
magazine Life recently pictured the "largest pearl ever found", with
a good likeness of the son of our member, Ira D. Cobb, son Cobb
being an explorer of the out-of-the-way corners of the Islands.

Lawrence Benton, veteran, member of Stotsenburg Camp, Manila,
writes from 2255 Camden Ave., Los Angeles, and states that he
waits each issue of the Oldtimer with "pleasurable anticipation". He
wants more of the Mail Box feature, which we shall certainly give
him if comrades and oldtimers in the Islands and States will send
us letters.

Conrad Neubert, (a, 10th U.S.Inf.) writes that he holds memories of
Palawan, where he served, and enjoys the magazine. Box 98, Mansfield, Ohio.

The Oldtimer sends its copies to some of the units of the American
forces now on duty in the Islands. The recent letter from Commander M. B. Arnold, U.S.Navy, on the letter-head of U.S.S. Black
Hawk, acknowledges receipt of recent copies sent for the men.

Miss Theresa, Ericksen, "Little War Nurse of the Minnesota", sends
her Christmas greetings from the Minnesota Soldiers’ Home where
she is living in retirement, but by no means in inactivity.

W. D. Rogers, Commander of the 38th U.S.V. I, Association, Lexington, Kentucky, writes us a good letter about the service of the regiment in the Philippines, and we are asking him for a more complete history for the series of the stories of the regiments to follow later.


63


Each time we receive the magazine "Foreign Service” published
by the Veterans of Foreign Wars, we sigh and hope for the time
to come when we can afford to print something as good as that.
Text and pictures, it is a fine job, and we are tempted to copy some
of its articles. But the Oldtimer has its own field, and will stay
within its limits, which are the Philippines, past and present. It
is a large field and there is plenty of good pickings in it for years
to come. There are hundreds of good stories of the Island campaigns that have never been published, and we hope to get many
of them before the oldtimers pass.

Our lively contemporary, Bamboo Breezes, published by the Navy
Yard men at Cavite, tells us a recent issue "How Cavite got its
name," referring, of course, to the town where Navy activity centers.
But there is also a Cavite Province, and unfortunately, this has
gotten a "name” from recent newspaper reports, that is not so
good from the standpoint of law and order. This Cavite province
has, since 1898, been a sore spot in Philippine affairs. The outlaw
element has never been entirely suppressed, and gets out of hand
periodically. We wonder when the patience of the Philippine Commonwealth Government will be exhausted, and the Constabulary sent
there to make a real clean-up. It is certainly not going to be an
easy job.

The 43rd Regiment U.S.V. Association gets out its regular Bulletin
which is edited by Bob Mason, and runs into pages full of Philippine
experiences. In one letter, from Comrade Wm. H. Kuhlmann, memtion is made of the organization of the Brigade Scouts, attached
to and operating in Central Luzon, in connection with the 2nd Division under Gen. MacArthur. The most known Scout Commanders


SMOKE


EL DRIENTE
“Ghe CManila Cigar


64


were Burr and Batson, the first with scouts selected from several
of the U.S.V. and Regular Regiments, the second with the famous
Macabebes, of Pampanga Province. We shall have something to
say on both these Scout organizations as soon as official records in
Fort Santiago can be gone into. And we shall not forget Scout
Young who lost his life in a fight on the north advance.

“National Defense” a monthly publication of the Regular Army-NavyMarine Corps, devotes most of its space and energy to getting recognition for the “regular" veterans and their families, who have
retired after service since 1928. That is another pension angle which
we oldtimers know very little about. It is difficult to know where
to draw a line between veterans of war and veterans of peace military service, but when added up, it makes a mighty good argument
for peace—the kind the world needs today, so that large armies
and navies can be reduced to their lowest terms. Not counting the
cost of war, the cost of any adequate program of defense, figured
in outlay on the active forces plus care of retired veterans, is getting to be more than any nation can bear.



The Mindanao Herald, published in Zamboanga, is a weekly, and
a real newspaper. Its latest number tells of the visit of our new
American High Commissioner Francis B. Sayre, to this important
southern island. At Lanao some 1,000 of the 20,000 "squatters" on
the U. S. Army Reservation paraded and asked that the land they
occupy be turned over to them. And that is just one of the many
knotty problems the A.H.C. is called on to settle. Uncle Sam is
a good fellow, and if the Military Reservation wil stand the strain,
at least until 1946, the question may solve itself.


KRIEDT PRINTING COMPANY
Printers: Bookbinders: Engravers
Bulletin Bldg., Calle Evangelista
P. O. Box 859
Phone 2-29-59








65



Ready Remarks
SMILES
by



Hank: "Did you enjoy the circus?”
Bill: “You bet, and ever since I saw
that hippopotamus, I have been better
satisfied with my own shape.”
Father: “Yes, my boy, I’m a selfmade man."
Son: “Gee, pop, that’s what I like
about you. You always take the blame
for everything.
k
“You say this woman shot her husband with this pistol and at close
range?” asked the coroner of the eye
witness to the colored tragedy.
"Yassuh."
"Are there powder marks on his
body?'
“Yassuh. Dass why she shot him.”
Officer: “What’s the idea of driving
that truck so fast—do you think this
highway is a race track? Haven’t you
got a governor on this thing?”
Negro Driver: “Nausuh, boss, the
Governor is back at the capitol; that’s
fertilizer you smells.
*X
"You look all in today, Bill. What’s
the trouble?”
Bill: “Well, I didn’t get home until
after daylight, and I was just undressing when my wife woke up and said,
"Aren’t you getting up pretty early?'
In order to save an argument I put
on my clothes and came down to the
office."
X
He was sitting at the bar, downing
one after another and laughing boisterously. Every so often, as he mumbled to himself, he would hold up his
hand in protest. Finally the bartender’s curiosity got the better of him.
“What are you doing?” he asked. "I’m


Radagftifowuik


The cleverest
cooks prefer
electricity
RENT A


Meralco
Electricity
Costs Less


66


telling myself jokes,” was the reply.
“But why the hand in the air?” “Oh,
that’s when I stop me if I’ve heard it.”
*
Mary had a little lamb,
Given by a friend to keep.
It followed her around until
It died from want of sleep.
And then there is the one about a
tourist who was asking a lot of questions about a town and the oldest resident was having a good time giving
the answers.
“How about your water supply—
what precautions do you take against
infection?"
“Well, first of all, we boil it.”
“That’s good."
“Yes, and then we filter it.”
"Splendid.”
“And then," continued the old man,
"we drink beer.”





Independent
Shoe Shop

114 Echague, Manila, P. I.
T. G. HENDERSON


Proprietor
S


Miners Boots, all heights

p and sizes carried in stock.
Hungarian Hob Nails
A Rivetted Calks
Neetsfoot Oil
Rawhide Laces
Everything fon the men that
seel the gold.
Write for price list.
P. O. Box 2641—Tel. 2-21-77



RENTOCAY
CAFE
WE TREAT YOU RIGHT!


JEFF MOSBY
Proprietor


Put Your Feet
On Our Brass Rail, Boys


Phone 2-38-26


318 Estero Cegado






Quality Work
WIGHTMAN PRINTING COMPANY
214 Quinta Bldg.. 574 Echague Int.
Tel. 2-22-94
*
Expect the best in printing—and at reasonable cost.



67





Whyte & Mackay
i
SPECIAL
SCOTCH WHISKY
15
SOLD AT YOUR BAR


Y


 ELENDED SCOTCH
WHISRY
E
OV
TEN
PR
BRAR 
010
A
Sok paarstanpto 37
UEithao
GLASGO
“toS.. OG (NURO
Gule IRL TUmCMLAN2
Guaranteed at least
ten years old"
SMITH, BELL & Co. Ltd.
SOLE DISTRIBUTORS
FOR
THE PHILIPPINES



THE  
MAGAZINE
NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS
If there is a cross in
this square, you will
know that your subscription will expire with the
next number. So, in order not to
miss any number, renew at once.
Send by Postal Order.
In Philippines P2.00
In U. S. A.
$1.25
Foreign
$2.00
Please do not send us U. S. checks,
which cannot be cashed in Manila. Send
postal money order.


THE PIONEER'S CLUB
President Col. H. R. ANDREAS
Vice-Pres. ... G. L. RICKARD
Treasurer . . . A. E. TATTON
Secretary R. B. BLACKMAN
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Col. H. R. ANDREAS
G. L. RICKARD
A. E. TATTON
R. B. BLACKMAN
MEMBERSHIP COMMITTEE
T. J S. B. STEVENS, Chairman
J. C. COWPER.
Member
ALBERT M. EASTHAGEN
HOUSE COMMITTEE
B. H. BROWN. ... Chairman
W D. WOODROOF . . Member
J. F. MADDY . . . . . Member
AUDITING COMMITTEE
T. J. S. B. STEVENS Chairman
Member
E. A. GEBERT


68





Iondon — Manila


Marner, Bacnes &
Co., 1td.


Ilnilo


Cebu


Barolod





GRANDMA GAVE US MUTTON SUET
NOW MODERN SCIENCE BRINGS US
Penetruting
PENETRO
Made With a Base of Old-fashioned Mutton Suet Containing Menthol,
Camphor, Methyl Salicylate, Turpentine and Thymol
Sole Distributors
THE PHILIPPINE NET & BRAID MFG. CO., INC.
367 JUAN LUNA 369
Phone 4-95-85 and 4-95-63
P. O. Box 320





 



TEL. 2-32-74
HESS CO ZEITLIN
108 CRYSTAL ARCADE
Members Manila Stock Exchange
STOCKS & BONDS BROKERAGE INSURANCE REAL ESTATE



69





H
 Smoke


Chestertielo


CIGARETTES


CThey Satisfy


LIGGETT & MYERS TOBACCO CO.
MANILA





Gresh up
HVITHY


Sparkling
with
Lest
JSEVEN
UP
At all
bars, hotels, clubs, offers a fine refreshing beverand
age for that
restaurants



O
" o   9
O o 0


or direct from—


“tired” feeling.


ISUAN, INC.
Tel: 5-73-06 — ——
We Deliver



70


LUZON CAFE


MERCHANTS' LUNCH
and


CAL. COOLIDGE
Prop.
Tel. 2-14-28
SHORT ORDERS



THE SANITARY STEAM LAUNDRY CO. (NC.)
Phone
gP
2-44-41
AD
The Sign of Cleanliness





GOOSE'
Mgr.
305 Echague


P. O. Box 529
MANILA, P. I.


LAUNDRY * DRY-CLEANING * DYEING



That home and garden which you always
dreamed of—
San Juan Heights
is the best place for it.
oan guan neigRIsLO, IC.
680 Ave. Rizal P. O. Box 96! Tel. 2-15-0!
Manila


71


calamba ougar rstate
Sugar, Desiccated Coconut, Coconut Oil, Copre
and Industrial Alcohol.


Factories
Office



Canlubang, Laguna
Moserco Building, Manila.


*



OR more than Thirty years constant and sincere
devotion to the eyesight welfare of those who come
to us has established a firm relationship between our
patrons and ourselves.
Ever the best in quality but never
higher in price.


“Respite rom Office
cAway Go Summer "Delights!
Via MRR
Railways * Highways x Waterways
THE WAY OF THE NATION


SUMMER draws nigh, you now plan your vacation. You have the
choice of good resorts: Baguio for a cool sojourn, Banawe for wonderful landscapes, Tagaytay for a delightful week-end, Pagsanjan for
a thrilling adventure, Legaspi for a pilgrimage to beauty, Zamboanga
for an exciting experience, Dansalan for a life of color and drama.....
GRAND VACATION IN A PERFECT SETTING!
You reach them on the MRR way
ON WHEELS AND KEEL OF COMFORT
. . . . Air-conditioned expresses for Baguio and Legaspi....ss Mayon
to Iloilo, Zamboanga and Cebu....ss Bicol from Zamboanga to
Cotabato.... Mindanao Motor Line to Dansalan and Mindanao points....


General Information
Tel. 4-98-61


Manila Railroad Enmpany


Traffic Manager
Tel. 4-70-57


The National Transport System
Main Office: 943 Azcarraga, Manila, Philippines


Faithful to their
Reputation


Alhambra Cigar & Cigarette Mig. Co.


31 Tayuman


MANILA


P. O. Box 209


VOAS A AR E


ADBY AND FOR THEBENEFIT OF
NEERS' CLME GE MANILA


UNKNOWN
There are songs enough for the heroes,
Who dwell on the heights of fame;
I sing of the disappointed,
Of one who has missed his aim.
I sing with a tearful cadence,
Of one who stands in the dark,
And knows that his last, last arrow
Has bounded back from the mark.
For the hearts that break in silence,
With a sorrow all unknown;
For those who need companions,
Yet must walk their way alone.


VOL. II
No. 12
OCT. 35
TWENTY CENTAVOS


VMSa

AAIA
Pu ta

E
N
AA


P
S
E
AVE
(o
Ag,
AWi,

M
S


A
A

A
ROBERT
OWHISKE
-SCOTCH
2
AGENTS A4
SOLF
*



KUENZLEL STREIFE INC.
343 T. PIPIN. MANILA. TEL-23936.
BRANER.AG ISRAC PERAL. . TEL.C-I7-62..


3


DDarner, Barnes & Co., Ltd.
LONDON—NEW YORK—MANILA
ILOILO
CEBU
BACOLOD
92
Exports
Imports
INSURANCE
Machinery and Shipping


amng aaala
sa


fixed flavor
MAKES IT
"THE HAM
WHAT AM


 The popularity of “The Ham What Am” can be attributed to
its fine, unchanging flavor and tenderness. Always
good— it always satisfies.
Dealers Everywhere have Armour's
Fixed Flavor Star Ham
Armour and Company
nma
"I!
magngrpanenan:
manppa
mnmpanga
PSi
"
¡AMARAARARARAMEEIREERRHRBR
unbMiMMaadinutuLRL
3


E

CHATACEAEIIMMMILAMALAMAS


AALTNE
TRUSI COMIANA


PLAZA GOITI
MANILA



la


Mai


A


E

--
EIMAMEAEESCMERMMAEELILEMAALILELETCEMMELEM


FREE


PORTABLE ELECTRIC
WATER HEATERS


FREE


your grocer
HOWIl
ASK
Hot water in any room where there is an
electric light socket. RIGHT WHERE
IT IS NEEDED! Get a heater free!
BUY ISUAN
DRY GINGER ALE or NATURAL
(SODA) MINERAL WATER


NO INCREASE IN PRICES
The Best Soda Water in the Philippines
because it is a Natural Mineral Water


5-65-62


5-73-06


The BEST Mixers in the P. I.
You Feel Good Next Morning


ISUAN, Ino


NI
M
A


Elamuanlanla




LBAAZDEAAREAEDAMAMAALRARRARRA


OLDTIMERS
TOOT YOUR HORN
CLEARLY AND MOVE OVER
WHILE YOU TELL
A GOOD ONE'


Smoke


Chesterfield
CIGARETTES
CThey Satisfy
LIGGETT & MYERS TOBACCO CO., INC.
MANILA


p"e.


anualaaiaiaaialiaiaiailiailalilanalil
THE
SANITARY
STEAM
LAUNDRY CO.
(INCORPORATED)




paaaiiailgaamalbiilkimmaig
E


The Sign of Cleanliness
LAUNDRY
DRY.CLEANING
DYEING
MANILA. P. I.
PHONE 2-35-29
uaaaaan
nand







F.


Houston Rubber Co., Inc.
548 Rizal Ave.
Manila.
Distributors of
GOODYEAR
TIRES
1.50 x 21......... ₱10.12 E
4.75 x 19......... 10.80
4.75 x 20......... 11.60
all other sizes at lowest prices.
ACME
BATTERIES
13 Plate ......... P12.75
I year guarantee
J. H. MURPIY. SR.
General Manager.


SAUSAGES AND ASSORTED COLD MEATS


New Supplies: States Vegetables and Fruit
International Cold Stores


116 Echague


Phone 2-27-86






Put Your Feet
On Our Brass Rail, Boys


Kentucky Cafe s
WE TREAT YOU WHITE!
JEFF MOSBY
Proprictor


318 Estero Cegado

P
ih


uilanialiaagiainailanilanianilalalalaaam


INDEPENDENT!
SHOE SHOP
114 Echague
P. O. Box 2641—Tel. 2-21-77
Keep your feet off your
S
mind by wearing
Independent Shoes
Ma de to Order
Fit Guaranteed
Only the very best
American leather used.
8
T. G. HENDERSON


Proprietor


Dee C.
Chuan & Sons, Inc.
MANUFACTURERS & DEALERS IN ALL KINDS OF
PHILIPPINE LUMBER



PO. Box 474
Cable
4-88-26 -
Address
16-34 Soler Street
Tels.
!"
1-96-83
Manila, P. I.
CHUAN
LARGE STOCKS ALWAYS ON HAND
Operating:
Philippine Lumber Manufacturing Company
i
MANUFACTURERS & EXPORTERS OF PHILIPPINE HARDWOODS
SAWMILLS AT CATABANGAN, CAMARINES SUR
Codes Used:
Cable Address:
Bentley s ACME
MAHOGANY
2




mmaag
aagaagmalaaaanasaban an aamaalalaaaal alaaaan alnaaa
aiaaa


Tumaniaanan


OLDTImERS
OURSELDES
Me
want
and expect
the
OLDTIMERS"
PATRONAGE.
I. BECK, Inc.
ESCOLTA


CHRISTMAS CARDS
We carry an assortment of
Christmas Cards with typical
Philippine Views:
Photographic views in water
color. Shell, bamboo and
buri Xmas Cards hand
painted in oil.


Drop in at
Manila Photo Suppiy, Inc.
159 Escolta




taliaiaaiiaiaiaaanaiaaaagilaaiaaaaaalaailaaaiaaaaanumanl iaaaaaaaaa aa aaaaaalauaraliaaadinanaamaiataaiaalimi
Pirruaataagagaaagaaaaaaagra
EiniaalialaliiiiiliiauaAmaRaAEEEEAaniII


GOLDEN BULL


London
Dry Gin
Here’s the drink to
give you that flying
start and keep yon
fresh any day!
Ask for it at your
bar or get a bottle
from nour grocer!
Phone 2-27-92 for a
case of ang kind of
quality liqnor!


Pickayouup!


ELIZALDE G CO.
MUELLE DE LA INDUSTRIA. MANILA
Iloilo Cebu Gubat Sorsogon Hongkong Shanghai San Francisco—New York
-
haaaaaa aaaaaaaaaanaaanalaaanagaaagiaimanamaiiairinmimamimias


AlHCKICAII
DLLIIER


A MONTHLY MAGAZINE PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PIONEERS' CLUB
OF MANILA, P. I.
DET. '35


Published at No. 224 Calle Chica, Manila.
Edited by E. V Bartholomai


VOL. II


Entered as Second Cluss Mail Matter at the
Manila Post Office on Jan. 4. 1934.


No. 12


President . . A. W. PRAUTCH
Vice-Pres.. L. BENTON
Treasurer T. J. S. B. STEVENS
Secretary E. V. BARTHOLOMAI
Master-at-Arms PETE WILSON
House Committee
J. T. MADDY ... . Chairman
E. V. BARTHOLOMAl Member
.. Member
P E. MCGUIRE


During the past year many of
our members, due to many
causes, have become delinquent
and it has been very hard to keep
them coming to the club due to
their embarrasment, but this is
not as it should be, surely there
are enough of us who are in better
circumstances and who are willing to lend a helping hand by
making small donations or contributions to keep the club from
going into the red.


Membership Committee
JOHN W RATLIFF . Chairman
T. J. S. B. STEVENS . Member
BRUCE RICHARDSON Member
Auditing Committee
T. G. HENDERSON . Chairman
H. SMITH
Member
T. MASTEN
Member
P2 a Year
20 Cts a Copy
U.S. and Foreign $2
Make all payments and address all
communications to “The American
Oldtimer” Pioneers' Club, 224 Calle
Chica, Manila.


If you are not a member, you
should be, and if we could only
interest you enough to have you
call at the club to see the good
work that we are doing, you
would not hesitate to sign on the
dotted line.


DOING HIS BIT!


9


HOUND DOGGIN.
Dealing of trips made to difficult places.


By Colonel
O


E
way, away to the north of us,
A like small flyspecks on a huge, rumpled window pane of cecan, lie some
MEA
little dots of islands, isolated, rugged
and foigotten. And indifferent peo
ple nicely surrounded by comforts
de 
have permitted them to lie there
storm ridden, often miserable and
never remembered. A mere look at
the shore lines tells to an observing
and understanding intelligence that
these shores are ever lashed by
storms-currents and terrific tide rips.
An examination of the foliage also
tells the story of terrific typhoons and
strong monsoons. Ordinary trees do not survive and only the most hardy
and tough woods such as the Camegon and other hard woods dare even rear
their crests to meet the storms that howl. Gnarled, crooked and broken they
reach out their tortured limbs to the sky, not in entreaty nor supplication, but
like the inhabitants, in mute defiance to the winds that blow and the calamities
that follow.
Cliffs sheer from top to bottom, bare of any vegetation, eroded with
gullies and huge caverns and ridges where the eternal tides and waves bit
and lashed. Those are the little islands to the north of us known as Babuyan
Islands and the Batanes. All the vicious winds that blow in these latitudes
appear to come from the southeast and move toward the northwest. The
Balintang and Bashi Channels are the "Neck of the Bottle” from which the
cyclonic winds must pour the typhoons into the hard bitten and storm ridden
China Sea. Luzon, long and narrow with high mountains from north to south
appears to help the trend of typhoons toward these islands, because few are
the typhoons that blow that do not exit the Philippine Archipelago across
the Babuyan Islands, Balintang Channel and Batanes Islands.
It has been the privilege of the writer to make two trips by airplane
and steamer to every one of those islands excepting Babuyan itself and over
that island he flew in questing circles with other planes in a search for landing
fields, of which none exist. An island all topsy turvy that, with its saucy
active little volcano on one end. It spat sandy lava at me one day but I
was well away from it and laughed as the lumps exploded on landing on


10


the slopes of the cone. We left Nichols Field on our first trip on July 17
with a typhoon one hundred miles east of Legaspi. The path of the typhoon
was northwest according to the report, consequently Major General Parker.
commanding the Department of the Philippines ordered our take-off, as we
would be running away from the trend of the typhoon at 120 miles per hour
while the forward progress of a typhoon is usually not more than eight
miles per hour.
The farther north we flew the better the weather became, as expected.
Landed at Vigan, we were able to take stock of the members of the party,
because it was just a little difficult at Nichols Field in the grey of morning
to determine who were and were not going along of the large groups hurrying
about.
We found, of course—Major General Parker, Vice-Governor General Hayden,
Colonel Albert Sneed, Colonel Charles Livingston, Major Marty Stenseth,
Captains Maxwell, Cote, Wells and Lieutenants Morrill and Peterson and Dr.
Harland Bartlett, a botanist. Then I.
We refueled at Vigan and took off before lunch for Dalupiri—a flat island
north of Luzon, on which there is a landing field. Here we expected to find
the Lighthouse Tender “Canlaon" which however was conspicuous by its absence.
We later learned the skipper had heard of the typhoon away at Legaspi several
hundred miles south and had made a beerline for safety.
Dalupiri is a long narrow island lying just in sight of Luzon on a clear
day, immediately north of it. To the east across a nasty tide swept channel
is Fuga also flat and grassy.
Dalupiri is said to be owned by a wealthy Filipino from Manila, who
maintains in the single small village of the island a cattle station. This
station is operated and maintained by a Veterinarian educated and raised in
the United States. The people live in thatched houses in a scattered village
of not more than thirty shacks. They constitute the herders and cowboys
that tend the huge flocks of good looking cattle that raced over the ranges
as we circled for a landing. In the beginning they did not like the huge
Dragon Flies buzzing over them, but very soon quieted down and looked at
us Hoating about above them, probably wondering why, with such a cyclonic
howl overhead, there was no pelting rain and hammering wind.
We remarked the sturdiness of the people. Quite a number of them were
above the average height for a Filipino and all demonstrated by their tanned
and sunblackened features they were open air people used to roughing it. While
we were there several came in, riding very good looking ponies, and they sat
them bare back and bare footed and while some of the ponies cavorted and
pranced their dislike and suspicion of the planes, the riders, almost a part
of the horses, made them do their will.
The whole population were out at the landing field about a quarter of a
mile from the village before we landed. They remained on the side lines near
the fences and gave us a chance to land, which is more than we can say of
some of our more enlightened brothers.
The Vet, whose name I very regretfully do not remember came out and
welcomed us and I handed him papers for the last week brought for the occasion while others of the party gave him some magazines. We there ate the
lunches we had very fortunately brought with us although we had been told
it would not be necessary, as the “Canlaon" had been scheduled to be there
and meet us. All I had brought was my three customary fresh sliced Pine

11


12


apples but I soon had good customers aplenty. Fried chicken—eggs—plenty of
stuff. Fair exchange is no robbery.
The failure of the “Canlaon," of course, completely upset our plans because
part of the expedition was to proceed to several islands in the Batanes group
away to the North across the Balintang Channel where we were to examine
afoot, certain fields or rather localities which had appeared good prospects
from the air during a reconnaissance made by General Parker, Captain Maughan
and others in March.
We were, of course, rather upset by this defection, so General Parker
and Colonel Sneed in one plane and Lieutenant Peterson and myself started
dragging the northern Luzon coast line miles and miles away—to Aparri, and
the shores of Fuga, Camiguin and Calayan islands to see whether he were
hidden away in some of the coves. We did not find him, so we returned to
Dalupiri and the entire expedition then returned by plane to Vigan, disappointed.
General Parker and Governor Hayden, in spite of the terrific day they had
had in the air returned to Nichols Field. reaching there after nightfall and began
to radio for the “Canlaon" which was found nicely snugged away miles and
miles from Dalupiri—east at the Port San Vicente. The rest of us remained
at Vigan.
On the 18th General Parker and Governor Hayden again arrived with news
that the “Canlaon" had been contacted and would be at Dalupiri upon our
arrival so we again took off from Vigan and arrived at Dalupiri shortly after
noon where we found her awaiting us. Skipper said "typhoon at Legaspi", so
he had run for shelter.
We reached Ibajos at daylight next morning, July 19th, and made an
early landing. Captain Cote reached an exploring foot for a piece of coral
that appeared to be only about six inches under water. It was much deeper
so, as his legs were not telescopic he failed to reach the rock and faded over
into the brine and in the mix-up rather painfully gashed his knee which was
not so good in view of the fact that we had several miles of hiking to do.
Captain Wells, not knowing Cote had hurt himself, was gleefully watching him flounder about, when he took a backward step with the same result
which did not appear to depress Cote at all.
If there was anything of Ibajos left to discover I cannot imagine where
it could have been. We made a very very thorough ground examination of
every possibility and laid out and measured two entirely practical fields.
Ibajos, like Dalupiri was devoid of trees. It was rolling grazing country
for cattle of which there were several large herds, which upon our arrival
decided to depart from our immediate neighborhood-which they did. A few
mama cows whose calves could not keep up with the herd, lagged behind and
we took care not to crowd them, remembering something about “The female
of the species having sharper horns than the Bull." Anyways that quotation
is the way we remembered it, consequently there were no-customers for the
mama cows.
Ibajos does not have one single forest tree. Not one. There had been
a coconut grove of fifty or sixty trees but the typhoons of last October and
December beheaded them. The herders informed us they had not had a steamer
there for more than a year. They knew nothing about Sakdals, N.R.A. and
by golly had not even heard of Hitler or Mussolini. What a place!
We had brought water with us which was fortunate because there is no
drinkable water on Ibajos if one has any regard whatever for germs, bugs,


13


cte., which are said to do the Human Being harm. Only four families live
on Ibajos and they are cowboys or herders of huge herds of cattle which
find abundant grazing on the rolling hills of the island. These people live in
small huts on the beach where they had also dug a few little holes in the
light overburden of earth which covers the lava rocks underlying same, into
which secped a meager supply of water they drink. The animals depend upon
rain water and it is said they also drink sea water although I did not personally see them do it. The herders however stated they did.
We here secured some watermelons we thought were green because the
insides were white instead of red. Our botanist, Dr. Bartlett, who was as
indefatigable in search of flora as we were of landing fields, was much intrigued
over this melon which we found perfectly edible, sweet and ripe although from
appearances it was entirely undeveloped.
A swim in the beautifully clear water over a coral bottom refreshed us
and back we went to the “Canlaon" where we found the Captain in a blue
funk over the prospects of having to stay in those waters overnight. On
the opposite side of the channel lies a high rugged mountain with unfriendly
shores and very steep mountain sides. The channel is a mill race running
several miles per hour. On the shore above the reach of the waves snugged
two villages which from the “Canlaon" made one think of medieval Europe
with its Causeways of stone, narrow passages and stone embattlements. We
tried to get ashore to photograph one as such a village, so isolated, promised
some very rare scenes, but after an experience with the breakers enroute to
shore it was decided to return to the ship which was done.
Up anchor then for the town of San Vicente on the opposite side of Sabtang.
where a landing was made by General Parker and Vice-Governor Hayden in
a small boat. The former secured a horse and rode to the top of the crest
and back—quite a feat—but found no landing field. I wanted to go ashore
also to photograph the place but as a huge sea was running and I am a very
poor swimmer, General Parker instructed me to remain abroad. I threw a
smokescreen by looking disappointed, and don’t know whether I got away with
it or not, but I really was not aching to go through those waves because there
was a really bad sea running outside and the breakers appeared very vicious
from the deck of the “Canlaon."
The moment the General and the Vice-Governor General left the “Canlaon,"
the Skipper began to suffer from an ailment which caused him to fidget and
walk the deck scratching his head and rubbing his hands and rolling his eyes,
while he discoursed fluently, constantly and tirelessly about the sea currents;
tide rips and unhospitable shores of this group and the bad records of past
years sea tragedies of these waters.
Came aboard at last the General and a Lieutenant Benzon of the Constabulary, Provincial Commander from Basco who more than ever upset the sea
Captain by stating the sea we were having was nothing for the Batanes and
that he could make a very safe landing at Mahatao six and a half kilometers
below Basco or an absolutely quiet landing at Contra Costa, about three kilometers from Basco on the opposite side of the island. Much rumbling and
shaking of head—"bad waters” "many drowned” "no harbors.”
It was decided we would go to Mahatao where we made a perfectly safe
landing although I will confess we had a few bad minutes in the small boat
while we were loading from the “Canlaon.”


14


2
.

3
2

E
3
CO

2

*
5
2
2

E
-

S
2



Ashore we found a large assemblage of people awaiting us. Rugged—sturdy—
sunburned every one of them. I shook hands with many school girls and school
boys and was greeted in good English and in many cases, by their Elders, in
very good Spanish. One of the things I noted while shaking hands was that
they did it, instead of sticking out a stingy paw to be felt for and grabbed at.
They really took hold and shook hands as though they meant to do it, and not
as though they rather expected us to lift their hands to be kissed.
More startling than this, however, was the fact that darn good looking
young boys and girls had calloused hands. Our stay was too short to learn
why, but it was a certainty that no one worth while at Mahatao was a "Never
Swent.” I found out later the “why” of the calloused hands.
Our party was larger than anticipated or horses more scarce than our
requirements so it took some time to gather horses for us. Night was approaching rather rapidly as it usually does along around six o’clock, and the
Batanes offered no exception to the rule. Several men came riding into town
from the hills out of mere curiosity to see a steamer, than which there is
nothing more rare—excepting an airplane.
A special feature of these arrivals was that the Governor without any
ado told the owners of the horses they were wanted for a ride to Basco—and
presto, we had the horses and the owners had their bare feet and SHANK'S
Mare to walk on and they appeared glad to do it.
Now Mahatao is a very nice, clean, neat little town nested away in a cove
on the western shore of Batanes Islands. Has a quiet Spanish Priest, nice
church and well kept streets. Many Luzon towns could. take lessons from
Mahatao and Basco. It is connected to the south with nothing excepting a
hostile coast and some cattle trails while to the north it is connected by an
unmettled and unsurfaced road six and one half kilometers long (much longer
if one is tired) cut through the sheer sides of the mountains and precipices
from Mahatao to Basco. During the few moments left before nightfall we
walked along this beautiful road and saw the waves dashing over the rocks
below us and it was beautiful spray leaping high against the cliffs in the
fresh breeze—one of the most beautiful sights I have ever seen but after night
fell with no light the sound of the breakers below us did not give the same
kind of a thrill the sight of them had and the only way we could keep in
contact with each other was by the man in front keeping a cigarette lighted.
We saw the “Canlaon’s” lights scooting for the South. We did not have sufficient horses to go around so every one of us including General Parker and
Governor Hayden took turns of ten minutes on a horse and ten minutes walking. We were all of us mighty tired after having walked about twelve miles
on Ibajos, although I would have sworn at the time I was doing the last part
of it, it was twenty miles, but ignoring my feet and legs and consulting the
map, I found one would have to Merry Go Round quite a lot to do it—anyways
my feet said twenty miles and they were what I had to go by. We had to
keep up a constant conversation each with the man ahead of him and behind
in order not to lose contact and walk off that blessed precipice. There were
several detours around slides which were not joyous things in the dark.
To add to the pleasure of the trip it began to rain. Not just one of
those nice little bit of foggy rains, but a Rain. No Liquid Sunshine about
that rain, as it was night. It worked at the job of raining and did a good


16


job. No one could kick about that rain because no one should kick at a job
well done.
Now I had two fine 1800-foot flashlights. Nice five-battery flashlights.
Harry Morgan himself had sold them to me and assured me they would throw
a beam 1800 feet. I had two but they were no good to me that night because
they did not work. They were nicely snugged away in my flying kit which
was some place ahead or behind on a sledge being pulled by a bull. I think it
was a bull. I am not sure. Those flashlights did not work. You see when
we got ashore we did not know we would be delayed so long at Mahatao and
our baggage had been loaded on little narrow sledges which were dragged by
bulls—at least Beeves, so my flashlights were some place along that road and
I surely wished for them.
Suddenly from some place ahead came a shout, "look out for the ditch"
and about that same time some one produced a flashlight. It had come from
Basco and not long afterwards, some one from behind overtook us and he
also had a flashlight.
The ditch they talked about went down the middle of the road and was
about 2 fect wide and at places from three to four feet deep. At places it had
caved in through the lapse of time, it was not so deep. It had been dug
the middle of the road for the new water system but I guess they forgot to
work on it after they had dug the ditch.
Captain Wells who was suffering from a lame knee and riding a very
small horse gave his animal a little too much right rudder and immediately
made a beautiful wing slip into the canal where it was about four feet deep.
He brought the horse to the bottom of the ditch in a perfect four point landing
but he failed, before doing so to raise his own landing gear and both his
legs were jammed against the sides of the ditch while he was still astride
his horse.
Captain Wells being accustomed to flying the Amphibian should not have
been caught unawares like that, but should have had his landing gear hoisted
up out of the way. We all of us went back and eventually got Captain
Wells extricated and he was only a little less heavy than the horse which
docile little beast remained just as he fell, perfectly supine and quiet while
we hoisted him out of the canal or ditch. Never once did he embarrass us
by lashing out a foot or leg but he just laid quiet while we did the work,
and once on the road again and his saddle readjusted he plodded along as though
falling into ditches was merely a part of the day’s work.
Came another shout. This time that a perfectly good Botanist had fallen
into the ditch which was an entirely different matter. Now Professor Bartlett is not a small man. He is far from frail or fragile. He has the outward
appearance of being a bit pudgy and soft which condition was entirely belied
when we started hoisting him out because what we at first estimated to be suet
we found to be darn well developed muscle which carried weight but we eventually got him out. He, like the horse Wells had been riding took it with utter
nonchalance, just an incident and when I offered him my horse which I had
been leading ever since we paralleled that ditch he merely gave a cheerful grin
and said, "no Colonel thanks. Less distance to fall if one is hiking.” Shows
he had a great mind because that was the same reason I had been walking


17


for the past two kilometers and probably the same reason General Parker had
been persistently declining the use of my horse when offered him.
At last cume the time when we began to ask “how much farther is it?”
And came at last the refreshing news that some lights we saw immediately
ahend were in the town. Sure enough there were a few lights that showed
here, there and yonder, mostly yonder and we were led eventually over the
ditch agnin and up the steps out of the rain into a big stone building, very
ruggedly made and very strong.
Here we found two Padres, and two white youngsters, Russian and German
and quite a parcel of men. The lamps were petroleum with gauze mantles
and of the pumping up type. They gave a very good light which was more
than we expected to find in Basco. On a table were about twenty glasses all
filled with a sort of yellowish liquor and although I am a teetotaler I decided
that after those miles on Ibajos, the six and a half kilometers between Mahatao
and Basco, the rain and the hoisting of men and a horse from a ditch warranted in at least investigating what kind of liquor it was. I was hoping it
was "basi" for which these islands are famous, with typhoons, tide rips and
more typhoons, because if it was “basi” I would be justified in sampling it,
as I had never yet tasted it and I felt the need of something inside to warm
me up.
I therefore picked up the bottle which however was labeled “Muscatel”
which in itself is a very inoffensive wine, so I picked up one of the glasses
and swallowed its contents and while the bottle may have been telling the
truth, I later discovered the contents of the glass did not come from that bottle
and I had taken one awful slug of Pedro Domecg Brandy, than which there is no
more warming or agitating fluid known.
As our baggage did not arrive for an additional half hour we naturally
were quite cold, so I decided probably from the inspiration of the first, to
take a second which I did, and unstimulated as I am and unaccustomed to it,
I somehow lost all interest in my baggage in the contemplation of whether
a third would not entirely remove the necessity of changing my wet clothes
at all. However, came a diversion in the arrival of the bull pulling the sledge.
Civilization won over Pedro. I lost interest in Pedro and opening my kit,
got a dry towel, a good rub-down and changed clothes. Every one of our party
did the same and we then wandered out to the big sala of the Casa Gobierno
and were taken to a really wonderful dinner which had been prepared for
us. Now that dinner had been in course of preparation for three days because
the radio station there had intercepted a wireless to the “Canlaon" to meet us
at Dalupiri on Monday but that due to the delay thro the Skipper’s Safety
First program we did not get there so they had to hold off that dinner until
we arrived. There were plenty of good courses and we tried them all and
found them all nourishing and palatable, especially so as every one without
exception had sampled the inspiration which had not come from a “Muscatel"
bottle.
Dinner over we were all ready for bed—every one of us and when we
went back again to the sala we found there quite a bevy of nicely dressed girls
and nice appearing men. We were rather surprised to find the modern dresses
in use, on account of the extreme isolation that is Basco’s peculiar honor,
but the girls up there cccasionally contact the mainland and again at rare


18


intervals steamers come and bring belated mails which contain movie magazines,
Delincators and other dress magazines. The purpose of the gathering was a
“baile" and really, we looked at each other horror stricken. However, we all
had been or are soldiers and all of us knew the wonderful hospitality of the
Filipino and we felt that although every one of us was foot sore and tired
to the limit almost, from the unwonted hiking over hard and hot Ibajos and
later the night hike, we knew we would create real disappointment did we not
smile and dance. So we did.
The music played that night was unique. Every offering (and they were
mostly waltzes or Kundimans) was accompanied by singing which was done by
the orchestra while it was playing. It gave a rather refreshing effect and was
something entirely new. After about four or five dances the music struck up
and, before any one of us could move to ask a Senorita to danee, we were
startled to see a mighty nice looking girl rise from her seat, glide to the floor,
gyrating and pirouetting, who after a few turns, floated to a position before
General Parker’s chair and bowed. After bowing she made an inviting gesture
and whirled away.
.
We were, of course, all taken aback until Judge Garcia explained to him
that the girl was inviting him to dance one of the Country Folk dances and
that all he had to do was imitate what she did—which was plenty.
General Parker nothing loath watched her a moment, got up and went
through with it. Considering he had never seen this before we all of us thought
he did wonderfully. The dance finished, another girl bobbed up and doing the
same thing approached General Hayden and then in turn to each of us, even
to Wells of ditch fame and Cote with his very sore knee, but both of them
although quite lame from their experiences, carried on. Of course, we later
comers or rather later invited had the best of the first ones because we could
see somewhat of how some of the trick steps went, but I don’t imagine it did
us much good because we probably did not get them correctly anyways. Some
of those girls we learned had hiked afoot seventeen kilometers to attend that
dance. Can you beat that?
We got to bed at about three o’clock and if there were any mosquitoes
we did not notice them. Ago
Next day again out looking for landing fields and we found one pretty
fair field on the Contra Costa. Cote’s bad knee had tangled up with a post
while going through a fence and Well’s leg became very lame from riding
after his experience in the canal. We rather suspected however it was not
his leg alone that was sore from the ride.
Meantime the “Canlaon" had beat it for safety away south although the
Contra Costa was as calm as a baby’s asleep. The typhoon had moved very
rapidly northward, in fact due north which was rather a freak thing for a
typhoon to do and it was hovering one hundred miles east of Basco. The
peculiar thing about that however, was that although it was located only a
hundred miles from us and should have been giving us a very bad time, we
were not having bad weather while south around Manila and Luzon they
were catching gusty winds and plenty of rain and they were several hundred
miles further away from it than we.
The “Canlaon" was to arrive at day break next morning either in front
of Basco or on the Contra Costa to pick us up, so as we had another night
in Basco we decided to give the Bascoenos a return dance. We arranged
with the hostess of the night before to arrange the details of the food and


20


entertainment and very much intrigued and pleased the people by returning
the compliment tendered us by the girls the night before, by each of us asking in turn, each girl to dance the folklore dance who had invited us to dance
it the night before. Our Beau Geste really pleased these kindly people very
much.
Next morning a daylight breakfast, a fairly rough and wet embarcation
in a heavy sea under an overcast sky to the “Canlaon" and a return to Dalupiri
where we arrived the following morning for a disembarkation at daylight.
TO BE CONTINUED


OLDTIMERS


Do you know who this is?—No!—well it
is Pop Russell, another one of the Oldtimers
who made good in the Philippines—now a
prosperous business man in Batangas, both
in the Cine and Hotel business.
He is known as the Prince of Batangas,
and the champion pinochle player in the
Philippines. What! you dont believe it? Then
drop in at his hotel and stay a few days with
him and we are sure that you will be convinced that he runs a very good hotel with
the best of service and that he sure does
play a very mean hand at pinochle.


pppaganmmangaaaa
a
Maikanalli


ANId Don r LiRe R


Coal tar derivatives are effective means of
discouraging ants in their fiendish delight of
destroying wood. Ants simply do not like it.
If you are troubled with them, coat the wood
liberally with
CDAL TAR PAINT


Write us for full information and prices.


MANILA GAS CORPORATION


R
PA"I



*


salililitillliniibiilalliubaililiillililiangiigihniiilnlbanallitilallibisianlaiamulbliagalliiBaiuAllIllIHIIL,?
a
PITTTLR
NRRRPIHEI
ORI
LAAAMAEAEMMRRBEAHLBISREAANAMIEHTEMREEARAITUITTURITITIEAAERARALARARMHETRCE

ATERSON RADIOS
FOR 1936
ARRIVING ON OCTOBER 21st
8—10—12 AND 16 TUBES
AOBOIN BIBESol RO
17 ESCOLTA
PHONE 2-36-41

BE

n
"a
r. AamtilILiadimilLlMLAAMIlILAMMul
MAMMMMLAAN: -MLMARiEAHMIBRERAAIMMIMLIBIBIMIAENETLS




EI
MMEMMAAMAASEHIIIIIIIHERETIDEDASHEEBBEEAAMAMILELIUEERENGHHTLS


MOLON DRORERAGEOO.


Derham Bldg.

Port Area


MANILA, PHILIPPINES


P. O. Box 591
Tel. 2-24-21


LICENSED CUSTOMS BROKERS

BILLS OF LADING ISSUED TO ALL
PARTS OF THE WORLD
AUTOMOBILES AND FURNITURE STORED
-:
ET
1
E


I
"ITT
N
PETHI
"!"
lan leAMalinaeTTHEMMEMAAEAMMMMMACIATILRANSAA: MMTANTITMoagaaiaiaaaataaaaaaihams
22


WHO AM1?
I am more powerful than the combined armies of the world.
I am more deadly than bullets, and I have wrecked more homes than the
mightiest of siege guns.
I steal in the United States alone over $300,000,000 each year.
I spare no one, and find my victims among the rich and poor alike, the
young and old, the strong and the weak.
I massacre thousands upon thousands of wage-earners in a year.
I lurk in unseen places, and do most of my work silently. You are warned
against me, but you heed not.
I am relentless. I am everywhere; in the home, on the street, in the
factory, at railroad crossings, and on the sea.
I bring sickness, degradation and death, and yet few seek to avoid me.
I destroy, crush and maim; I give nothing, but take all.
I am your worst enemy.
I AM CARELESSNESS.
—Rhode Island Health Monitor.


WAITING
Sunk in the slough of Depression
For the past six weary years,
Waiting for Europe's "War Debts”.
Waiting mid hopes and fears—


Waiting to get the Millions
Back on the old Pay Roll,
And just as we solved the problem,
Sunk in another hole—


Now we wait for another Dempsey,
To put in the "Square of rope”;
For another stretch of weary years,
Waiting for some “White Hope"¬
A. G. HILL



L

MMURABIILTEAMIERMERMREAMMMECAMSRRRMGHHEAELIIDT


a
SHADES
LAMPS
NOVELTIES
FURNITURE
HEMP RUGS
EVERYTHING TO BEAUTIFY A HOME
 PHILIPPINE SHELL.CRAFT CORPORATION
L. RIFKIN
Manager
478 A. Mabini
Phone 5-69-57
larimaniniinmurmminmRtiaRaminmamminRmPanminamMIgIlmmMIRImma





23


PEACE, PER FECT PEACE?
The oratorical efforts of Japanese Diplomats, leads me to believe that an old Biblical Prophesy, foretelling a time of "Perfect
Peace" is about to be fulfilled. Said Isaiah, chapter II verse 6.
“The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and
the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, etc.


Said the Big Bad Wolf of Nippon
To the Philippino Lamb,
When you have full Independence,
And aro thru with Uncle Sam;
We will have Frce Trade between us,
And live in perfect peace;
For with me as your Protector
All your worriments will cease.
Then side by side we’ll prosper
Beneath our Eastern Sky—
Ha' Ha' Ha' Ha."
"Wont you walk into my parlor”
Said the Spider to the Fly.


A. G. HILL.
RR



pn
¡MHIHIHIHHHURHIHRERRRARBETRAAARERRMAABREBRRABRRRERMMABEMLEIARMRRRLHAHHHHIRS
fOR more than Thirty years constant and sincere
devotion to the eyesight welfare of those who come to
us has established a firm relationship between our
patrons and ourselves.
Ever the best in quality but never
higher in price.


24


THE END OF THE LONG TRAIL
alling up the memory of the past is often sad, inasmuch as it brings to
O mind individuals, both friends and enemies who have been but ghosts for many
years. These came and crossed the ripples of our lives and vanished, even as
do the ripples on a still pond. Two decades ago such a one, whom we will
call Barnes came to Nueva Ecija, lived a while and then passed on to be forgotten by mest men, except two of us who were with him to the last. Curiously
we knew him and yet did not, for who he was, and whence he came, are still
a mystery for none made any enquiries about him.
At the time of which we write the province had not awakened to its opportunities. It was a succession of wide arable plains but all they produced
was cogon. Its forests were a paradize for hunters, for they contained plenty of
deers, herds of wild hogs, its swamps were black with ducks, and such wild
birds as the tipul, the six-foot crane, the camaboy, and the casile arounded.
These of course all disappeared as soon as we got the people to adopt the homestead as a means of turning the wild lands to the production of rice and to
be called the "granary of the islands". The sleepy towns were still in the
atmosphere left by Spain for the struggle for existence had never been as keen as
in other regions, altho to he sure epidemics and fevers kept the population
about stationary, until we got the tide of immigration going.
News was a month old when it came and that was not too often. The
elders of the towns had not yet heen taught a new way of sucking egas by
the rising generation, supplied with imperfect knowlenge from school-books.
Theirs was the simple life, for they did not possess the oratorical leaders, who
now in a kind of feudal magnanimity refer to them as "my people". But
their curiosity was insatiable given the least morsel to gnaw upon.
A stranger coming into one of their sun-burnt towns was instantly the
the object of an extreme curiosity. A few moments after his arrival, if he
were at all communicative—and indeed, it was difficult to be otherwise, unless


25


one travelled with a retinue of servants, themselves animated newspapers—his
errand, reasons or motives, right or wrong would quickly become the property
of all the inhabitants. They had a wonderful capacity for absorbing news
nfter the manner of the ancient Greeks. Time runs its course and most of
the matandas are resting peacefully in the campo-santos, and the new generation ure in the suddle addicted to book-learning, stump-speaking and flamboyant
neck-wear.
Nowadays they pay little attention to the stranger within their gates.
Such is civilization, take it or leave it, but two decades or so when a swarthyclose-knit Americano rode into Bongabong, a town that looks like it sounds,
with a pack-horse loaded with supplies, the curious were on tiptoe with anxiety.
Indifferent to the emotions he had aroused the stranger dismounted leisurely
and sought out the presidente. This factotum, hastily donned his coat of office,
shoved his feet into chinelas and grasping the official cane granted to those
in authority, presented himself before the new arrival. Courtesies were exchanged and the two presently repaired to the president’s house. Proffered
liquid refreshment, the stranger poured himself a drink that would put crimps
in the Constitution, and gulped it down with audible appreciation. He had no
need to explain the thirst, for the thirty miles from the next town to Bongabong, were nothing but hot treeless parched plains that sizzled with the heat
from a scorching sun.
Talk began after the inner man had been satisfied, and casual friends
occupied the long benches worn satiny smooth by generations of seekers after
news. The stranger puffing a post-prandial Londres informed the local chief
that he was about to become a resident of the town; he was, he said to take
charge of a deserted plantation at Irurulong, a vast tract of virgin land, that
paid taxes to the government but remained virgin of gain to the owners, who
dwelt in Manila and had sent him up to see if he could remedy the situation.
The plantation lay in a valley between lofty mountains, a sort of back pocket
close to the divide between Luzon’s backbone and the Pacific. It comprised
both hill and dale and bore to the uninitiated all the outward signs of an
agricultural puradize. This was not so, for it lay in the indeterminate climate,
and to this day the owner—which happens now to be the government—is still
waiting for dividends, as they can neither sell or rent it to natives who have
the rudiments of agriculture and know something of climate.
The stranger whom we will call Barnes went out to the place, built a
small house in the somnolent barrio there, but maintained a town-house as it
were because of its proximity to the Chinese tiendas that sold vino and ginebra.
His breakfast was of the kind known as a Kentucky breakfast.—a dog, a loaf
of bread and a bottle of hard liquor—What was the bread for? Why to give
to the dog, of course. And he was known to all the dogs who greeted him with
timid tail-waggings and who met his advances with appreciation and a confidence more easily gained from them than that of the suspicious townspeople.
These held aloof not yet being satisfied as to the mission of the dark-complected
stranger.
Some opined he was a doctor as he opened many bottles, others that he
was a Protestant missionary from his copious language, and hence called
“burabut-sabon" or soap-suds. Still others opined he might be a miner looking
for the mother-lode. On one of my occasional visits the justice-of-the-peace,
an old codger long gathered to his forefathers, confided to me in a confidential
whisper that he himself had discovered a "mina de tanso” which would be a


26


brass-mine and desired me to go in with him in pre-empting the discovery before the handsome stranger discovered it for himself.
Gradually we came to know the stranger, his hopes and failings, his
vices and virtues. We took his name to be an adopted one. “My moniker is
Barnes," and as Barnes we accepted him. He was a man of even temper but
occasionally under stress or emotion could display a lurid and unexpurgated
vocabulary which could best be explained by a series of exclamation points
and dashes. This eloquent flow of language was once provoked by his inability to mount a balky horse, and a lady—a female—who chanced to overhear him, rebuked the outburst. An argument began winding up with just
as lurid remarks as his own. She noised her opinion abroad. However we
did not pay much attention to her anathemas for we knew like the Spaniards
that “every season has its reason" Furthermore she was not popular with
us being one of those who think all men are vile and were born so; she desired to put pants on the Venus de Milo and make a law prohibiting the
word damn. Many old-timers no doubt remember her and chuckle over her
crusading proclivities.
Barnes was a handsome sort of chap with a black mustache and X ray
eyes. He not only talked well but betrayed an excellent education, quoting
Latin and other dead languages. He dearly loved an argument if it related
to doctrinal theory. But his rare lapses into autobiography disclosed nothing
whatever about himself, his home or his former dwelling places. Even the few
good books he possessed had the fly-leaves carefully torn out. We opined these
had his real name and in the manner we were used to, that was none of our
business. His duties as encargado of the plantation were not onerous but
he lived on, making his trips and reports. It looked as if he had taken the
job as a last resort and wanted to get away from the maddening crowd as
far as possible, and did not think further struggle against fate worthwhile.
After a certain age, no matter what the cataclysmic experience there is no
real change in the soul of man.
He had a whimsical theory that life was a journey, a path, a trail that
led on and on without beginning or end, and that one could make it joyfully
or otherwise as his cosmos dictated and his digestion allowed. A wife and
a family made, he contended, slow going, foot-free one travelled faster to his
predestined goal. But fast or slow, happy or sad one came at last the point
where all journeys ended. We agreed with him, but did not trouble ourselves
much as the journey was most delightful and we never bothered much about
where we were bound to. In fact we were glad to just take a chance like
one does on a lottery ticket.
He was optimistic about his corner of Nueva Ecija and sensed a fortune
if his plans panned out. In vain we told him that the man who hopes for
fortune overnight is the type of man who hopes he can win consistently overlooking the fact that nobody wins all the time, not even men engaged in honest
endeavour—and money in hand. He had no great flair for life in the bundocs,
and the bundocs where he planned to do so, were the real thing. He would
discuss frequently the idea of establishing a trading post with the timid Negroid
peoples who haunted the ranges overlooking the Pacific but we pointed out the
thousands who had tried this primitive urge and had failed because of the
handicaps facing them at every turn.
Time and time again, when I rode into his secluded town, he welcomed
me as a long lost brother. Only men who have dwelt in the far off places


27


know just what these random visits with men of his own breed meant to
Barnes. The city dweller is ignorant of the frontiers, anyway; he has a world of
companionship all the time. Five or six times a year some one who spoke his
language and hailed from the home-country would ride up to his shack to
stop a while and exchange ideas with him, eat, drink and endeavour to be
merry and argue some knotty point with him. These were red-letter days
with Barnes, irrespective of how the calendar printed them. Sundays and
fiesta days he was likely to forget altogether, but not visitor days.
And those who lived on a frontier, populated yet lonely had to learn to
he master of their souls. There are things that money cannct buy, haraships,
lessons in experience, devotion of friends, self-control and the task well done.
There is of course the pursuit of happiness, the wealth of life that comes
to few. Some are happy when working thirty hours a day; others can loaf
thru life and enjoy it immensely; others hold to the middle of the road, the
main thing being to get a kick-out of life, not merely to live it as a sodden
duty. The end remains the same but only achievement counts in the last analysis. As for Barnes his life might be summed up in the verse.
“Oh, dark dividing sea and alien plain."
"Life was cheap—therefore he sold it”
“Gold was good, he could not hold it”
“And now, perhaps, he knows his loss or gain".
I once ran across him lying at his ease under an alibangbang tree on the
banks of the Rio Coronel. We got to talking names and I told him of the
yarn of how it came to be named the River Colonel. During the early part
of the last century when the decrepit town of Bongabong was temporarily
the provincial capital, a colonel of Spanish Infantry paid it a visit of inspection. It was during the rainy season and the river was in full flood and he
would not heed the native ferryman who cautioned him of the danger of crossing. Spurring his mount into the stream he elected to swim across. Halfway
to the opposite bank both he and horse were struck by a huge tree floating
broadside on the current. Knocked unconscious he found himself being borne
away ahead of the tree. He had been seized by a crocodile, one of those
craggy specimens who haunted the back reaches of the river, and are most
active during freshets, seeking food in troubled waters.
But this particular crocodile, gigantic as it was, could not make a single
gulp of the burly colonel, on the axiom that the container must be larger than
the contained, and instinct drove it to pilot its burden to some convenient sandbar down stream where it could enjoy its meal at leisure. The officer who
had regained consciousness in the cool waters was in no position to argue the
question with the saurain which swam diagonally across stream. He confronted a precarious situation, as his end might be swift and sanguinary if
the reptile thought fit to submerge with its prey. Any movement made the
jaws clamp closer on his body, but turning as swiftly as he could, he reached
over and with two vigorous thrusts of his thumbs he gouged out the saurain’s
eyes. With violent tail lashings the crocodile freed him, and gasping the
trailing grasses he pulled himself to safety from the creature’s tail. He was
a man of direct action and evidently a bear for punishment.
He found himself on an islet, the current between it and the main bank
being both deep and swift. The colonel plunged into this bravely, but had
not taken more than a few strokes when he was seized by another crocodile.
This reptile being hungrier than its mate, immediately submerged in the first
eddy drowned the unfortunate officer of His Majesty’s Army, and ate him at


28


leisure. And so it came about that the river is called the Rio Colonel, for
over a century.
By the time the yarn was told it was time to adjourn to his shack for
a drink and a further discussion of his trading-post. Finally Barnes lost his
job, that is, the owners of the virgin tract expected him without rhyme or
reason to increase dividends by mere word of mouth, so he went back to Manila
to assemble a stock for his trading venture. I had mentioned Dingalan Cove
that boasted a couple of houses and sat on the Pacific which allowed transportation for any such forest stuff, like almaciga, resins, rattans, beeswax, etcetera,
he might accumulate. And he was certain that he would have a shipload within
a year. Alas, how many since the days of Salcedo have had that same dream,
only to encounter sickness, loneliness and death. For each success, how many
have met misfortune. Only the unwritten annals can tell of this down thru the
centuries.
He started from Bongabong with two pack-horses and quite an array of
goods, which included a small carpenter’s chest, and unfortunately, a five-gallon
can of native vino. On the top of the divide, his carriers deserted him. Harvest time was near and the yellow rice, irresistible to the native called more
loudly than day wages. Barnes, at his wit’s ends threw up a grass shelter
over his supplies, and camped there, to make his rendevoux with Death on the
trail. It was indeed to be the end of the trail for him. Disheartened he had
taken to the can of vino, with murderation instead of moderation. The consumption of this ad libitum had its result. To the final gargantuan attack his
stalwart body had finally succumbed. One boy had stayed with him and as
the shadows seemed to gather he had dispatched him with a note to the president
explaining the situation, and asking for some American who might be there
to come to his relief.
Ruddy Walters and I happened to ride the town that very night the message
came, and the least we could do was to go to his help. The way thru the
plantation ran past grassy ravines opened up by each seasonal flood racing
to the river and rejoicing in such names as Aragoog, Dupunga and Bugnaan.
There was no rain, the sky was a cerulean blue flecked with a few fleecy
clouds sailing in from the Pacific. The thick jungle by the trail was a haven
of forest warblers and droning insect life. The day wore on for it was fifty
kilomieters to his camp and Nature itself could not be hurried, sharing the
East’s passive resistance, narrow thorny paths, rocky inclines and decp mucky
swamps had to be negotiated, and at sunset we topped the divide and with
the sun on Mount Mingan and descended into the dark valley, to finally locate
Barnes in his grass shelter.
We greeted him with a jovial outburst, but it needed no doctor to tell
us he was about to take his last hike into those eternal wilds from which
travellers send back no tales. Of course we concealed our misgivings confining
ourselves to cheerful comment on the future commerce of his trading-post and
I am afraid that in our conversation it grew into a great emporium, with the
owner retiring in affluence at the end of a year or so. He was too far gone
to eat anything and we had brought along nothing to drink. The boy hashed
us up a sort of a meal and we two comforters ate alone to as joyful conversation as we were able. After the doleful meal Barnes became as communicative as he ever did—with nothing to say as to who he was or where his
folk lived in the States. At intervals he would lapse into incoherent mutterings. Then he would expound some obscure point of religious dogma to
all of which we agreed and without argument.


29


Walters who never allowed anything to depress him much, began to hum
a popular tune and Barnes took it up. In those early days I habitually carried
my own musie in the form of the esteemed harmonica, which like a banjo fits
in anywhere and at this juncture I essayed to blow a few tunes on it and
Barnes responded immediately asking me to play his favorite tunes. So on
the night air in the gloomy vale behind mount Banaybanay rose the strains
of “Break the news to Mother,” “The Blue and the Gray," and the “Girl I left
in Sunny Tennessee.” Barnes requesting me to repeat each time and I played
these over and over again while the jaded wanderer beat time with a quavering finger.
Midnight came and passed. I was still blowing with sore lips on that
wheezy harmonica as the impromptu concert seemed to please him or rather
to soothe him with memories of other climes and other times. His boy and
our guides had long gone to sleep leaving the situation entirely to us. Suddenly Barnes sat erect interrupting a repeated rendition of “Break the news
to Mother.” He stretched his arms before him and his face lighted up with
a most wonderful recognition. “Oh Mother, poor Mother” he whispered. For
a moment he seemed to listen to a voice. "Wait, Mother I am coming. Wait,”
he repeated three or four times, and with these words and a glorified smile
on his lips, he sank back on the blankets, dead.
We had known there was litile hope but the end had come quickly, almost
dramatically and we felt perturbed, nevertheless. Even Walters gulped, and we
spoke in whispers. He had gone over into the unknown, and perhaps his vision
of Heaven was realized at last. Quien Sabe? Whoever he was he took his secret
with him as nothing in his effects told any story, neither note or letter or any
keepsake as far as we could find. We composed the poor body as well as we
could and kept it company by the fitful fire, smouldering away in the gloom
until the gray dawn brightened and the sun flashed its rays from the rim
of the Pacific, the vastest and most lonely of all the oceans.
When this had driven the mists away and the wood crickets begun their
interminable shrilling, we dug a grave and buried him as best we could, putting
up a rough cross at his head in sign of final redemption. Under this no
doubt he lies as quietly as if his passing had been marked by an admiring
and mourning nation. He had found peace in a land that knows no doctrinal
quarrels, and where the Good Book tells us, all shall be united. A short
distance from his grave in the jungle, the giant surges rolling in from the
Pacific chant a common requiem for him and all who sleep within that sound,
and it is an anthem that has never ceased since the world began.



 Fariailaialaiatiaiaaililimaainaarinm


TT

HAMIEMAMAMARMMAMMMIEMREMIAMAREDRERASTRIOREDS


MANTEANOTEL
"the aristocrat of the Orient"


H. C. ("ANDY") ANDERSON
Managing Director



EHUNI

AMAIIITO


R'T
MaimaamanananaatR.:


30


Attention - Spanish War Veterans!
HERE'S WHAT H. R. 6995 DOES
Densions which were paid to veterans and dependents of veterans of the Spanish4 American War, the Boxer Rebellion, and Philippine Insurrection, prior
to the passage of the Economy Act on March 20, 1933, were granted without
the necessity of showing that disability or death were due to service. Under
the terms of the Economy Act, with certain minor exceptions, in order to
receive pension it was necessary to prove that disability or death was the result
of actual service. Additional restrictions with respect to income, actual participation (in the case of the Philippine Insurrection and Boxer Rebellion) and
employment by the Federal Government, were also included in the Economy
Act.
By the passage of H. R. 6995 (now known as Public 269, Seventy-fourth
Congress) all provisions of the Economy Act as they related to Spanish War
veterans and their dependents have been repealed, effective Aug. 13, 1935, and
the pension laws in effect prior to March 20, 1933, have been restored. Under
the Economy Act certain pensioners have been granted service connection for
their disabilities and where the rate of pension under Public 2, Seventy-third
Congress, is greater than the rate payable under the pension laws in effect
prior to March 20, 1933, the higher rate will be paid. In the administration
of the new law persons entitled to greater benefits than were had under the
old pension law will be presumed to have applied for the higher rate. Under
no circumstances when a larger pension has been granted under the Economy
Act will that be reduced.
The rates of pension in effect prior to March 20, 1933, are as follows:
With 90 days or more of continous service, including nurses under contract,
between April 21, 1898, and July 4, 1902: $20 a month for one-tenth disability;
$25 a month for one-fourth disability; $35 a month for one-half disability;
$50 a month for three-fourths disability; $60 a month for total; and $72
a month where the regular aid and attendance of another person is required
Any veteran who has reached the age of 62 years shall be entitled to $30 a
month; 68 years, $40 a month; 72 years, $50 a month; and 75 years, $60 a
month.
With 70 days or more of continuous service, including nurses under contract,
between April 21, 1898, and July 4, 1902: $12 a month for one-tenth disability;
$15 a month for one-fourth disability; $18 a month for one-half disability; $24
a month for three-fourths disability; $30 for total; and $50 a month where the
regular aid and attendance of another person is required. Where a veteran
has reached the age of 62 years he shall be entitled to $12 a month; 68 years,
$18 a month; 72 years, $24 a month; 75 years, $30 a month.
Restoration will be automatic and no applications are necessary except in
the filing of new claims, and it is requested that no letters or telegrams be
forwarded until an opportunity is had for making initial adjustments.
NO NEED FOR VETS TO WRITE
"Have positive assurances of Director Hines our law effective automatically
Aug. 13. No application required. Preparation being made for immediate restoration and prompt payment. No one should write or wire about claim, as
it would only delay action."


31


"IN THE DAYS OF THE EMPIRE"
By "PRIVATE" BENTON, Ex—33rd U. S. Vol.
(CONTINUED)


Yn a preceding review under this title, published in the September
Inumber, a brief summary was outlined of historical facts connected
with the Philippine sector of the Spanish-American War and of succceding events leading up to the outbreak of the Philippine insurrection. In a review of that nature, it is impossible to brief every important
historical event in chronological order and still retain the continuity of thought.
Some important facts and incidents are necessarily passed over to be taken up
later. The present article will therefore go back to the beginning and pick
up threads left untouched in the preceding article. To this end, it is believed
that a chronological brief of principal events beginning with April 21, 1898,
will be of interest. We therefore quote the following from official reports:
1898


April 21
23
26
27
May 1


2


3


25
25


30


June 15
18
21
23


By an Act of Congress, the United States declared that a state of
war existed with Spain.
President McKinley issued a Proclamation calling for 125,000 volunteers.
War with Spain was formally declared. The strength of the regular
army was increased to 63,106 men.
The American Squadron, commanded by Admiral George Dewey,
sailed from Mirs Bay (near Hongkong) for the Philippines.
The American Squadron met and destroyed the Spanish Squadron,
commnanded by Admiral Montojo, in Manila Bay.
A landing party of sailors and marines destroyed several magazines
near Cavite.
The Cavite Arsenal was abandoned by the Spaniards and was immediately occupied by forces from the American Squadron.
President McKinley issued a Proclamation calling for an additional
75,000 volunteers.
The First Expedition, commanded by Brig. Gen. T. M. Anderson,
U. S. V., sailed from San Francisco for Manila, and arrived at
Cavite on July 30, 1898. (The composition of this and succeeding
Expeditions, up to and including the Seventh, was given in the
preceding article and will not be repeated.)
Major General Wesley Merritt, U. S. A., arrived at San Francisco
and assumed direction of the expeditionary forces destined for the
Philippines.
The Second Expedition, commanded by Brig. Gen. F. V. Greene, U. S.
V., sailed from San Francisco. It arrived at Cavite on July 20th.
Aguinaldo, by Proclamation, established an interior civil government
at points captured from or abandoned by the Spanish authorities.
The island of Guam was formally surrendered to the commanding
officer of the U. S. S. CHARLESTON.
Aguinaldo proclaimed himself military dictator and president of the
Philippine revolution, and outlined a system of general government.


32


July


Aug.


27 The Third Expedition, commanded by Maj. Gen. Wesley Merritt,
U. S. A., and Brig. Gen. Arthur MacArthur, U. S. V., sailed from
San Francisco. It arrived at Cavite late in July.
1 The First Expedition was disembarked at Cavite.
7 The U. S. Navy took possession of Isla Grande without resistance by
the Spanish Garrison of 1300 troops.
15 The Fourth Expedition, commanded by Maj. Gen. E. S. Otis, U. S.
V., sailed from San Francisco. It was disembarked at Manila on
August 22nd.
15 One battalion of the First California Volunteer Infantry encamped
on the outskirts of Manila near Malate.
19 The Fifth Expedition, commanded by Col. H. C. Kessler, First Montana Volunteers, sailed from San Francisco. It disembarked at
Manila on August 28th.
23 The Sixth Expedition, commanded by Brig. Gen. H. G. Otis, U. S.
V., sailed from San Francisco. It disembarked at Cavite on
August 28th.
25 Major General Merritt arrived at Cavite.
29 The Seventh Expedition, commanded by Lieut. Col. Lee Stover, First
South Dakota Volunteers, sailed from San Francisco. It disembarked at Manila on September 2nd.
31 Night attack on United States’ forces by Spanish troops in trenches
around the city of Manila.
1 Second Division, Eight Army Corps, organized under command of
Brig. Gen. T. M. Anderson; and Brig. Generals MacArthur and
Greene assigned to command brigades therein.
1 During the night, Spanish field artillery shelled the trenches occupied
by United States’ troops.
2 Spaniards opened fire at 5:00 A. M., and 9:45 P. M., on trenches
occupied by United States’ troops.
5 Spaniards opened vigorous fire with artillery and infantry on United
States’ troops in their trenches.
7 Joint demand was made by Gen. Merritt and Admiral Dewey on the
Spanish Captain-General for the removal of non-combatants from
Manila, and notice was given of intention to bombard the city.
7 Camp Dewey was established on the outskirts of Manila.
9 The Spanish authorities stated that they were unable to remove noncombatants from the city because of the presence of insurgents.
A joint formal demand was then made for the surrender of the
city of Manila and all its defenses.
Foreign war vessels left their anchorages in front of the city, and
the American fleet clears for action.
12 Protocol with Spain was signed at Washington, D. C., by Hon. William
Day, Secretary of State, and M. Jules Cambon, French Ambassador
to the United States, representing the Spanish Crown.
13 Spanish intrenchments around the city bombarded by the navy. They
were then stormed and carried by the troops. The city was entered
by the American forces, and a commission was appointed to draw
up articles of capitulation.
14 Major General Merritt issued his first Proclamation to the Filipino
pcople, denying the right of Aguinaldo and his insurgent forces to
occupy Manila jointly with the American forces.


33


15 Orders were issued for the assumption of civil government by the
United States' Military authorities in the city of Manila and the
district of Cavite, and officers were assigned to duty thereunder.
16 General Merritt received a cablegram from the President of the
United States announcing the cessation of hostilities as per Protocol of August 12th.
21 Transport ARIZONA sailed from San Francisco for Manila with
4 companies of the 18th U. S. Infantry, and detachments of the
1st Nebraska, 10th Pennsylvania and 1st Colorado Volunteer In4
fantries, commanded by Brig. Gen. Charles King, U. S. V.
25 First Division, Eighth Army Corps, organized with Brig. Gen. T. M.
Anderson, U. S. V., commanding.
28 General Merritt assumed duties as military governor, and transfers
command of the Eighth Army Corps to Maj. Gen. E. S. Otis,
U. S. V.
Brig. Gen. Arthur MacArthur relieved Brig. Gen. Anderson, U. S.
V., of the command of the Second Division.
29 Maj. Gen. E. S. Otis, U. S. V., relieved Maj. Gen. Wesley Merritt,
U. S. A., in command of the Department of the Pacific and as
military governor of the Philippine Islands.
30 Brig. Gen. H. G. Otis, U. S. V., assigned to command of First
Brigade, First Division.
Sept. 8 Gencral Otis demanded the withdrawal of insurgent forces from the
entire city of Manila, its suburbs and defenses.
13 A Commission appointed by Aguinaldo conferred with General Otis
in regard to his demand of September 8th.
15 Insurgents withdraw from limits of the city of Manila as established
by General Otis, with the exception of the districts of Paco and
Pandacan.
Oct. 7 Civil courts, as constituted by the laws of Spain, are allowed to resume their jurisdiction and regular functions, subject to supervision of the military government in its policy of occupation.
9 General Anderson and staff, while proceeding unarmed up the Pasig
River in a steam launch, was ordered to return to the city by the
Filipino guard.
10 General Otis made formal demand for the retirement of Filipino
forces from Paco and Pandacan and from other points established
by survey to be within city limits.
14 The Eighth Army Corps was reorganized into two divisions, designated as the First and Second Divisions of the Eighth Army
Corps, each Division consisting of two brigades. (The 23rd
U. S. Infantry, the 2nd Oregon and the 13th Minnesota Vol-¬
unteer Infantries continued to constitute the guard and police
force of the provost-marshall-general of the city, and were not a
part of the reorganized divisions.)
17 Transport SENATOR sailed for Manila with battalion of the 23rd
U. S. Infantry, a battery of the California Volunteer Artillery,
and detachments of recruits for the 2nd Oregon Volunteer Infantry, under command of Major G. A. Goodale, 23rd U. S. Infantry. The transport arrived at Manila on November 21st.


34


Nov.


Dec.


19 Transport VALENCIA sailed for Manila with Companies F. G. I.
and L. of the 1st Washington Volunteer Infantry, and a detachment of California Volunteer Artillery, under command of Lieut.
Col. W. J. Fife, 1st Washington Volunteer Infantry. The transport arrived at Manila on November 22nd.
25 Filipino forces retire from points indicated by General Otis in his
demand of October 10th.
27 Transport INDIANA sailed for Manila with headquarters and band
and Companies C. D. E. G. H. I. K. and M. of the 20th Kansas
Volunteer Infantry, under command of Col. Frederic Funston of
the 20th, Kansas.
28 Transport OHlO sailed for Manila with Companies A. B. C. D. E.
H. K. and M. of the 1st Washington Volunteer Infantry, and
detachments of California Volunteer Artillery, under command of
Col. J. H. Wholley, 1st Washington Volunteer Infantry. The transport arrived at Manila on November 26th.
30 Transport ZELANDIA sailed for Manila headquarters and Companies A. B.. C. E. F. L. and M. of the 1st Tennessee Volunteer
Infantry, under command of Col. W. C. Smith, 1st Tennessee
Volunteer Infantry. The transport arrived at Manila on November 28th.
3 Transport PENNSYLVANIA sailed for Manila with the 5ist lowa
Volunteer Infantry, under command of Col. J. C. Loper, regimental
commander. The transport arrived at Cavite on December 7th..
but regiment did not disembark until the end of January, 1899,
having been sent to lloilo for the planned occupation of that city.
Owing to delay in the occupation of the city, the regiment was
returned and disembarked at Cavite.
6 Transport CItY of PUEBLA sailed for Manila with Companies
D. G. H. I. and K. of the 1st Tennessee Volunteer Infantry,
detachments of the California Volunteer Artillery, and First Troop
Nevada Volunteer Cavalry, under command of Lieut. Col. Gracy
Childers, 1st Tennessee Volunteers. The transport arrived at
Manila on December 6th.
9 Transport NEWPORT sailed for Manila with Companies A. B. F.
and L., 20th Kansas Volunteer Infantry and a Battery of Wyoming
Artillery, under command of Brig. Gen. M. P. Miller, U. S. V.
The transport arrived at Manila on December 7th.
10 Transport ARIZONA sailed for Manila from Honolulu with a Battalion
of the 18th U. S. Infantry, recruits for the 1st Nebraska, 10th Pennsylvania and 1st Colorado Volunteer Infantries, and a detachment
of Hospital Corps. The transport arrived at Manila on November 25th.
30 Companies A. and B. of the 10th Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry
assigned to duty on  Corregidor Island.
5 The 7th Companies of the 1st Tennessee Volunteer Infantry, which
arrived on the transport ZELANDIA on November 28th., were assigned to duty with the provost guard.
10 Treaty of Peace was signed at Paris between the United States and
Spain.
13 General Otis received a petition signed by business men and firms at
Iloilo asking for American occupation and protection.


35


15
23
26
28
29
30
31
19
22
26
29
1
2
3
4


Troops of the 1st Tennessee Volunteer Infantry, which arrived on the
transport CITY of PUEBLA on December 6th., disembark and
joint regiment on provost duty.
The Astor Battery sailed from Manila for San Francisco.
President McKinley ordered the relief of the Spanish Garrison at
Iloilo by United States’ forces.
First Separate Brigade, organized under the command of Brig. Gen.
M. P. Miller, U. S. V., sailed from Manila for Iloilo to relieve
Spanish Garrison.
Brig. Gen. Miller with his Brigade arrived in the harbor at Iloilo,
but found that the Spanish Garrison under General Rios had
evacuated the city and the insurgents had taken possession.
Insurgents at Iloilo, replying to General Miller, asked for time to
receive instructions from the revolutionary government at Malolos
as to the occupation of Iloilo.
Insurgent leaders at Iloilo refused their consent to the landing of
United States’ troops at that place.
Merchants and foreign residents of Iloilo petitioned General Miller
to postpone landing of troops in order to avoid the burning of the
city by the insurgents.
1899
Transport GRANT sailed from New York for Manila with the 4th
U. S. Infantry and Companies B. G. I. and M. of the 17th U. S.
Infantry, under command of Maj. Gen. H. W. Lawton, U. S. V.,
and arrived at Manila on March 10th. (This was the first transport to sail from New York for Manila during the SpanishAmerican War.
Company I, 1st Tennessee Volunteer Infantry, under command of Captain Givens, escorted a battalion of Spanish prisoners to the southern islands of the Archipelago.
Transports SCANDIA and MORGAN CITY sailed for Manila with
the 20th U. S. Infantry under command of Brig. Gen. Loyd Wheaton,
U. S. V., and arrived at Manila on February 23rd.
51st lowa Volunteer left Iloilo harbor for Cavite to be landed thereat
after having been on their transport since leaving San Francisco
on November 3, 1898.
Transports OHlO and SENATOR sailed from San Francisco for
Manila with the 22nd U. S. Infantry, under command of Col. H. C.
Egbert of that Infantry. The transports arrived at Manila on
March 5th and 4th respectively.
Astor Battery was mustered out at New York City.
Transport SHERMAN sailed from New York for Manila with the
3rd U. S. Infantry, and Companies D. H. K. and L. of the 17th
U. S. Infantry, under command of Col. J. H. Page, 3rd U. S. Infantry, and arrived at Manila on March 22nd.
Picket line opposite San Juan del Monte fired upon by insurgents at
8:30 P. M. A general engagement was precipitated and continued
until 5:00 P. M., the next day.
Street disturbances in the city of Manila were controlled by the
provost guard.


36


5 A general advance was made against the insurgent lines resulting in
their retreat beyond the foothills, and Santa Ana, San Pedro
Makati, Pasig and other villages in the immediate vicinity captured.
Provost guard dispersed a party of armed natives within the city.
6 Earthworks and blockhouses constructed and occupied by insurgents
and the city waterworks, on the Mariquina River, captured.
7 Sharp and decisive skirmishes took place on the Mariquina road.
8 General Miller was directed to take the city of Iloilo.
10 A general advance was made on the enemy’s position in and about
Caloocan.
11 1st Tennessee Volunteer Infantry arrived in the harbor of Iloilo.
11 City of Iloilo was set fire to and abandoned by the insurgents, and
was immediately occupied by United States’ forces under General
Miller. Much of the city was saved from destruction by quick
work of the American troops.
12 Line of the First Separate Brigade extended toward Jaro and Molo,
driving the insurgents before it.
13 18th U. S. Infantry encounters insurgents at the main bridge over the
Jaro River. From the 14th to the 19th of February, American
troops push their lines as far as Santa Barbara, occupying Molo
and Aravelo.
19 Transport SHERIDAN sailed from New York for Manila with the
12th U. S. Infantry, and headquarters and Companies A. C. E.
and F. of the 7th U. S. Infantry, under command of Licut. Col.
J. H. Smith, 12th U. S. Infantry. The transport arrived at Manila
on April 14th.
20 East Paco was set on fire by incendiaries.
22 Incendiary fires were set in the thickly inhabited districts of Santa
Cruz and Binondo, but were quickly put under control by the
American troops.
23 Insurgent outbreak occured in Tondo, the 10th Pennsylvania and 1st
South Dakota Volunteer regiments were engaged and drove the
enemy northward with heavy loss.
23 20th U. S. Infantry assigned to provost duty in the city.
24 1st Nebraska Volunteer Infantry defeated a party of insurgents north
of the Mariquina road.
Mar. 1 Insurgents make an attack in force on outposts of 18th U. S. Infantry
at Iloilo. Insurgents shelled from their trenches by Battery G,
Gth U. S. Artillery, and attacked and routed by the 18th U. S.
Infantry.
Visayan military district was established.
2 Congress authorized the enlistment of 35,000 volunteers and the increase of the regular army to 65,000 men. The volunteers enlisted under this authority were designated as U. S. Volunteers,
and their purpose was to relieve and replace the State Volunteer
organizations which had been enlisted for service during the
Spanish-American War. The U. S. Volunteers were enlisted for
the Philippine Insurrection.
5 Insurgents intrenched across the Mariquina road are routed and
driven off.


37


7 The entire district lying between the Pasig River, the Mariquina
River and the deposito pumping-station road, is cleared of insurgent forces.
8 The 12th U. S. Infantry, enroute to Manila by the transport SHERIDAN, landed at Malta and was received with courtesies by the
Rritish garrison.
11 During March 11 to 17th., a provisional brigade under Maj. Gen.
H. W. Lawton, composed of the 20th and 22nd U. S. Infantries;
Companies C.D.E.G.H.K.L. and M. of the 1st Washington Volunteer Infantry; Companies A.B.D.E.I.L. and M. of the 2nd Oregon
Volunteer Infantry; Troops E. I. and K, 4th U. S. Cavalry; and
one section of Light Battery D, 6th U. S. Artillery, engage the
insurgents at Guadalupe, Pasig, Pateros and Cainta.
16 Two Companies of the 1st Colorado Volunteers attacked a body of
insurgents retreating from Cainta, and drove them through the
town of Mariquina.
17 Maj. Gen. H. W. Lawton relieved Maj. Gen. T. M. Anderson in
command of the First Division.
21 Companies F. G. L. and M., 1st Colorado Volunteers, sailed from
Manila enroute to Bacolod, Occidental Negros.
24 Transport CITY of PUEBLA sailed from San Francisco for Manila
with headquarters and Companies A. F. G. I. L. and M. of the
9th U. S. Infantry, under command of Captain James Regan,
and arrived at Manila on April 23rd.
25 A general engagement took place at Caloocan, participated in by
the 22nd U. S. Infantry, 2nd Oregon Volunteers, and the second
battalion of the 3rd U. S. Infantry. The enemy was driven across
the river in front of Malinto.
26 2nd Oregon Volunteers crossed the Talishan River east of Malabon,
and drove the insurgents by successive charges from their trenches along the line of road leading to Bulacan.
22nd U. S. Infantry captured Malinto under heavy insurgent fire.
27 Brig. Gen. M. P. Miller, U. S. V., retired and is succeeded in command of the Visayan military district by Colonel Van Valzah,
U. S. Army.
28 Transport ZELANDIA sailed from San Francisco for Manila with
Companies of the 9th U. S. Infantry under command of Captain
C. M. Rockfeller, arriving at Manila on April 27th.
31 The insurgent capital at Malolos stormed and occupied by American
forces of the Second Division commanded by Maj. Gen. MacArthur.
Troops of both the First and Second Divisions took part in this
general advance to the north which resulted in the capture of
Malolos. Each division was comprised of three brigades; the brigades of the First Division being commanded by Brigadier-Generals
Ovenshine, King and Wheaton; and of the Second Division being
commanded by Brigadier-Generals Hale, Otis and Hall. Maj. Gen.
Lawton was in command of the First Division.
April 8 Expedition composed of Troops C. G. and L, 4th Cavalry; Companies
A.C.D.E.G.I.K. and L., 14th U. S. Infantry; Companies A. C.
D. and F., 1st Idaho Volunteers; Companies C. D. I. and K., 1st
North Dakota Volunteers; 4 Companies of sharpshooters and two


38


mountain guns concentrate at San Pedro Makati and embark on
cascoes up the Pasig River for Laguna de Bay.
9 Santa Cruz attacked and occupied by expeditionary force.
10 Towns of Pagsanjan, Longos and Paete occupied by expeditionary
forces.
12 Treaty of Peace of December 10, 1898, between the United States
and Spain, signed by President MCKinley.
The foregoing is a brief chronological review of the principal events which
took place during the Spanish-American War and the Philippine Insurrection
up to April 12, 1899, when the Treaty of Peace between the United States
and Spain was signed at Washington. The principal value of this review
is the fixing of dates choronologically of major events of that period. The
military organizations actually in the Philippine Islands on April 12, 1899,
were the following:
State Volunteers: 1st California; 1st Colorado; 1st Idaho; 51st lowa;
20th Kansas; 13th Minnesota; Ist Montana; 1st Nebraska; 1st North Dakota;
2nd Oregon; 10th Pennsylvania; 1st South Dakota; 1st Tennessee; Ist Washington; and 1st Wyoming regiments of infantry. Trocp "A” Nevada Volunteer
Cavalry. California Velunteer Heavy Artillery; Utah Volunteer Light Artillery; and the Wyoming Volunteer Light Artillery.
U. S. Regulars: The Third, Fourth, Seventh, Twelfth, Fourteenth, Seventeenth, Eighteenth, Twentieth, Twenty-second and the Twenty-third U. S. Infantries. The Fourth U. S. Cavalry. And the Third and Sixth (two battalions) U. S. Artilleries. Also, detachments of U. S. Engineers, Signal Corps
and Hospital Corps. (NOTE: The Twelfth U. S. Infantry arrived on April
14th).
The total casualties among the American troops from the beginning of
hostilities up to April 1, 1899, were: Killed: 12 officers and 127 enlisted men.
Wounded: 48 officers and 833 enlisted men.
Provost-Guard duty: Interest has been shown by readers of the preceding
article, published in the September number, as to the names of the various
military organizations which were assigned from time to time to duty as provost-guard in Manila. Following the occupation of Manila and until the insurrection in the immediate vicinity of Manila had been suppressed, the provost-guard had very heavy and exacting service to perform, and especially
during the last weeks preceding and the first weeks following the outbreak
of the insurrection. The following information is taken from the official report
of General Otis to the War Department:
The first assignments to provost-guard duty were: Two battalions of the
the 23rd U. S. Infantry; the Second Oregon and the First Montana Volunteer infantries. Some time before October 14, 1898, the First Montana Volunteers were relieved by the Thirteenth Minnesota Volunteers. When the 8 Companies of the First Tennessee Volunteer regiment arrived at Manila in December 1898, this regiment was also assigned to the provost-guard; but this regiment was relieved and sent to Iloilo early in February. On February 2, 1899,
General Otis reported 3,000 men on duty with the provost-guard.
Following the outbreak of the insurrection on February 4, 1899, there was
much shifting of organizations from provost-guard duty to service in the field.
The Twentieth U. S. Infantry arrived at Manila on February 23, 1899, and
this regiment was immediately assigned to provost-guard duty, remaining in
that service until practically the end of the insurrection.


39


OLDTIMERI WHEN YOU SPEND MONEY
SPEND IT WITH OUR ADVERTISERS.


Kids just love it because it
tastes good!
For Sale At All Good Drug
Stores
Agents
INHELDER, WALCH CO., Ltd.

aa
L




MBBLLRABRBEBMERBLEBAERREEARaAAUZ
PHILIPPINE MATCHES

"SUNSET
"GUITAR'
"LIWAYWAY'
"RIZAL
all of them
Philippine Made
and
of guaranteed
BEST QUALITY
Manufactured by
nilippine MatehCo., Ltd.
MANILA
u



40


As this issue completes the second year of our magazine, if you wish to
get a bound copy of Volume No. 2. of the American Oldtimer, you should
put in your order with the Secretary.
XK
You will begin to get your increase in pensions with the arrival of your
check at the end of October.
X
In this issue you will find a complete summary of what you can expect in
the way of pensions according to the last Pension Act.

Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence Benton spent the Sunday with us and brought
with them Mr. L. S. Schroeder.
The following new members were taken into the club at the last meeting.
Fred T. Lawrence.
*
The club wishes to thank Mr. G. E. Dankworth for the large bundle of
shoes sent to the club. They sure came in handy as they were very badly
needed.
We wish also to thank Mr. and Mrs. G. J. Burbidge for the large bundle
of magazines sent to the club.

Mr. G. E. Forest who stopped with us several days several months ago,
due to having missed his boat came in on the S. S. Johnston, he paid a visit
to the club and presented us with a large box of Face Soap for use of the
club.
*
Mr. William Scales from Centralia, Washington, who have seen service here
during '98 and '99 with the Ist Washington Vol. Infantry paid the club a
visit and renewed acquaintances with some of the Oldtimers who were here
at that time. He also visited Lawten-Egbert Camp, Spanish War Veterans
and gave a very interesting talk on conditions as they are in the United States
today. Mr. Scales was very well received.
*
We just learned that Oldtimer Dodson was a member of the famous 13th
Infantry, the regiment of Carahao fame. Dodson still fights shy of these
creatures.
X
Snapper Harrison is now selling Sweepstake Tickets—He is getting up a
pool of 20 tickets which will be sold at the club.


1


If you want to keep in touch with Pension Legislation, why dont you
subscribe for the American Oldtimer Magazine. We publish all the latest news
on this question every month.
X
On another page you will find a few words about Solomon Russell, one of
the oldtimers who came out here and seen service with Co. "H" 1st Washington
Volunteers during 98 and 99. Mr. Russell returned to the States with his
Regiment and was discharged at San Francisco. Later he returned to the
Philippines and is now a prosperous business man in Batangas.
*
Dr. Henry Start has just returned from a few months vacation in China
and he can now be found at his office in the Lack & Davis Building.
K
Quite a number of the Oldtimers are now in the different hospitals, why
don't you pay them a visit and cheer them up?
X
A very cordial invitation to visit Corregidor on October 20th was received
from General Kilbourne and his wife, the party to be held by Lawton-Egbert
Camp U. S. W. V. A letter was also received by E. V. Bartholomai formerly
of the 22nd U. S. Infantry in which she wishes to invite all former members
of the 22nd. Infantry to accompany the Lawton-Egbert Camp on this trip. Mrs.
Kilbourne being the daughter of Col. H. C. Egbert, who was in command of
the 22nd. Infantry at the time of his death. Killed in action at Malinta Hill,
where today stands a monument marking the spot where he was killed. Mrs.
Kilbourne and the General have always shown a fine spirit for the Oldtimers,
and have yearly taken part in the ceremonies held by Lawton-Egbert Camp,
U. S. W. V. at his monument. If you wish to make this trip send in your
name at once to the Adjutant Lawton-Egbert Camp, Manila.
*
Why dont some of you Oldtimers who live in the Provinces send in a line
or two giving some of your experiences during the early days. Also a photo of
yourself and we will publish it in the magazine.
*
The games at the club get more popular as time goes on and more of the
Oldtimers are beginning to visit the club.



a
MMMaaMmaalaaaaAEALNAiHliMMIHiREIMMAM
L.A. COOl EKINC.
170 LEGARDA 170
TEL. 2-38-30


SEIBERLING TIRES


GASOLINE and OILS
BATTERIES
WE ARE OLDTIMERS and we need your
trade. You will get your money’s worth.
Value received.



CRIMHPESTRR
Aaaag


42


SMILE, DURN YOU, SMILE


No Luck.—“"Jessie, I have told you
again and again not to speak when
older persons are talking, but wait
until they stop.
"I’ve tried that, muimy, but they
never do stop."—Illinois Guardsman.
X
Suitability.—"Aren’t some of the
hats women wear absurd?"
“Yes,” replied Miss Cayenne; "and
vet when some people put them on
they Do look So appropriate."
Washington Evening Star.
X
Quiet!—“I want a shave,”" said the
disgruntled Sergeant as he climbed
into the barber’s chair. “No haircut,
no shampoo, no rum, witchhazel, hairtonic, hot towels or face-massage. I
don’t want the manicurist to hold my
hand, nor the bootblack to handle my
fect. I don’t want to be brushed off,
and I’ll put on my coat myself. I just
want a plain shave, with no trimmings.
Understand that?
“Yes, sir,” said the barber quietly.
“Lather, sir?"—Army and Nawy
Journal.
*
Just Meddling.—The hawker had
just been moved on by the policeman,
and was cross about it. "Garn, who
wouldn’t be a policeman?” he taunted.
"Nothing to do but stand still doing
nothing, while he walks around listening for anything he can see. —Pearson's Weekly (London).

Age of Specialization.—BEGGAR—“It
isn’t that I’m afraid to work, ma’am,
but there ain’t much doing now in my
particular line.
Lady of The House—"Why what
are you?


BEGGAR—"A window-box weeder,
ma’am."—Montreal Daily Star.
*
Hang Him Out.—An Irish Guards
officer called up a sergeant and spoke
of the unsoldierly appearance of a
recruit.
“He looks very slovenly, sergeant."
“Yes, sor."
“Are you sure he washes?”
“Yes, sor.
“Absolutely certain he washes?”
“Yes, sor, but he dries a bad color,
sor."—Stray Stories.
k
Sympathy—The town-clerk of a
small town in Scotland had the misfortune to lose his leg in a railway
accident. As a mark of appreciation
of his long services, the council provided him with an artificial limb. A
few months afterwards the same official was unlucky enough to have his
other leg fractured in a trap-accident.
Then mishap was naturally the
topic of much discussion in the little
town, and one old man was heard to
remark: "It’s a gey bad business for
the puir man, but is it his ain leg or
the leg that belongs to the toon that’s
broken?"—Passing Show (London).
*
Shall We Leave?—He—"Where are
all the nice girls this evening.
SHE—“Out with the handsome men.
Answers (London).
*
Don't Like the Type.—MRS. BROWN
—"Do you know, dear, I was reading
the other day that an ostrich can see
very little, and can digest anything."
MRs. SMiTH—“What an ideal husband!"—Boston Erening Transeript.


THENEWBLUEBIRD


A new breed of Blue Bird perched up on a tree,
And warbled it’s song, "if you folks follow me"
"A whole lot of wonderful things you will see"


These were folks who believed everything that they heard,
So they swallowed the bunk of this little Blue Bird;
Which to you, and to me, seems rather absurd.


As the warbling continued, great crowds gathered round,
Who fell into a trance at the silvery sound,
And dreamt that a cure for Depression was found.


But a storm came and stopped the melodious refrain,
The Blue Bird flew back to Blue-Birdland again,
And the people awoke, wet, and cold in the rain.
A. C. HilI..


A
N


RALDO


LACAAMCGALLAABAAMMCDN


44


STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP
oF “THE  "
Published in Compliance with Act 2580
Editor—E. V. Bartholomai
Managing Editor—E. V. Bartholomai
Publisher—The Pioners' Club—224 Calle Chica, Manila
Business Manager—E. V. Bartholomai
Owners or Stockholders holding one per cent or more interest.—The Pioncers”
Club.
Bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders of one per cent or more
of total value.—None.
(Sgd.) A. W. Pravton, President, Pioncers' Club.
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 27th of September 1935.
(Sgd.) J. R. Ramos, Post-office Inspector.


E
T



eninimiaaanaaiaaiaaaakaiaaananataalanaanrariamnaninatiaamilamaananiaaaiaaiaiaalaaamilaauanaanaiuacialanaanaaaaana
A MATTRESS WITH EVERY
SIMMONS BED BOUGHT FROM
FRE E
PLAZA STA. CRUZ—"Simmons Bed Store”


THOMPSON ELECTRICAL




SMAIBHEEERAAMNETUNINA


Company
Phones 2-11-07—2-11-08
TAH
isimilsallLisalllllas


A GREETING
FROM THE
MARINERS
MARINERS' CLUB
DERHAM BUILDING
Opposite Pier 3
Manila.


TAKEA HINT
FROM THE
LITILE FELLOW
ON THE
EDITORIAL PAGE


P
d


S.E. ELOth
INCORPORATED
INSURANCE
OF ALL KINDS


Kneedler Bldg.
MANILA, P. I.


Phone 2-24-28





-X--


45


T
RARERERRARHIPRRRa
PIIROONEHTRP1
RTVLIR
BEIRBAMATRABBAMMMAAMAAHERTAAAAAAMAHHEMHATARAOANFEMAHMERSAMARAAai


LA AMISTAD
WATCHMAKER
JEWELER - OPTICIAN
U. REYES
530 Ave. Rizal
Tel. 2-93-58
P. O. Box 2019
APR
CRiiirEnllitlliillialiiiilitaihiiligliilimlalllii


We carry in stock assortments of
Watches, Ear Rings, Bracelets,
Medals, Buttons, Silverware, Fountain Pens, etc.—We do Watch Repairing. Mail Orders Received and
Sent by C. O. D.


LACTIANGL CIIS
349 San Vicente 351
OON
(fronting the Crystal Arcade)
We have one of the finest Charcoal Grills in the Orient
OUR SPECIALTIES ARE
GRILLED STEAKS and CHOPS
MONTE—MANAGER


Mlaailas


amial
PE
anaaiaa aaiaiaaillailiaiaitiaitiauialilakimiliaaililitikaiiiaklaikaliliiiaikilinieliaaaaaaaiaialaaaaia
dilll


ASK US ABOUT CUBAO HEIGHTS
It's going to be a grand place to live.
SAN JUAN HEIGHTS CO., INC.
P. O. Box 961
680 Ave. Rizal
Phone 2-15-01
Manila


TeRta
PI
man
MOaPHRRAaa
TPPUH
man
MAMREREREBEDRERMASBEAMABBARMAMCRRAAIARAENRRNMAAIINIEliR
46





YEARS


C


Yes, even years are added to the life of timbers,
ties and piles through the application of a CREOSOTE TREATMENT.
Our equipment and experience enables us to
supply you with CREOSOTED LUMBER that is
deeply and uniformly penetrated . . . Deep into the
pores of the wood CREOSOTE is forced and from
then on offers a challenge to any element that is
detrimental to the life of the wood.
Your next job will warrant the use of CREOSOTED LUMBER. . Do not fail to use it....


ATLANTIC, GULF & I


A
EN


MOTOR OIL


IS THE


(EO PIRO
EAY
BES
MOTOR OIL


Petroleum Co. IP.I.) Itd.
N



BLEARELIR


UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES,
LIBRARY
5604


KI
EA


PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF
THE PIONEERS' CLUB OF MANILA


WE LIVE IN DEEDS
We live in deeds, not yeers; in thoughts, not breaths:
In feelings, nof in figures on e diel.
We should count time by heerf-throbs. He most lives
Who thinks most, feels the noblest, acts the best.
Puilir Jaues 'aMli:


VOL. III
No. I
 NOV. '35 4












EN2
MAPILA
3.1
PPINENAO MANC PENOV 


KGUIAMXATUCULITYIN


REDUCED THIRD CLASS WEEK END TICKETS
For the benefit of students, employees, and others residing in
Manila who may wish to spend the Week End in their provincial homes, this Company is introducing for the first time
greatly reduced round trip Week End tickets.
Sold af Manila (Tutuban) station
commencing Friday, October 25, 1935.
Tickets will be on sale on Friday, Saturday,
Sunday of each week and will be ralid for return
trip up to Monday foliowing.
HERE ARE SOME OF THE FARES FROM MANILA


Bigaa


Calumpit


D a u


.P0.18


San Miguel M. ....


..... P0.83


..0.31


San Isidro ........


.....1.06


..0.44


Sta. Rosa C. ......


1.32



..0.55


Cabanatuan .......


..... 1,42


0.60


Bacolor ......... . .


.... 0.80


0.74
 


Guagua ..........


.... 0.86


..0.94


Lubao ........... 0.94


1.00


Carmen ...........


.....1.08


1.43


Arayat ........ . . ..


0.98
*  *.


..0.42


Stotsenburg .......


.....1.07


..0.53


Magalang .........


..... 1.10


Reduced Round Trip tickets also on sale on other days


Inquire from your
Station Agent


Inquire from
Traffic Dept. Tel. 4-98-61
City Office, Tel. 2-31-83
Information, Tel. 4-98-61
Local 42


Manila Railroad Eompany


943 Azcarraga


Manila


 U NNA NWIN ANNINN


A V   IUIIVUN E IWECE


KHEENTRAARRRYO'TLICCATLTA CALIRAPPPIANICPATTRC.


INDEPENDENT
SHOE SHOP
S
114 Echague
P.O. Box 2641—Tel. 2-21-77
Keep your feet off your
mind by wearing
Independent Shoes
Ma de to Or de r
Fit Guaranteed
Only the very best
American leather used.
T G. HENDERSON
Proprietor


UTAPENNTONAGIIIENCIGCATGTGTINT


PHONE 2-65-92


Put Your Feet
On Our Brass Rail, Boys
Kentucky Cafe
WE TREAT YOU WHITE!
JEFF MOSBY
Proprietor
318 Estero Cegado


ECALNCUAN
PENVPUPTPPPPYRVER PIETEXTENTATATTTA


E    P
II


FREE


PORTABLE ELECTRIC
WATER HEATERS


FREE


your grocer
HOWII
ASK
Hot water in any room where there is an
clectric light socket. RIGHT WHERE
2
E
IT IS NEEDED! Get a heater free!
Ay
BUY ISUAN
DRY GINGER ALE or NATURAL
(SODA) MINERAL WATER


NO INCREASE IN PRICES


ING Dor
because it


5-65-62


Son Valon N
is a Natural


UNG PUIDDINS
Mineral Water


5-73-06


The BEST Mixers in the P. I.
You Feel Good Next Morning


ISUAN, InC.


MANILA


   


GMOANNNAATNIYIITATATXTAAIITIYYANCAYPANARCNCOTNCNIRITKTIYTXCIILOA
We regularly buy estates for development
into residentiel suburbs. We buy only the
best end the most likely to be benefited
by the trend of city growth. Our long experience enables us fo recognize that trend.
San Juan Heights Co., Inc.
P. O. Box 961
Tel. 21501
Manila
680 Ave. Rizal
 
TAIATALACIITIVTITIIITTEIIT
AATIAMANAIAIITEITII
PHILIPPINE MATCHES
OLDTImERS
SUNSET
OURSELDES
GUITAR'
Me
"LIWAYWAY"
"RIZAL"
want
all of them
and expect
Philippine Made
the

and
of guaranteed
OLDTIMERS'
L
BEST QUALITY
A
PATRONAGE.
Manufactured by
I. BECK, Inc.

Philippine MatehCo., LId. E
ESCOLTA
MANILA
NO AA O
NENLSACRACSIAV  VAN A AAA A 
5


E
With the Compliments of
MONSERRATENTERPRISESCOMPANT LA
Dunlop Tire Department
INeA
A
  

IYETAAINCKITAITETYNTO
Warmer, Barmes & Co, Itu.
London—New York—Manila
lloilo
Cebu Bacolod
S W 

6


VASATTACION
TNEYNN


UGTANIACYOSTTUIIYITANIVAN(ETXOTO


CHRISTMAS CARDS
We carry an assortment of
Christmas Cards with typical
Philippine Views:
Photographic views in water
color. Shell, bamboo and
buri Xmas Cards hand
painted in oil.


Drop in at


Manila Photo Supply, Inc.


159 Escolta


Kids just love it because it
tastes good!
For Sale At All Good Drug
Stores
Agents
INHELDER, WALCH CO.. Ltd.


SD


VA DEE


NVA E VAAE


ES


ta 


OLDTIMERS
TOOT YOUR HORN
CLEARLY AND MOVE OVER
WHILE YOU TELL
A GOOD ONE”


AL N E N ANAN A N L E L NAN ANCNNNAN N E  LS


7


APATOVIOTANTOTIYITCTCIYAYATOTNTBGYTATCOCEATRINCTATAAYAAITUTETO


Smoke


CRestertiend


CIGARETTES


CThey Satisfy


LIGGETT & MYERS TOBACCO CO., INC.


MANILA


   NN N ANLAE   


B DLDEN
London
Dry Gin


BULL


Here’s the drink to
give you that flying
start and keep you
fresh any day!
Ask for it at your
bar or get a bottle
from your grocer!
Phone 2-27-92 for a
case of ang kind of
quality liquor!


Pickayouupl


ELIZALDE G CO.


MUELLE DE LA INDUSTRIA. MANILA
Iloilo -Cebu GubatSorsogon.- Hongkong-—Shanghai--San Francisco—New York


N LANA  


M EA  A E S E DANNADE N A D  A
8


AIIIER.CAIL
DLOIHIER


A MONTHLY MAGAZINE PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PIONEERS' CLUB
OF MANILA, P. I.
.
NEV. 35


Published at No. 224 Calle Chica, Manila.
Edited by E. V. Bartholomai


VOL. III


Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at the
Manila Post Office on Jan. 4. 1934.


No. 1


President . . A. W. PRAUTCH
Vice-Pres... L. BENTON
Treasurer T. J. S. B. STEVENS
Secretary E. V. BARTHOLOMAl
Master-at-Arms PETE WILSON
House Committee
J. T. MADDY .... Chairman
E. V BARTHOLOMAl Member
Member
P E. MCGUIRE
Membership Committee
JOHN W. RATLIFF . Chairman
T. J. S. B. STEVENS
Member
BRUCE RICHARDSON Memben
Auditing Committee
T. G. HENDERSON . Chairman
H. SMITH
Member
T. MASTEN
Member
P2 a Year
20 Cts a Copy
U.S. and Foreign $2
Make all payments and address all
communications to “The American
Oldtimer” Pioneers' Club, 224 Calle
Chica, Manila.


nd now that we have a reA
presentative group of Americans with us, don’t you think it
a good idea to have each and
everyone of them visit the club
to see how, we, who have no connections with our home government have solved the question of
the forgotten man.
So get busy—buttonhole some
of these fellows and lead them
around to Calle Chica and show
them our unique club and let
them know just what we are
doing to make a success of this
project.
If any of them should see this
little magazine and I am sure
they will—let this stand as a
special invitation for them to
pay us a visit.


9


MCGINTY
CGinty was a war-recruit in my old outfit, the red-legged artillery, many
Myears ago. He was a sawed-off, bandy-legged little chunk, with freckles
as big as a quarter, an auburn thatch, a smile that was a perfect thirty-two
as to teeth and possessed a brogue that one generation on the East Side had
not quite eliminated. He joined us when we were camped on the beach at
Port Tampa, then the jumping off place for the Cuban and Pcrto-Rican
campaigns, when all was in a happy confusien, and all queer and strange
to MeGinty.
First he had a name, and MeGinty was never applied to any other than
an Hibernian, at least; I never heard of a Swede or a Dutchman with that
name. Names were names in those days and not disguises. Hard-boiled noncoms gave MeGinty the rudiments of soldiering, that is, they got him to locate
his revolver and saber properly, give a kind of a slap he called a salute, and
learn to march to stables in two-four formation. But they were properly stuck
in trying to make him stand straight like a soldier. Try as they would there
was no way of synchronizing his legs which were shaped like this (). He
would never have been able to stop a pig in a ditch, nor keep his knees together.
Only a surgical operation could have accomplished this. His legs had the
cowboy curl all right, but we all wondered at the myopic surgeon who passed
him, and then sent him to the horse-artillery. And we wondered also at the
brand of whisky used by the medical corps under the name of spiritus frumenti, and let it go at that.
After he got a month’s slum and coffee under his belt, went thru the daily
monkey-drill and able to orientate his uniform, MeGinty got to look almost
human. Not that he was slouchy. He was so willing to learn he almost fell
over himself. Also he thought the Spaniards were Republicans and were beating the “Cubians" as he called them, to death with paving blocks. The chow


10


then was the regular army ration, for this was long before the days of dessicated spuds and onions introduced into the Philippines, the iron rations, a
bite to a meal, and the condemned “goldfish”, the later soldiers had to masticate
and like it. Anyhow his smile kept anyone from holding a grudge after some
notorious break in discipline or at drill.
He was attached to my gun-crew, a hard boiled mixture who regarded
recruits as insects, and they made his life just one thing after the other,
and his name being McGinty was enough to start things. Always hungry,
they kept him at the foot of the line so he had to bolt his firsts to get seconds,
at saber exercise they showed him stuff in no book. He was often on kitchenpolice or cleaning up the picket-line. He was sent to the shavetail to borrow
a tompion, or to Hungry Joe our dyspeptic commander to get a dollar on his
pay to visit the Gray Goose saloon. He fell for all the gags till he learned
the ropes after the manner of armies, and this was twenty-one times a week
and twice on Sundays. But he always came up smiling, with his “Ahr Chee”
every time.
I tried to get them to lay off McGinty who was getting to know the difference between a trail handspike and a prolonge-rope. But there was a lanky
corporal named Smoky Johnson, who had a bad case of elephantiasis of the
ego, and who continued to make camp-life a hell for the kid. Several of us
tried to reason with him but being an overgrown bully he preferred to walk
in danger trusting to length and strength. We saw the rising tide of resentment in McGinty and knew that red hair and smile would liable to rise and
explode some day. Once Smoky deliberately jiggled the kid’s mess plate full
of red-hot slum, but received the balance in his eyes. He started for MCGinty
who dropped his mess-kit and grabbed a picket-pin, but we all got in the way
and calmed them down. "Begorry. Some day oil’ll havter to climb his frame,
the big stiff” said the kid, and we knew it would have to be fought out,
sooner or later. Evervbody laughed but Smeky who remained unconverted and
unconvinced.
The battery at war-strength had quite a sprinking of Germans, Poles and
Irish, for we had taken over the casuals in San Francisco before starting East.
I remember in the misty reveilles on the coast, when the top called the roll
by lanternlight, we thought he was either whistling or sneezing the names.
The German sergeant of the platoon teld Smoky to lay-off the kid or he would
get black-jacked by a trail-bolt, for his continual nagging and ragging, but he
laughed and went on as usual, picking on MCGinty. Our battery, the Black
Horse outfit was an old organization, and the battle scarred flags in the orderly room were covered with Mexican and Civil War inscriptions. It was once
commanded by General Bragg. C. S. A, when Zachary Taylor, afterwards
President, said "A little more grape. Captain Bragg", and naturally we took
some pride in our outfit.
Time went on and paydays were purposely skipped, for the commanders
well knew what would happen with their outfits paid off, in a hot thirsty
camp with twenty thousand regulars drilling daily in the hot Florida sand, for
drink and soldiers have been inseparable since long before the days of Alexander or Hercules. We were kept pretty busy altho we had a few hours off
each day to think it over. We could always ride up to Tampa and get into
a fight with the cops. We never killed any outright, but if they found one
of us alone, anywhere, or anyhow, they practised on us, for they were kinder
fussy abcut their municipal laws. MeGinty came along as he could drink and


11


sing, and his jokes got to be the “howlers” of the battery. And he was in
love most always. What the girls could see in MeGinty to admire I could
never understand but a lot of them did. Later down in Ponce and Mayaguez
he was along with me and MeGrath—but that is another story.
The railways were congested with war-freight and extra spurs were laid
every day to accomodate the varied shipments shot down to Tampa. The
harbor was crowded with all kinds of ships, and tramp steamers got together
with more haste than investigation, for the loading of transports was not
an exact science in 1898 A.D. A couple of carloads of water-melons were
switched into a spur not far from where the Buffalo soldiers, the 10th Cavalry
were camped, and brigaded with us, but it took MCGinty to spy them out.
After that it was a free-for-all in watermilion time. It was hot down there
and McGinty like Chris Columbus the first Democrat went on voyages of
discovery, and who found out things by just running into them.
It was MeGinty, however who discovered the six box-cars of the beer
that made Milwaukce famous and all in kegs. For the moment he was the
hero in all the lines of bell-tents. Well, we got to that beer. Somebody, name
no names, busted off the door-seals, and then began the happy exodus. MCGinty
was first into camp staggering under a keg of cold beer, then a thin redlegged line came next bearing burdens, and disappearing along the line of
tents, which happened to be ours. Every tent had from one to four kegs
securely buried in the sand not to keep them cool, but like pirates to keep
them hid. We had propaganda then and it was not long till about five
thousand thirsty ginks heard of the free beer and a chap named McGinty.
Those six boxcars were unloaded so promptly that the stevedores never had
a chance. It was no job at all. MeGinty got all the fame. They even heard
of him in the infantry and casuals camp.
Naturally we did not wait on any Alphonse and Gaston stuff, but opened
one right away, first putting down the sidewalls of the tents to keep the
dust out. We were just about to blow the froth off our tin-cups, when I
saw a pair of shiny boots near the door, and the lieutenant pulled up the
canvas and viewed the interior. It was a scene from Rembrant. He was
looking for the looters we knew well without being advised. Being the nearest participator and secing the kinder paralysed look on the crowd with their
tankards, I immediately handed my foaming cup to the officer, adding that
it was fine and cool, after the drill. That shavetail was a prince—a Prince
of Pilsen. He winked ponderously and drained the tankard to the bottom.
Then he wiped his mouth on a handkerchief, told us to keep the tents well
policed, and went off hunting for looters. Wide smiles came from all, and
they'd voted that loot for President, right then and there.
He was all to the good, and the battery helped him to win some medals
later in the campaign, and which gratified us as much as it did him. Well,
as I was saying that cold beer was a Godsend and lasted as long as they
had ten shotgun guards to a car, and even then one or two were subtracted
or abstracted. It was wartime anyhow, and a few kegs missing was’nt as
much as the billions being distributed right now. MCGinty was feeling fine
and sang his repetoire of "Little Annie Rooney,” “East Side-West Side,"
popular hymns of that far-off day. I remember he had one with forty-seven
stanzas, of which I recollect two “Sure, the aristocracy kim to the party.
There was MeCarty. Loight and hearty” "And Florence Bedalia Foggarty.
Who said that was Frinch fer her name". "Dionysius Alfonsus Mulrooney,


12


Oh so loony, and so spoony.” And the charming "Evangeline Mooney. Of
society she was the crame".
Anyhow what with his songs and the discovery of the beer, MCGinty became acceptable to the battery, even in the rear rank.
The day our supply of keg-beer run out was long remembered. Not for
the beer but the fight that followed. Smoky Johnson, as usual ragged and
picked on the kid, until he was roused to a fine point of frenzy. We could
see he was holding himself in. When Lanky Johnson jiggled McGinty’s beer,
looking round for the laugh and applause he thought coming, he got it, but
from another angle, when the kid rushed over and with a neat one-two blacked
both his eyes, yelling “Come out yez dirty scut and I’ll trim yez to a fare-yewell" adding the good old fighting words, that his mother was no lady.
I suppose Smoky never thought he would have to fight. He was over a
foot taller and thirty pounds heavier than his adversary and like a dub, thought
this was a license for continual bully-ragging. Seeing it had to be settled,
I hustied all out of the tent onto the sandy company street, and told Smoky
to take off his blouse. We had no need to tell McGinty this. "Fight, fight"
was yelled and being out of drill hours it needed no megaphone to call it.
From all points of the compass soldiers came running. The Buffalo regiment
next door, the light artillery brigade of ten batteries, an engineer outfit and
seven battalions of infantry were ample to draw upon for an audience. They
had never heard of Johnson, but all seemed to know something of MCGinty.
Again the name.
A couple of our chaps were holding him, and he was screaming what he
was going to do to Smoky, at once, immediately, for he was fighting mad
and rearing to go. Seeing the handicap we could make no rules, it was just
a figit and we had to let it go at that. Smoky had thrown himself into a
boxing posture, a sparring crouch. That is where he made his first mistake.
There was going to be no Marquis of Queenberry, rules, or Rugby or Hoyle
at all. What Johnson should have done, was to have dodged and run like
hell. There was no preliminaries like asking names, weights or handshaking.
No bets, no odds. All would have bet on the kid anyhow by just looking at
him. I hollered “Let go", and they did.
with a scream like a West Coast locomotive MeGinty flew over the sand
and leaped high on the frame of Smoky. It looked like he kicked him twice
in the wishbone going up and once coming down. Johnson went down flailing
forgetting all rules of science. MCGinty backed up again and Smoky got to
his feet. He prepared to clinch. This was another vital mistake. You cannot clinch a wildcat. He did get hold of the kid for a second, but as MCGinty
was clear off the ground and had his bowlegs hooked round him, the clinch
was ineffectual. He lit into him like a bobcat. And Gee, how that freckled
kid could fight, and claw, and bite and do everything not according to Hoyle
but guaranteed to make the other feller pine for home and mother. Smoky
yelled to pry him loose, but the brigade was howling with tears of joy to
see the little man whaling the tar out of the big one. They cheered to the
echo without asking why. It was a fight that was plenty sufficient.
One lone guy tried to give Smoky some advice, but McGinty reached over
and gave him a backslap so hard that he was seven feet behind the men in
the rear ranks when he hit the sand. Nobody cared to referee the fight, Smoky
stood there dazed and weaving, his eyes had already swollen up, he was bleed

13


ing from the nose and numerous wide scratches, and the lobe of his left ear
was gone. He looked clawed all over. All he had left of his shirt was wristband and a piece hanging from it. MeGinty was chewing something. Might
have been a mouth full of horse-shoe nails, but somebody yelled it was Johnson’s car.
Then with a swift punishing leap he was on to Smoky again, gouging,
bittin, seratching and punching. When the human catapult was about en him,
Smoky missed him with a kick that almost put his leg out of joint, but he
was so scared he did’nt get in a lick that did any good or that hurt MeGinty.
Smoky went down in a smother of punches, bites and kicks. We had to drag
the kid off him, but he got in two good ones before we did. The camp-guards
had run up to maintain peace, but were so fascinated they forgot to say
anything. Somebody pulled Smoky to his feet, dazed and bleeding. "Put him
out kid" yelled the pugilistic crowd. “Give him the K.O.” “Bite his other
ear off. MeGinty” yelled the beer-drinkers. Altho Johnson was a sorry sight
it seemed that the kid was too small and light to give him a knock-out, but
he did it, after all.
I never did see exactly how it was done, as I had my job cut out trying
to keep a run-off space clear for the kid. They said he started with a muzzle
velocity of sixty miles a second, did a double handspring, and landed his
both feet on the solar-plexus of Smoky. What I did see, was Johnson hurled
thru the first three ranks of men crowding round, like a stone from a Roman
catapult. They rescued him and tried to stand him up, as his mouth was too
swelled up to yell “Enough” Then the freckled fury came on, actually leaped
right over his head, turned and hit him so scientincally over the ear, that if
Smoky had’nt buckled at knees he would have been driven seven feet into
the sand. He took no further interest in the fight or in the subsequent proceedings. He was down and out. The provost guard made some remark,
but after one look at our tent-mates, they said they'd report it as a wrestling
match, which it was in a kind of way. We finally calmed MeGinty down, for
he was just getting warmed up. And he had all his teeth intact, which were
for biting Spaniards or bully-raggers impartially. We got him fixed up for
drill. Old Fritz Katlengall, the top, lit a stogy, and said “Goot", but MCGinty
like a good sport never said a word about the fight. It was over so long as
there were no more snooty remarks. And there never were any more from
Smcky Johnson, after he got out from the hospital.
He shut up like a clam, and any rookie could give him back-talk and he
took it. He did not know what possibilities they had and took no further
chances. His ear was lobeless, and his nose never did get back its shape,
but healed up in such a way, that one thought it grew that way by continually
wiping it from east to west. He was the most thoroughly licked feller I ever
did see. Naturally he transferred to another outfit as quickly as possible,
which was a hard stunt to do, before we sailed for Santiago, but he made it.
I imagine he never picked on anybody again, big or little, and walked as
the Spaniards say. “con pies de plomo". But the story of the fight, and the
name of the fighter fellowed him even if there was no such thing as propaganda in those days. MCGinty, was a popular name and known as the
guy who discovered the six car-loads of keg-beer and got away with it. They
even said that he drank a whole keg without drawing breath, which was a
manifest impossibility for we know the container must be greater than the
contained, and as I say, MeGinty was a very small edition, but well bound,
and printed on geod paper.


OUR
HOSI


OUR VISIT TO CORREGIDOR.
General and Mrs. Kilbourne have always taken a great
deal of interest in the welfare of the United Spanish
War Veterans in the Philippines.
"They say that sometime during a man’s life some event takes place which
1 leaves an everlasting memory of the event. Well that is just what happened to some 65 Oldtimers from Lawton-Egbert Camp No. 1 United Spanish
War Veterans piloted by Barney Brown, Actg. Department Commander who
were invited to visit Corregidor on Oct. 20, 1935, by General and Mrs. Kilbourne.
We left Manila at 8:00 A. M. and arrived in Corregidor about 10:30
being met at the dock by General Kilbourne and his Aides. Here we boarded
a tram car which was waiting to take us on a most wonderful trip around
the island, and we were shown everything it was possible to show us without
divulging any military secrets.
At the conclusion of this trip we were taken to the Swimming Beach
Pavillion where we sat down to a most sumptuous dinner arranged by Mrs.
Kilbourne and prepared by the different organizations stationed on Corregidor,
and, as usual as it is the custom in this country to have music with your
meals, we had the 91st. P. S. Regimental Band in attendance.
After filling ourselves with all the good things they had prepared for
us to eat, which by-the-way was plenty, with beer, cigars and cigarettes on
the other side, Gencral Kilbourne gave us a very interesting talk, and one
of the things which he said was, speaking to comrades, that it all goes to


15


show that the Army of today appreciates what their comrades did when things
were really hard over here, saying that he used the word Comrade advisedly,
for no matter when we wore it, the uniform makes us all brothers under the
skin.
General Kilbourne’s speech was answered by Comrades Charlie Salmon and
Lawrence Benton, who both thanked the General and Mrs. Kilbourne for their
kindness in making it possible for all of us to see Corregidor, and for the
swell repast and kind attention shown us everywhere we visited.
Comrade Easthagen then told a joke on Gencral Kilbourne when he was
a Licutenant in the Signal Corps during 1899 over in Cavite Province, I cant
just remember all that he said, but it seemed that he was trying to impress
Mrs. Kilbourne that the Licutenant in those days was a very reckless spender,
and to prove his story, he presented Mrs. Kilbourne with a small bag of old
coins which he says were some of the same coins spent by Lieutenant Kilbourne. The General answered, saying that it was a very good story but that
he does not believe that he had that much money when he was a Licutenant.
In behalf of six old Comrades who were from the 22nd. U. S. Infantry,
E. V. Bartholomai presented Mrs. Kilbourne with a Regimental Pennant in
honor of her father Col. H. C. Egbert—killed in action at Malinta Hill in 1899.
After the party we boarded trucks and were shown some of the beautiful
roads in Corregidor ending up at the Headquarters of General Kilbourne,
where we had a little rest and drank up all of the water on the top of the hill.
Leaving there we proceeded to the dock, went aboard the S. S. General
Hyde and were taken in tow by the Officers of that boat who made us all
comfortable and showed us a great deal of attention.


Bound for Manila, we arrived about 6:15 P. M., all somewhat tired but
happy and all voted that it sure was the end of a perfect day.


16


HOUND DOGGIN.
Dealing of trips made to difficult places,
Batanes Group, our Northernmost Islands.
COL. H. R. ANDREAS
PART II
(Continued from October)


Gne usually has impressions regarding the people he meets for the first
time. The impressions may be most decidedly pro or con or they may
be negligible. That was the case with Professor Bartlett, who accompanied
us as the guest of Governor Hayden to secure data of the flora of these little
known islands.


I had first been presented to Dr. Bartlett at Nichols Field in the grey
of the dawn of a stormy, rainy morning—the morning we left by plane.
We were grouped in a damp crowd under the shed fronting the operations
headquarters of the Observation unit at Nichols Field, looking at sheets of
rain in a murky dawn. A fairly big man, with snow white hair which however his ruddy cheeks showed were not the white hair of age.
His rosy cheeks as well as his girth of chest and waist gave me the
impression, as it did to some others of the party, of softness and desk breeding
and we wondered how the Professor would “get by” on some of the hikes we


knew were ahead of us, for be it know
joy rides. There is work always to do.


Pair of "HOUN' DOGGERS"
Gen. Parker, left; Col. H. L. Sneed.
right; Basco.


, none of General Parker’s trips are
Came a complete and absolute
disillusionment on the Safari. (trek)
He swarmed over every hill and into
every hill and into every gully, stooping to pluck some specimen that
caught his eye while we remained on
the flats seeking landing fields, and
when we reached Basco he climbed
almost to the very top of the high
mountain immediately behind the
town, up through the fog and clouds
in quest of specimens. He returned
quite late in the afternoon just one
cake of black mud from top to bottom where he had slidden in the volcanic mud when he lost his footing.
I kidded him about his appearance
while he was very contentedly placing
his specimens in presses in the basement of the “Casa Gobierno" and he
retorted to Captain Wells who also
joshed him about his appearance that
it takes adeptness and common sense
to be able to successfully slide down
a mountain. You see who has the
sore legs—and it is not I.” If a


17


man’s ability to “take it" was ever belied by his physical appearance, it was
certainly so with Professor Bartlett. He was referring to Captain Wells’ sore
legs. Bartlett was a tough egg on the hike.
A freak of the typheon was that although we were under its rim the
weather was finer and better in its shadow than several hundred miles south.
Planes came to Dalupiri to take us away but as two planes had gone south
to Nichols Field for supplies and were storm bound at Clark Field, Colonel
Sneed and myself elected to remain behind and await the return of two Observation planes to take us south.
We remained on Dalupiri therefore until after noon when our planes came
to take us off. The Veterinary gave us a very good lunch. Simple but well
cooked and well served, and we were evidently very welcome.
Arrived at Vigan we found the weather quite stormy and we landed in
a smother, plenty of water on the field and a dirty look to the sky to our south
—which was our objective, so we decided to remain there overnight.
The next day we flew from Vigan to Clark Field through one of those
miserable white rains which make visibility so very bad on Central Luzon and
flying very interesting while one lasts.


One of o
y" huts on Ibajo
We had sufficient data now regarding possible landing fields in the Batanes
CE
and arrangements were made through Governor Hayden to have a small appropriation for the preparation of the Basco-Contra Costa Field. Came at
last word the field was ready.
This time General Parker decided to take no chances regarding water
transportation after we arrived at Basco, as he was determined to thoroughly
explore Itbayat, the northernmost bit of populated land of the Philippine Archipelago, under the shadows of Formosa across the Bashi Channel.
Off again in the early morning—the dark of July 17th, Gencral ParkerColenel Sneed—Colonel Ruggles—Major Stenseth—Captains Wells and Fator
and Lieut. Straubel and myself. We missed Hayden and Bartlett who wear
well en a trip, however tough. As en our first trip we landed at Vigan,
refueled and immediately took off when finished.
Flew up over Dalupiri again, but this time did not land, Colonel Snced
circling the field and throwing over two large packages of newspapers and


15


magazines covering
the last month with
his and my joint
compliments recall

ing our former en
forced stay there.
All our planes were

N

to land on the new
field at Basco where
3
we would meet a
Cutter for Itbayat.
R
Then straight for

Babuyan which we

again very carefully
“dragged" without
RA
RA
A
secing any terrain
on end.
Major Marty Stenseth and myself then thoroughly investigated the saucy
little volcano on the western coast, flying as close as we dared to the impudent
thing, which was quite active as could be smelled by the strong sulphur and
burning slag vapors drifting out of the clouds. I succeeded in securing some
pretty nice movies of this fellow although the crest was cloud covered thro
Marty’s patience in maneuvering for favourable and not too safe positions.
Rare visitors to this island state the people are extremely primitive and
wear few clothes. It is the only inhabited island in the Philippine Archipelago
which has absolutely no towns and no government. The inhabitants pay no
taxes either cedula or otherwise. They live in shacks separate from each
other and are very evidently not “Groupers.”
Being wind swept by the terrific typhoons which pass this way, the people live in lonely dugouts, on the hillsides, heavily covered with thatched roofs
and it is stated the people arc quite indifferent to visitors and that one man
lives in the hovels they dwell in with four or five wives. Mebbe thats why
they keep so far apart. Brave—brave men to do that altho if they run true
to form, the more wives they have the more fields they tilled and the more
they have to eat.
We flew in many circles over these hills and saw only some patches I took
to be planted with camotes and some mountain rice fields and only saw evidences of a very few small shacks.
We hurried after our companions who were well ahead of us over toward
the Balintang rocks from which the stormy channel takes its name. The Balintang islands are not worthy the name, as they are merely recks sticking from
a stormy sea and their terribly jagged appearance very clearly demonstrates
the force and constancy of the waves. Terrific tide rips were washing and
rushing over the narrow reefs surrounding them. These rocks rise very
rapidly from great depths as a menace te any unfortunate ship that might be
off its course. Only a few scraggly wisps of forlorn looking grass grew from
a niche or two, as no foothold could ever be secured by shrubhery even that
would hold against the winds and waves that must eternally lash these lonely
rocks.


which was not tilted Gen. Parker, left; Prof. “Houn' Dog” Bartlett, right.


19


I photographed them and then again streaked after the other distant
planes.
Dragged we then thoroughly Sabtang Island and gave these people their
second view of planes. The little villages nesting below us on the shelves
above wave-reach, lie in very orderly rows and appeared, all of them, to be
made of coral rock with thatched roofs. There is not sufficient of Sabtang
Island lying flat to sit down on comfortably-let alone land a plane. It’s a
darned good island to break one’s neck on if one loses his footing.
Across some mighty nasty looking water between Sabtang to Batanes. I
say nasty looking water because we could see the whirlpools and tide rips playing tag with each other below us and the back lash of choppy waves slap
each others’ faces and the steady drone of our motors was quite comforting
and reassuring.


We soared over villages on the lower edge of Batanes and then quickly
picked up Mahatao and scooted low over the trail we had taken on our first
trip—the trail gouged from the side of the precipices between Mahatao and
Basco and were able to spot the canal down its center in which Professor
Bartlett had plunked and Captain Wells had skidded.


We circled Basco and saw the people running from every direction toward
the Landing Field as we were about to make a landing for the first time in
the history of the northern islands. We all carefully “dragged” the field in
turn looking for danger spots, if any, and then Colonel Sneed signalled for
us to “disengage" and after another turn he set down his plane while we
from the air noted results. Followed rapidly the rest in turn while the Amphibian created huge excitement and considerable consternation with the
hundreds of people out there by settling on the water. High excitement—


S.


Gen. Parker—one good Houn' Dog.”


"a plane had fallen into the water"
but the excitement subsided when they
saw Captain Wells skillfully taxi over
the water to a safe anchorage close
off shore. Too bad the beach was all
huge round stones and “The Duck”
could not come up on it. I would
have loved to hear the remarks of
these people on an "Air—Water and
Land” Plane.
There was waiting for us the
Harhor boat “MILEY" belonging to
the United States Army, which had
smashed her way north from Manila
and was awaiting us. We immediately
transferred to the “MILEY" and
steamed for Itbayat which we reached
after five o’clock. Talk about unfriendly shores. Talk about rugged
cliffs and wave bitten strands.
Itbayat is an almost circular island
not over six miles wide and ten miles
long. It is all rolling country of
volcanic formation with the entire


20


coast line or rim of
the island higher than
the center. It is a
peculiar feature of Itbayat that no stream
gives into the sea, all
of the small creeks

flowing toward the
A

center of the island


to its lowest point
A Y

a
near Mayan—its only
YA
VAg
PA
real town. The cliffs
M
rise sheer from the
R

water for about 400
AOA

feet, possibly a little

more. Caves and unN
dercuttings evidenced
the force and constancy of tide and storm. We disembarked from a small boat onto a coral
or lava ledge, narrow and insecure. We then scaled, crawled and inched across
some huge lava boulders, which while they were twenty feet above high tide
mark give every evidence of being very often wavelashed and punished. Then
across some more less broken rock to a goat’s path which zigzagged when it
was not going almost sheer up, to the top. Believe you me when we got to
the top I don’t think any of us that were not blowing like Walrus.
There are only two horses on the island and we had them both. One had
a saddle fastened to the horse by a small rope used as a girth. One stirrup
was a looped rope while the other was a one time stirrup which was tied "at
the bottom" because the top had been broken and lost and the owner too tired
to make a new one.
The Governor of the Batanes Group was with us because he had been
waiting for months for a means of transportation, for be it known right here
and now that while Basco has been forgotten and forsaken by Luzon and
its governments here, Itbayat is farther from Basco by transportation than
is Basco from Luzon, although in distance it is a searce twenty miles. No
harbors of any kind exist on these islands. Consequently no boat of any size
can be retained but there is no reason in the world for the isolation these
islands suffer because there are many times of the year, and days during any
month that a good boat with a sea skipper—not a harbor hider could make a
landing at either place. With the prevailing monsoons at northeast and southwest, one side or other of the islands is always calm and due to their narrowness, transport of supplies not impossible from either coast. Some one drowned
up there some time. Last year a launch tied together with baling wire and
bejuco disappeared hence no vessel of any size likes to come here now. Give
a deg a bad nameOn the way from Basco to Itbayat, we found the sea would be too rough
on the western coast so we made for the other coast and the Governor informed me he understood things were pretty bad on Itbayat for food and
wondered whether he could secure some on the boat, although he had made no
effort whatever to bring anything aboard. He emphasized the fact that things
were very bad on Itbayat for food but as I had heard that story so often
when there was no real need for relief, I paid small heed to his remark.


Basco Church Built in 1764.


21


We made the approximately four miles to the town of Mayan mostly by
walking, descending and climbing continuously very rolling country over a
narrow foot or cattle path. There was small evidence of any intensive plantings along the path although I did see a few mountain rice patches. The
trees however even after ten months gave evidence of having had an awful
beating and a small patch of coconut trees beside the trail had not even begun
to recover from the terrific drubbing it had taken months before. I rode one
of the horses part of the way but it was almost as painful to ride that saddle
with its "impoverished" stirrups as it was to walk, so I inveigled Colonel
Sneed into the belief he was tired and got him to mount while I walked the
rest of the way. After ahout a half hour he called back to me through the
dark.
“You back there Andreas?", and upon my affirmative reply he again called
back, “Come up here and get your darn horse, as I am worse off now after
riding him than I was before, and I almost hanged myself in this maybe stirrup
several times."
I however did not again ride that horse. I knew the reason for my
generosity.
The Governor immediately upon ascending the precipice near the landing
place had quickly annexed the other horse for himself as none of us wanted
the runt because it had no saddle, so he commandered a gunny sack which he
doubled and threw on the horse’s back, vaulted over it and started. Every
time he went down hill he was on the horse’s neck and every time he went
up hill he slid on her haunches to which the lady horse objected and she
would endeavor to dislodge him by bucking and kicking, but the Governor merely
reached forward by lying down on her back and pulled himself into place. I
got a great kick out of this, as he
was really absolutely wet from perspiration when darkness fell while
those of us who were walking were
much better off and we had to employ
no acrobatics afoot.
There was a wonderful moon and
the walk over the rolling hills in the
dying afternoon and early night was
really beautiful. Came we suddenly
over the brow of a hill and saw nesting just below us a village of stone
houses with the inevitable thickly
thatched steep roofs and came up to
meet us a considerable group of people who had been advised by the Amphibian that afternoon of our prospective arrival in a note dropped
into the town.
Very good looking and well dressed
girls stepped forward and presented
Y
cach of our group with a very nice 
-
bouquet of henest-to-God roses and
flowers. It was most decidedly a Kids likes puppies in any language
22


Beau Geste and demonstrated what I believe to be a very sincere feeling of
appreciation for our visit. We were taken to the Presidencia where we found
a considerable group of people who wanted to see for themselves the men
"who flew through the air.” After a little difficulty, so unaccustomed are
these people to visitors, we secured some bathing water and a place to sleep,
which were given us in the Intermediate School house where wooden and cane
benches or beds with woven mats were placed for us. Water supply—gasoline
tin-shower—a coconut shell. Fair enough. We had to ask the assistance of
Police to keep the youngsters from crowding in on us while we were trying
to throw cupfuls of water over ourselves preparatory to changing clothes, as
we were all wringing wet from our sonstant climbing and going down the
hills. Colonel Sneed and myself only had brought our clothing rolls so we
traded about with the Gencral and Lieutenant Staubel.
About nine o’clock we learned what the Governor meant by the island
being short of rations. We were taken to the home of one of the school
teachers and seated at a table covered with a spotless table cover. Cheap but
clean. We sat on wooden benches around the table. The meal began with
an apology about the food, but, I have yet to go into the rural sections of
any country or any land to find where the house wife would not make apologies for the food set before us although the cooking may have been divine
and the abundance excessive.
There was no bread, and now listen you soft bred people—not a grain of
rice to be had. We had a bowl of warm water in which some eggs had been
ccoked and that constituted the soup. We had two or three plates of very
good camotes cut in squares and fried and we had a few pieces of meat of
some kind cut thin and fried hard. I had the advantage over the rest because
I am accustomed to anything they set before me but the others had not too good
a time over that meal. They did happen to bring in a small bunch of bananas
which was immediately pounded upon by the others while I gleefully mopped
up on the camotes and the unidentified meat.
Now this is no criticism of our hospitality. It is a description of it and
of what we had to eat and you who know the hospitality of the Filipino will
understand they gave us better than they ordinarily had for themselves and
when this was all they had to give, what in God’s name did they have for
themselves? We might just as well finish up with the food proposition right
now. So for breakfast we had a fried egg apiece, and some little squares of
camotes fried brown. They dug up frem some mysterious place a little coffee—
native coffee, and we had that and some bananas.
Our hostess asked not one thing for herself but did confide to me that a
few cans of milk might possibly save her baby if she could get it and I promised
to do what I could This was only brought out however with great reluctance
on her part after the General and the rest of the party had departed next
morning on a reconnaissance toward the west and southern ends of the island
while I remained behind waiting for sufficient light to photograph the last
place in the Philippine Islands and then make a reconnaissance afoot in a circle
over the northern and eastern parts of the island, rendezvousing at noon with
General Parker, Colonel Snced and Lieutenant Straubel at the landing place of
the afternoon before.
After our dinner, back we went to the Municipio or Presidencia where
we found the rest of the town gathered for the inevitable “baile.” We had a
delightful time in spite of our long flight. The place was lighted by the
inevitable Coleman petroleum lamp which is in great vogue even in these prim

itive places. General Parker and Colonel Sneed made themselves immortal by
giving one of the policemen and the Presidente each a 5-battery flashlight and
wonderful was their gratification over same.
As we sat there the music started and the same country folk dance was
offered by a separate girls asking each in turn to dance which, of course, we
did without hesitation on account of our past experience the month before at
Basco. At about 12:00 we decided we had all we wanted and left the hall for
the School house, as we sensed that the people would consider it highly improper to leave before the guests.
After our long trip by plane to Basco, the boat trip then from Basco to
Itbayat and the hike across the island to Mayan we were tired and the hardness of the beds was no hardship. Next morning—awake before daylight and
the breakfast above described. The houses here are the same as at Basco,
walls from two to two and one half feet thick made of coral rock laid one
upon the other with a binder of plaster made of burnt coral lime between.
The windows are of wood and sturdily made as are the doors in order to resist
the terrific blasts of the frequent typhoons.
The roofs are very stecp and more than two feet thick built layer upon
layer of cogon grass bound to matted reeds which are in turn held in place
on the outside by a lattice work of split wood so that the wind cannot upturn
the grass roof and tear it loose.
The interiors of the houses of Itbayat were very neat, scrupulously clean
and the floors, composed of thick heavy boards were highly polished. Few
houses had chairs but were well supplied with cushionless benches. People
mostly slept on mats laid on the floor at bed time and rolled up and stood
upright in a corner in the day time.
I did what photographing I could and then started on the walk back to
the landing field, not returning by the path over which I had entered the
town the night before. A young man of about twenty two or twenty three
accompanied me without invitation. I had told our hostess of the night before
I would do what I could regarding a few cans of milk and if she sent a boy
along I would see that he got it for her if any were available. Quite a group
of people came to the house after General Parker’s departure asking whether
our ship had any stores for sale. They informed me there had not been a
boat since May and that boat had brought no supplies. The terrific typhoons
of October and December had cleaned them out and worst of all they had
had “dry typhoon" which means a strong wind without rain which picks up the
wave crests and blows them completely in the form of spray across the island.
This is the most dreaded of all typhoons because the salt spray kills all vegetation and burns up their crops. The typhoon in October was a "Devil” according
to the people and scarcely a tree was left with branches and then to top everything the terrific typhoon of December came along, "worse than a Double Devil,”
the last two days of which were dry, and that worked their complete undoing.
The people did not want charity—they were quite distinct and plain about
that, but they did want a boat to come with rice so that they could "buy'
and not starve. They were almost unanimous in that plaint.
“We do not want anything for nothing but why does our government
not send us a boat with something to sell? Maybe it is because we are so
few or maybe it is because we are not "independistas” up here but desire
the Americans to remain so the Japanese will not take us, but anyway we
also become hungry and nobody helps us—not even sells us something. Our
camotes are also finished. What can we do?”


24


On my Safari back toward the landing I learned the reasons for the
calloused hands. Starting from the town I was accompanied as before said
by a young man and was soon overtaken by probably a dozen more young
people—both boys and girls. They had been in to the “baile” the night before and were now returning to their little rice and camote patches to tend
to them. These people are not too proud to work and investigation back on
Batanes demonstrated that the calloused hands of nice looking boys and girls
there were also caused by honest farm labor. A big contrast to some of the
collar wearing "Never Sweats” we find on the main island, too proud to work
but not too proud to seek charity. My hat is off to the Batanes people.
Arrived about noon at the landing place I made a slow and careful descent
and found there on the rocks a large number of people who where seeking
an opportunity to go to Basco. Students who had not been able to get down
there in time for the beginning of the classes, merchants who had come to
Itbayat months before and been morooned there and others who wanted to
return or get away from the place. General Parker permitted them all free
passage and there was a very gleeful crowd.
We were able to return in a small way the hospitality we had received
by buying from the ship the only sack of rice available which our party
donated to our hostess, the Presidente and some others who had assisted us.
It was really beautiful to see how they guarded that one sack of rice, so
many hungry mouths and empty stomachs and only one sack of rice. We
also bought and presented to our hostess a whole case of milk. She had
herself came the miles barefoot to the boatgone out to it, and horribly seasick as she had become, said, “Oh our baby can now have some milk. I am
so glad I came.” She was crying.
They did not want a gift, they wanted only a chance to buy. We however would not have it that way. It is entirely fitting here to state that
General Parker immediately contacted Vice-Governor Hayden by Radio who
in turn set the wheels going whereby the Coast Guard Cutter “Arayat" rushed
north with Hayden himself in charge and gave them temporary adequate relief until the new crops come in about October. Some rice was donated to
the very poorest and several hundred sacks were left for sale at cost. Wish
I could have been there to see those sun tanned Batanes faces—felt those
calloused and hardened hands of girls and boys—people who wanted to buy—
just a chance to live—a people not too proud to work.
END


RATIUECTATIXATITAYXN


11 11 IT


MAEAE
“the aristocrat of the Orient”


H. C. ("ANDY") ANDERSON
Managing Director





AC NN 


25


THE OLD BLUE SHIRT


Remember the days of the old blue shirt,
That covered the back of the soldier boy?
Remember the hike and the sweat and dirt,
The Krag’s swift kick and the canteen’s joy,
Where the brew ran wet and buck privates met,
And the army was all soldiers?
For the old blue shirt and the moist canteen,
Went along with him in those days of yore,
Fromi the fever camps to the Philippines,
Old Pekin’s wall to the Cuban shore,
When on payday there was hell to pay,
With the guard house for the soldiers.
But the old blue shirt saw his fights all won,
And “Volstead” was not in his list of words,
And a draft never blew a boy into one
Of those old blue shirts, and these tough old birds,
Were not rationed with gum, but knew beno and rum,
When the army was all soldiers.
So the blue shirt went away with beer,
By a staff G. O. for the O. D. kind,
But it covered the hide of a volunteer,
With his fighting heart, and you'd always find
Him the first to go with but half a show,
When our nation needed soldiers.
Now the old blue shirt is a thing now passed,
Like the boy who was, on that long gone day,
Whose comrade’s ranks are a-thinning fast,
But the Flag meant lots when he fought his way,
And he’s full of whales of pre-Volstead tales,
Of the army and its soldiers.
So don’t forget in the hour of cheers,
When the bands blare loud and the posts turn out,
That the old blue shirt and its volunteers
Once carried the Flag with same trump and shout,
To the world’s off side, o’er the oceans tide,
When the army was all soldiers.
—AUSTIN RowELL


26


One of Our Distinguished and Most Honored Visitors.
Y ats off to Past National Com11 mander Rice W. Means, United
Spanish War Veterans, the man to
A
whom we, the Oldtimers in the Philippines wish te pay homage for his

indefatigable work in having our pensions restored.
And now that we have him with

2
us in person it behooves each and
s every Spanish War Veteran to turn

r
out to greet him for the loyal support
N
he has given and the hard work he


W
has done for the restoration of our
pensions.
N
A tentative program covering
plans and schedule for the reception
to Comrade Means.
Nov. 14 —Arrival of Past Commander-in-chief Rice W.
Means on the s/s "President Pierce" at about 7:00
A. M., November 14, 1935. It was agreed that the Department
Chief of Staff address a letter to the Insular Collector of Customs
requesting the courtesies of the port, and that the official reception
committee be composed of the Department Commander and his staff
together with all comrades of the Order who might be able to be
present. Uniform or badge of the Order to be worn preferably.
Nov. 15 —Inauguration of the Commonwealth. The Department Commander
to arrange for the participation of Comrade Means.
Nov. 16 —Sight seeing.
Nov. 17 —Official visit to joint meeting of Major Crispulo Patajo Camp No.
23, General Frederick Fujston Camp No. 18, General Douglas MacArthur Camp No. 10, and 2nd Lieutenant Jose Ma. del Rosario
Camp No. 11, at Veteran’s Hall, Calle Echague, at 9:00 A. M.
Nov. 18 —Official visit to joint meeting of Macabebe Camp No. 26, William
C. Brady Camp No. 29, General J. Franklin Bell Camp No. 36,
San Fernando Pampanga Camp No. 33, and General Leonard Wood
Camp No. 4, to be held at such location in Pampanga Province as
may be designated later on, at about 10:00 A. M.
Nov. 19 ——Official visit to joint meeting of Generals Lawton-Egbert Camp No.
1, Colonel John M. Stotsenburg Camp No. 2, and General Guy V.
Henry Camp No. 19, at Veteran’s Hall, Calle Echague, Manila, at
8:30 P. M.


27


Nov. 20 —Official visit to Filipino Camp No. 24, Francisco Madrid Camp No.
28, Major John A. Logan Camp No. 32, San Quintin Camp No. 30, La
Union Camp No. 31, and Echague Camp No. 34 at Cabanatuan,
Nueva Ecija, at about 10:00 A. M.
Nov. 21)—Tentative visit by air to Iloilo and Cebu for purpose of inspecting
Nov. 22) Major Oliver B. Warwick Camp No. 8 and Valeriano Briton Camp
No. 27, at Iloilo, and Major Edward MeConville Camp No. 6 at
Cebu.
Nov. 23
—Official visit to Captain Marcus Covell Camp No. 40, at Atimonan,
Tayabas, at about 10:00 A. M.
Nov. 24)—Guest of Department Commander at Baguio.
Nov. 25)
Nov. 26 —General Reception and Despedida to be held at Sta. Ana Cabaret,
or at such place as may be designated by the Committee on Arrangements. It was decided that in addition to all members of the
Order an invitation be extended to the Governor-General and his
Staff, to the Commanding General of the Philippine Department
and Staff, to the Admiral of the Navy and Staff, to General Douglas
MacArthur and Staff, to the Commanding General at Fort Mills,
Fort Stotsenburg and Fort McKinley, and Staffs, to the Commanding
Officer of the 51st Infantry and Staff, to the Manager of the Vetcrans Administration and Staff, to the Veterans of Foreign Wars
and American Legion, to the American Chamber of Commerce, and
to such others as may be decided in the discretion of the Department Commander and the Committee on Arrangements.
After general discussion it was decided that the Committee on Arrangements should have full authority to make such arrangements and decisions
as might be required by circumstances arising. It was further decided that
considering the importance of the visit of Comrade Means every member of
the Order should feel a personal interest in making his visit a success and that
all would desire to contribute, according to their ability, to support the expense
involved. The various Camps to raise their own funds for entertainment to
be given in their own Camps—Department to raise a special fund to finance
the expense of the general reception. The Department Commander announced
that he would make up any deficit incurred.
The following committees were appointed:
Committee on Arrangements:
Senior Vice Department Commander Bernard H. Brown
Past Department Commander Albert M. Easthagen
Department Chief of Staff T. G. Henderson
Committee on Finance:
Past Department Commander Amos G. Bellis
Past Department Commander Leo Fischer
Junior Vice Department Commander Fausto Fronda
Department Inspector Chester Sanders
Department Patriotic Instructor C. S. Salmon
Department Quartermaster E. I. Totten (Treasurer)


28


THE AMERICAN ORDER OF NOBILITY


THE "United Spanish War Veterans” is a unique
organization. No child can be born into it; no proclamation of President, edict of King or Czer can command admission; no university or institution of learning
can issue a diplome euthorizing its holder to enter; no ecf
of Congress or Parliement secures recognition; the wealth
of a Rockefeller or a Ford cannof purchase the position;
its doors swing open only upon presentation of the bit of
paper, torn, worn, begrimmed through it may be, which
certifies to an honorable discherge from the armies or
navies of the nation during the Spanish-American Wer.
the Philippine Insurrection, or the China Relief Expedition.
And, unlike other essociations, no "new blood” can come
in; there ere no growing ranks from which recruits can be
drawn into the United Spanish War Veterans. With the
consummation of peace through victory, its rolls were closed
forever. Its lines are steadily growing thinner, and the
tramp of its column is with ever-lessening treed; the gaps
of the picket line grow wider; day by day defails ere made
from the reserve, summoned into the shadowy regions to
return to touch elbows no more, until, by end by, only a
solitary sentinel shall stand guard, waiting until the bugle
cell from beyond shall muster ouf the last comrade of the
United Spanish War Veterans.


SHADES
LAMPS
E
NOVELTIES
FURNITURE
HEMP RUGS
EVERYTHING TO BEAUTIFY A HOME
PHILIPPINE SHELL.CRAFT CORPORATION
L. RIFKIN
Manager
478 A. Mabini
Phone 5-69-57


AELPANA TA N GE NINGNNEANANWVLNAELNCEANAE


29


An Old Friend
for
50 YEARS


AT ALL DEALERS
SMITH, BELL &. CO., Lid.
MANILA.


d


WCNAUINANITTT "IANEINNCECETAYNANATTANAINOUAUI
Houston Rubber Co., Inc.
548 Rizal Ave.
Manila.
Distributors of
GOODYEAR
TIREES
4.50 x 21......... P10.12
4.75 x 19......... 10.80
4.75 x 20......... 11.60
all other sizes at lowest prices.
AACME
BATTERIES
13 Plate ......... P12.75
1 year guarantee
J. I. MURPRI. SR.
General Manager.

EATANIUTITIXTTATEETTTATC
E. E. EISER
INCORPORATED
INSURANCE
OF ALL KINDS
Kneedler Bldg.
MANILA, P. I.


Phone 2-24-28


MLE   E AEIO


30


YANKEE MUSIC IN THE FAR EAST
By CHARLES A. FREEMAN
'ar back in the days of Ninety-eight the soldiers composing the first expedi tion lounged on the awning covered decks of hastily chartered transports, and
sang from San Francisco to Manila the popular songs of the day. One of
these songs was destined to introduce a new word to the dwellers of the
Philippines—a word which they believed had derision in its origin, but which
in reality did not.
“Just because she made them goo-goo eyes,” was a chorus tang of a minstrel
song. And when for the first time Jim Smith gazed into the dark orbs of a
Filipino dalaga he turned to Tom Brown and remarked—
“Gee, but that girl can make goo-goo eyes.” Later the insurgents under
arms took the word goo-goo or gu-gu as it is variously spelled, as an insult.
When the Americans learned this, it stuck, and became a veritable taunt. Of
recent years the world has become shortened to gook, but gu-gu persists in
Philippine fiction and fact written by Americans, and applies to the lower
class Filipino.
On the other hand Filipinos of the early years of American occupation
adopted American songs and music with rapidity, not having the slightest idea
of the meaning of the words. This is still true to a certain extent, for not
so long ago a Filipino band, stationed outside a church during a baptism
ceremony in Ilocos Norte, played for the delectation of the proud father "Why
Did I Kiss That Girl?'
American soldiers used to experience a wonderful kick when a funeral
procession passed with the inevitable tooting of “There’ll Be a Hot Time” or
"After the Ball.” Soon after hearing it, the insurgents parodied "Hot Time”
with what the Americans called the one-two-three. It was part English and
part Tagalog, but it pleased its composers so greatly that they often in their
trenches sang it for the attacking white men. The chorus went:
One, two, three— Mericano na-hu-li.
Three, fo' fi'—Mericano na-patay.
This conveyed the gentle sentiment that any Americans taken prisoner
would be speedily bumped off.
In retaliation the blue shirts parodied the famous "Aguinaldo March" with:
Oh, Aguinaldo, what do you want to run for?
Oh, Aguinaldo, why do you want to run?
You got foot itch, and jumped the ditch.
What do you want to run for?
Oh, Aguinaldo—you’re a son of a gun.
Later, after the dove of peace spread its wings over the war torn archipelago, and the army of occupation busied itself with love making instead of
fighting, another half English, half Tagalog song came into being. It was
tacked to the music of “Rings on her Fingers and Bells on her Toes.” Like
Mademoiselle of Armentiere” and "Hinkey Dinkey" it tended to ribaldry, but
many a cantina has echoed to the ringing chorus of "No got asawa, no gotta
rice,” in this case the sentiment being that a Filipino girl mourns the departure
of the transport on which her soldier sweetheart sails for the homeland, in
consequence of which she has "no gotta rice."


31


UTONIVNTTVVIVIICUNUTITNITTCINUUWIUNILAYAATIYRXXTNUAAEACTENLTAGYATUUVINOEY.


Swiff's Premium
Ha ms and Bacon
N
American an d
Australian Be ef


N
Choice States Fruits and Vegetables
N
Carnation Churned Buttermilk
International Cold Stores
116-120 Echague
Phone 2-27-86





Compliments
of


Kneedler


Realty Company


operating


KNEEDLER BUILDING



Bay View Hotel


Leonard Wood Hotel


 T TE


DOS DEOD AN LENE NOS 
32


U. S. TAXES—A TALL OF WOE
Contributed by a former Philippine resident.
Tax the farmer, tax his fowl,
Tax his dog and tax its howl
Tax the hen and tax the egg,
Let the pore old fool go beg.
Tax his pig and tax its squeal,
Tax his boots run down at heel;
Tax his farm and tax his clothes
Tax the rag that wipes his nose.
Tax his house, his plow, his shed,
Tax the bald spot on his head
Tax his ox and tax his ass,
Tax his auto, tires and gas.
Tax the road where he must pass,
Make him travel on the grass
Tax him till he has to bawl.
Did’nt he vote to tax em all.
He is just the forgotten man,
So tax the cuss just all you can.
Tax the laborer but be discreet,
Tax his bread, and tax his meat.
Tax the pay-roll, tax the sale,
Seize the gold for rubber kale.
Tax his pipe and tax the smoke;
Teach him government is no joke.
Tax all business, tax the shops,
Tax the incomes, gifts and stecks.
Tax the kids until they’re dead
Stand the darn fool on his head.
Did’nt he vote to tax em well,
Tried to make a taxing-hell
Let him kick now, all he can.
He voted for the forgotten man.
Percy A. HILI


33


PHILIPPINE
TRUST COMPANY


PLAZA GOITI
MANILA


NELSSES NAA D S DADD L 





SMILE, DURN YOU, SMILE


Left at the Post—Smith: “Jones
expects 100 per cent disability on his
accident-insurance policy. He says he
is completely incapacitated by the loss
of a thumb.
Smythe: "What’s his vocation?”
“He’s a professional hitch-hiker."
Bracebridge Gazette.
*
Worth a Fortune—I've got a new
idea. Fortune in it.
"What now?'
"It’s an alarm clock that emits the
delicious odors of frying bacon and
fragrant coffee.”—Tatler.
*
Adaptable—"Almost every man can
find work if he uses his brains," asserted the man who had travelled a good
deal—“that is, if he has the ability
to adapt himself like the piano-tuner
I once met in the West of America.
"'Why,' I said to him, for we were
in a wild, unsettled country, 'surely
piano-tuning can’t be very lucrative
here? I shouldn’t imagine that pianos
were very plentiful in this region."
“‘No, they’re not, said the pianotuner, 'but I make a pretty fair income
by tightening up barbed wire fences!'”
—Portage la Prairie Gruphic.
*
That Sort of Fellow—Jean: "What
sort of a chap is Fred?”
Jill: "“Well, when we were together
last night the lights went out, and he
spent the rest of the evening repairing
the switch.”—Chatham News.
*
Joint Account—Bank Teller: “So you
want to open a joint account with your
husband? A checking account, I suppose?”
Mrs. Brown: "A checking account
for me, yes, and just a deposit account
for my husband."—Granby (Que.)
Leader-Mail.


Reciprocity—Jones leaned over the
garden fence. “I say, old fellow,” he
said to his neighbor. “I understand
that you have Thomson’s new rake?”
The neighbor nodded.
Good,” said Jones. “If you'll let
me borrow that occasionally, I’ll let you
use Brown’s roller whenever you need
it."—Moncton Transcript.
*
Seunds Better—Father had just had
an encounter with the magistrates, and
mother was instructing little Tom, who
had been invited out to tea.
“Now, don’t forget, Tom, she said.
weeks, not twenty-one days."—Ottawa
Citizen.
*
Superflous Warning—"Are you the
plumber?
“Yes, mum.”
“Well, see that you exercise care
—"your father’s gorn away for three
when doing your work. All my floors
are highly polished and in excellent
condition."
“Oh, don’t worry about me slippin’,
mum. I’ve got nails in me boots. -
Maritime Merchant.
K
A Little Short—Guest: "I’d be happy
to perform some tricks this evening,
but I haven’t the necessary equipment
with me.
Host: “What kind of tricks do you
perform?"
Guest: “Ccin tricks."—Farm and
Ranch Review.
The Target—A negro was asked to
supply a tame turkey. The customer
was insistent that it should be tame,
not wild. When he came to carve the
turkey he found it full of shot and he
reproached the negro for having supplied a wild bird.
'In stric' confidence," explained the
negro, "dem shot was intended for me,
not de turkey!”—London Free Press.


35


(OTUUNVIIOTATACIICUAVOITIYATINWYAXEIYAKEVEYXXXACCNNARXCCOTCRIEIITEEEXAA


THE PHILIPPINE NET & BRAID MFC. CO. INC.
367 JUAN LUNA 369
Sole Distributors
of
“HERCULES"—lce Cream Freezer
Large size P10.00—Small size P8.00
Every family needs one of these freezers
Freczes Ice Cream in one minute.
P. O. Box 320
Phone 4-95-85 and 4-95-63


  EA A A   VN    SSNNN S
TCANIYAVAYIIEITTTETTYEYITEXTYIXTYATIYIYATITATACIUUYEYAEKYMEAXI


NECTARSODA FOUNTAIN
Soft Drinks and Light Meals


Where the famous NECTAR ICE CREAM is prepared scientifically
under the direct supervision of an Industrial Engineer.
Try our Mango Ice Cream
TEMPTING, APPETIZING, DELICIOUS


UNIVERSAL DRUG STORE
501—513 Rizal Ave.
Manila, P. I.
Tel. 2-30-55 Connecting All Depurtments


NO     AA N G U N NVNRENWED SEESSEN LN NAN N
TTTLGTAAANYXYYALLLTTEAT


Delicious with
sandwiches
.... because it has its distinctive flavour.
THE delicate flavour of
NESTLE'S Crustless Chedder Cheese
satisfies the most exacting palate. It has a creamy smoothness which makes it different from ordinary cheese.


  S DESA


EAS NL DAO DUDAN AA DINE


36


SINGERS OF SONGS
Sing a song o’six pence
A pocket full of rye,
Seven Billion Dollars
In a Democratic Pie;
When the Pie was opened,
All Congress was atingle,
To see the stream of glittering gold,
And hear the metal jingle.


They sang a song of Bullion
Which ended in a sigh,
For those were Rubber Dollars
In that Democratic Pie;
From five, to seven Billions stretched
By brainy Profs pedantic;
They'll shrink to five again when sent
Across the Blue Atlantic.


They sing a song of silver,
And hope is riding high,
That Wheat and Cotton prices
Will soar up to the Sky;
That busy hands will mint them tons
Of Dollars, Quarters, Dimes,
And then from round the corner
Will return the Good Old Times.
A. G. HILI


8


 CE E N    EANNG V  N
37


IXICACATOTOCEIVEATITTACTXYYATTIXIYTANITKAXIUEYITIATELACAYA!T


L. A. COOPER, INC.
170 LEGARDA 170
TEL. 2-38-30
SEIBERLING TIRES
GASOLINE and OILS
BATTERIES
WE ARE OLDTIMERS and we need your
trade. You will get your money’s worth.
Value received.


Mr. Louis Schmiedeman from the famous Carabao Outfit, the 13th U. S.
Infuntry, comes back after all these years to see the Inaugural Ceremonies of
the New Government. He says he is taking some pictures back to show the
boys at home, the brutes that caused his comrades to run.
Y
Mr. H. L. Jefferies is now out of the hospital after 2 years and is now
stopping at the club.
*
Don't let Old Father Time cut in on the opportunity to join the club. As
days go by this opportunity is passing. Why don’t every member of this club
make it his business to introduce at least one new member each month?
*
During the past month the club has suffered the loss of three members
through death.
Frank H. Stegner
Pedro Ma. Duarte.
S. P. Fields
May they rest in peace.
*
To all those who have contributed books, magazines, clothes, shoes, etc.
during the past month, we wish to express our thanks.
*
Do you know that—Only seven letters of the alphabet—G. J. K. U. X. Y
and Z. have not been used in the Titles of the Administration and projects
created by Congress and the President. But don’t get frightened, they will
find a use for them before they get through.
*
J. B. Heim, one of our members, who is representing the Westinghouse
Radios, has placed a Radio in the Club so that the members who did not get
an invitation to the Inaugural Ceremonies of the New Commonwealth will be
able to listen in. These Radics are being sold on monthly installments of
P6.00 down and P6.00 monthly.
Christmas is coming so don’t fail to read the page of our magazine calling
for small donations to our Christmas Fund.
*
Have any of you some eld clothes, shees etc, you have no further use
for? Don’t throw them away. Call 27804 and we will call and get them.
*
Did you know that G. J. Day, one of our members has opened a Refrigerator Service and Supply Repair Shop at No. 534 Aviles. If you need his
service you can get him on the Phone No. 22695.
*
After our visit to Corregidor some wisecracker made the remark that it
was a good thing that the Veterans Administration did not have a man
with us on that visit, because if they had, some of the pensions would surely
be cut. Ancther one said that he believed that Gen. Kilbourne must have
38


been trying us out to see if we could be re-enlisted as the Army was having
a hard time in getting new men, due to the C.C.C., the Dole and several
agencies of the Administration in Washington.
*
The following members are now in Sternberg Hospital: O. O. Hanson—
John Hayner—C. E. Wells. Why don’t some of you take a few minutes off
and go over and see them?
*
We are just in receipt of a beautiful booklet descriptive of the manufacture of White Horse Whisky. The booklet was sent to us by Hanson, Orth
& Stevenson, Inc., the agents for this whisky in the Philippines. It certainly
is a very interesting booklet containing some very good stories and jokes and
other interesting matter. In the future we intend to publish some of the
Scotch jokes in this magazine. If you do not know how to judge good whisky,
would advise that you write Hanson, Orth & Stevenson, Inc. for a copy.
X
On another page of this magazine you will find the tentative plans of the
United Spanish War Veterans for the reception of Past Commander in Chief
Rice W. Means. Don’t miss this as you may want to attend some of these
functions.
X
If you want any information in re any Oldtimer, come up to the club—ten
chances to one we can tell you all about him.
*
The club is now becoming very popular, many of the Oldtimers make
this their headquarters and you will find at least seventy or eighty of them
at the club daily.
*
Our Mess grows in popularity—why don’t you come up get a good meal
once in-a-while?


Noon Time is Lunch Time
That’s the logicul time to drop in at the
ASTORIA TEA ROOM
Exquisite Noon-Day Lunches
We Assure You of Irreproachable Servicc
Best of Refreshments
Delicious Pastry
106 ESCOLTA
(Opposite Phil. Education Co.)
American & European Service


BEFORE YOU PURCHASE ANY OTHER RADIO
SEE AND HEAR THE 1936 PATTERSON RADIOS
-HOMA SUN SILTENSUN INC.


39





XMAS FUND
WE HAVE NOW STARTED OUR DRIVE
FOR OUR CHRISTMAS FUND. IF YOU
FEEL DISPOSED TO MAKE A SMALL
DONATION TO THIS FUND—SEND ITIN
ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY OF
THE CLUB SO WE CAN MAKE OUR
PLANS FOR OUR ANNUAL CHRISTMAS
DINNER.


ANOTHER GOOD FISH STORY


“You may not believe me,” said Col. Andreas, "but what I am going to
tell you is gospel. Some years ago while in Mindanao I caught a half poung
tanguingue. He wasn’t much of a fish compared with others that I’d got, so
I threw him in again, first, however, clipping his tail into the shape of a heart,
so I would know him again. Would you believe it? I just came back from
there where I have been on some survey work with General Parker, and while
there I again caught the same fish, but he gave me great fight this time, and
no wonder, for he weighed between ten and twelve pounds. The heart shape
of his tail was perfect, just as I had put it.”
“I can quite believe your story," replied Captain Maddy, thoughtfully, “for
I had a very similar experience myself. Several years ago when I was fishing
around Palawan Island I caught an enormous Lapu-Lapu. I had plenty of
others, so I decided I’d mark this one and let him go. I didn’t like to cut
him so I took a small whistle that I carried on my watch guard and tied it
to the tail of the fish. Only a short time ago before I left there, I caught
the same fish. He was no bigger than the first time I had seen him, but the
whistle had grown into a fog horn."


TCTCLALAA


TIITIITTICIXTAATAYIEKCOTICCTCNTGATUTGTTITIAT


A
GREETING
FROM THE
MARINERS


MARINERS' CLUB
DERHAM BUILDING
Opposite Pier 3
Manila.


THE
SANITARY
STEAM
LAUNDRY CO.
(INCORPORATED)


The Sign of Cleanliness
LAUNDRY
DRY.CLEANING
DYEING
MANILA, P. I.
PHONE 2-35-29


 


EE VN N CN NI AC AE N R NIN


E


Remember your folks
A
at home!


A box of
AHSLEO
Cigars
will be a highly appreciated
Christmas Present


Give us your order and we will mail the box
for you, all charges prepaid, to any eddress within
the United States. If desired we can enclose your
personel card in the box, or furnish a nicely engraved
Philippine Christmes Card, free of charge.


Alhambra Cigar & Cigarette Mfg. Co.
P. O. Box 209
MANILA
31Tayuman


ENDNUNNCNN ANNANNNAANEN DAUNN


UNIVERSITY OF TUE PIHLIPPINES
LIBRARY


PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF
THE PIONEERS' CLUB OF MANILA


OUR CREED
To be so strong that nothing con disturb your
peace of mind: to talk health, happiness and prosperity; to make your friends feel that there is
something in them; to look on the sunny side of
everything; to think only of the best; to be just
es enthusiestic about the success of others as you
are abouf your own; to forget the mistakes of the
pest and profit by them; to wear e cheerful countenence and give e smile to everyone you meet;
to be too large for worry, too noble for anger, too
strong for feer, and foo happy to permit the presence of trouble.


VOL. III
No. 6
 APRIL 36 -


TWENTY CENTAVOS


ENATAVACITVAMEAITINMPTAMATNTGMATAATETITNOCTANTATANIIRINAM


No eMore “Reason "Go
Suffer Lowland "teat
Baguio as the best summer resort needs no advertisement. It has many modern hotels charging moderate prices.
It costs as much to live in Baguio as in Manila and other
large cities in the Islands.
You begin to enjoy Baguio temperature as soon as you
board the air cooled car at Tutuban Station.
Then it costs very little to go
to Baguio by train
LOOK AT THESE FARES


1st class, Manila-Baguio


Manila-Baguio, in
ordinary car ...


3rd class, Manila-Baguio...


One Way



Round Trip


₱11.89


10.78


₱19.40


3.72 (Up)


₱ 5.7


3.32 (Down)


Train leaves Manila
6:55 a.m.
8:30 a.m.
1:10 p.m.


You can afford
to be
Baguio minded


Arrive Damortis
11:33 a.m.
2:00 p.m.
6:49 p.m.


Arrive Baguio
1:15 p.m.
3:55 p.m.
8:45 p.m.
You can afford
to be
Baguio minded


For particulars, Call Up Traffic Manager
Tel. 4-98-61—Local 41
Information Office—Local 42
City Office—Tel. 2-31-83


Manila Railroad Company


943 Azcarraga
Manila
SAA  A    AS  D


NIRKI(ICAXAIKGAANAGNIAKGATTTAMACACAAAIAAMAATAMM


Beautified and Protected with
ICOTAr..S


J. Muller Residence in Baguio
This palatial residence of oldtimer John Muller, one of
Baguio’s business leaders was tastefully beautified with
selected non-fading colors of the best for the tropics—
Yco Paints.
Yco Paints are manufactured by experts using materials
tested for tropical suitability, making Yco Paints non-fading,
weather-resistant and economical in the long run!
Write our paint experts on how to Yco Paint your home
at less cost today!
ELIZALDE PAINT & OIL FACTORY, INC.
general managers -
ELIZALDE G CO..INE.
MUELLE DE LA INDUSTRIA, MANILA


ES


AVS V  N


NE LREN CAS


 )

VICTORIAS
REFINED GRANULATED SUGAR
A PHILIPPINE PRODUCT
Manufactured by the
VICTORIAS MILLING COMPANY
Victorias, Occidental Negros
Use Its Energy Generously
Sold in Convenient 10 lb. Bags.


IYTIYLAIYCAYCIVTYAENEIIXTETNTAITIATITITTITITYTTIY
TTYTPUPPTPEYO!
Iarner, Bacnes &
Co., Itd.
Hundon—New Potk—Manila
Bacolod
Iloilo
Cehu


Smoke
Chesterfield
CIGARETTES
They Satisfu
LIGGETT & MYERS TOBACCO CO., INC.
MANILA


NENTAUT
1 At your sel
LDN
2
o


TUINUUINY
TETITTITTIN
rvice ...
B DISTANEE


DO you make the most of
the possibilities of modern
Long Distance telephoning? Do
you know you can falk fo Cebu,
lloilo, and many fowns of Luzon
from eny felephone in Manila?
Call "LONG DISTANCE" for
rates to provincial and overseas points.


    
VTAVUUYPUVUVYVUVAIIVUTUVITUYTYOTYTTYYUYYTUIYITYYUTUTIYIXTUYVYTYYTYYYTULTUIYYIPTRTUTURTUPTYTTTYTRTYTYUY


PHILIPPINE
TRUST COMPANY


PLAZA GOITI
MANILA


EEIIAIOTIATI


Ghe.
BDLD-DIBBERS
of 1936
The old "Forfy-Niners” had a real job
as gold diggers; most of that gold was
produced by hand. The modern gold
digger' goes at it right and acfually
makes it pay by the shortest route.
He uses
GARDNER-DENVER
Air Equipment
PUMPS
COMPRESSORS ROCK DRILLS
AIR HOISTS STOPPERS
DRILL SHARPENERS
f mining is your forte let us give
you some data about this equipment and, the service that goes
with it.
ATLANTIC, GULF &
PACIFIC COMPANY


ANGUNUEIVUUO L LLIRE.Y


CALAMBA SUBAR ESTATE


Sugar, Desiccated Coconut, Coconut Oil, Copra
and Industrial Alcohol.


Factories : Canlubang, Laguna
Office
De los Reyes Building, Manila.


6


NKCMOUMGguurtt


To producing mines, to mines under
development or exploration, and to owners
of mineral claims.....Marsman and Company,
Inc, offers a complete technical service.....
from the examination of a prospect to
financing its development..... from a consulfing engineer’s report on mine development or mill design..... to the enfire responsibility for mine management.
We are also general sales representatives in the Philippines for standard mine
and mill machinery and equipment. In our
bodegas we have a full assortment of mine
messes, and stores.
Special quotations made on complefe
equipment for mines, mills, machine shops
and power plants.


MARSMAN & COMPANI, INC.


Stewart Building,
Burnham Park Boulevard,
Telephone 287—P. O. Box 18,
BAGUIO


G. de los Reyes Building,
Plaza Cervantes,
Telephone 2-32-32—P. O. Box 297
MANILA


  LCINCUNANNN IINVA E


AVE NVEL UUNNE


7


AANAITIATTIUNETUNCANANATAI
Tat


—Shop at

Going Abroad?
Going To Bagiuo?
We hare Big assortments to complete
your wardrobe.
TRAVEL—SPORT DRESSES TE HOUSEOF PERFECT SIVLE
EVENING GOWNS
TO LA PAE


Aurelia


Telegraphic Address
SALT!


ON
P. O. Box 1377
Tel. 2-16-25



LA FORTUNA"
Jewelry Store
154-156 ESCOLTA
Importers of Watches, Jewelry and Fancy Articles.
Wholesale and Retail


S. SALTI, Prop

PATTERSON RADIOS
SIMMONS BEDS—DECCA RECORDS
RADIO SUPPLIES AND PARTS
RADIO REPAIRING
THOMPSON STEVENSON, INC.
PHONE 2-36-44
17 ESCOLTA


MANILA PHOTO SUPPLY, INC.
159-161 Escolta
PHOTOGRAPHIC DEVELOPING,
PRINTING & ENLARGING
With every roll of film Developed and Printed
at the MANILA PHOTO SUPPLY, INC., you
will receive one (1) beautiful enlargement
size 5 x 7 inches FREE. Guaranteed studio
quality enlargement suitable for framing,
coloring, etc. Prompt service.
Manila Photo Supply, Inc.


A N  A A VAD A ENVA E D  EE
8


AIlIEKICAI!
S-TEEr
—A


A MONTHLY MAGAZINE PUBLISHED BY AND FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PIONEERS' CLUB
OF MANILA, P. I.
APRIL'36
I


Published at No. 224 Calle Chica, Manila.
Edited by E. V. Bartholomai


VOL. III


Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at the
Manila Post Office on Jan. 4. 1934.


No. 6


President . . A. W PRAUTCH
Vice-Pres... L. BENTON
Treasurer T. J. S. B. STEVENS
Secretary E. V. BARTHOLOMAI
n
Master-at-Arms PElE WILSON
House Committee
J. T. MADDY . .. . Chairman
E. V. BARTHOLOMAl Member
P. E. MCGUIRE . . . . Member
Membership Committee
JOHN W. RATLIFF . Chairman
T. J. S. B. STEVENS . Member
BRUCE RICHARDSON Member
Auditing Committee
T. G. HENDERSON . Chairman
H. SMITH
Member
T. R. MASTEN
.. Member
P2 a Year
20 Cts a Copy
U.S. and Foreign $2
Make all payments and address all
communications to “The American
Oldtimer” Pioneers' Club, 224 Calle
Chica, Manila.


e certainly don’t like to be
continuously calling your attention to the shortcomings of a
great number of our community
—but we are living in the tropics
and after thirty seven years
here, where the environment is
so strong to put off everything
until manana, we too are fearful of that time when we will
also adopt this same policy and
we therefore ask your indulgence
if we again ask just why you
don’t join the Pioneers Club and
help in the good work they are
doing in this community?
If you don’t know who we are
and what we are doing just get
a copy of The American Oldtimer
magazine. Read it over and then
come up to the club and see for
yourself what we are doing to
make a success of this project.


9





"MANILA'S PRIDE"
When you enter your favored restaurant
Just call the waiter aside.
Then, with the eir of e connoisseur,
Order, "Manila’s Pride”
The boy will smile
and say

Paninigue
palepilsen

V.
Sir!!
HOLPIL.N
this is the beer
that merits

E
E
“Excellent"
a product of
SAN MIGUEL BREWERY


NNLE NA A ENA NI OS



"


MABAA


An SARA DE IE TAA SGa A O MA D  PO
Fluid Ext. Krameria 45 Gm.; Opium 1.,35 Gm.; Excipiens e arom as. ad. I liter
Alcohol 357 vol.: Opium o.135 Gm.7e


10


HOUN' DOGGIN"
BY
ceiera GC
Chapter V


t was stil dark and quite cool at the 2,600 feet altitude enjoyed by Dansalan.
1 1 could hear the roar of the rapids where Lake Lanao poured its water
into the Agus river which later smashed over the wonderful Maria Cristina
Falls miles below. I quietly slipped over to the window and looked out but
not a single star. Not a sign of my Nightmare either. Dick Richards heard
me moving about and warned me not to fall over his bed, informing me that
he was some expert faller himself—evidence a broken arm.
I could hear the others moving about their rooms and heard the surprised
"whoosh” that Vice-Governor General Hayden roared as he turned on the cold
shower and incautiously stepped under. Dick opined that a busted arm had
its compensations after listening to the startled war whoop Hayden had just
let loose. He didn’t need to bathe.
The rest of us duly warned, took our immersions homeopathically and while
we wanted to roar, permitted Hayden to have the honors. A fine breakfast
before dawn. Don’t know where he got them but our host had fine pork sausage for breakfast and he came into the dining room personally carrying a
huge pot of coffee which he stated he always brewed himself and after tasting
a cup, I granted him the honors for coffee brewing. I am not much of a
coffee drinker—water always tastes good, but I like it good when I do drink
it but the other members of our party who were confirmed coffee drinkers,
looked delighted as they sipped the hot brew.
We got out to the Field just at dawn, took the sodden tarpaulins from
our ships, stowed them and after cleaning huge clods of soggy, clay from our
shoes climbed aboard ready to go south for Cotabato and farther. We had all
become wet to the knees in the wet grass and as pilots in the islands wear "slacks”
our calves were cold. Governor General Hayden, Captains Bryte and Richards,
and others we left at Dansalan preparing to leave for Nichols Field far north.
We got into the air in a gray dawn. The rain had cleared but a heavy fog
lay over every valley which caused every crest to stick up sharp and clear as tho
through a white blanket. By the time we got over Piapayungan, both of
whose craters we “dragged,” the visibility had cleared somewhat so we shot
down and took a look at a fine huge cataract named Davis Falls, after
Captain Davis who had spent many weeks in this country on air reconnaissances. We dropped over Malabang, just “cut the grass” and went on to
Cotabato where General Parker threw over some packages of candy for Governor Dionisio Gutierrez’ family. I forgot to ask on a later trip but would
wager the parcels exploded like shrapnel when they landed. By the time
we reached Cotabato the sun was well up and was "burning off” the mist
beautifully. The rain of the day before had clarified the air beautifully for


11


us. We then began flying in a generally southeastern direction and were soon
over a country wonderfully on end. We cut our motors to minimum flying
speed of course. The maps all were marked with those mystic words "Unexplored.” This was evidently the country where the camel developed his
hump and vile disposition, trying to lie down. We circled about very considerably and while still not far from Cotabato and the coast ridge found
quite some clearings evidently occupied by the Tigbilaans who are supposed
to be wilder than the Bilaans who in turn are dubbed Wild Folk by the Moros.
The clearings were well scattered and the houses never in groups of more
than three shacks, which surely meant close intermarriage and family clannishness. We were too high to see whether any of the occupants left their
houses to look up at us but Wild Folk usually do not, preferring to take a
peek at anything strange from thick cover—observing while being unobserved.
We soon entered a country where even these little groups of houses disappeared and where there was small evidence of clearings and the few we thought
might have heen, were heavily overgrown, denoting long abandonment.
The country was very precipitious and broken, the main range being
cut up with huge hogbacks some of which extended in every direction but
generally extending in the same direction as the long coast line. The country
was very heavily wooded with only occasional cogoon patches and the huge
lumber concession owned by the Lebak Lumber Company whose plant we could
just see nestling in a cove miles to our west down on the coast, if it extends
so far inland, is a wonderful concession. Although the maps could not help
us with details of the interior geography, (being blank) we were able to fol.
low our course very closely by retaining contact with the accurate coast line
as shown on our maps furnished by the Coast and Geodetic Survey of the
United States Government. While we were miles and miles inland from the
coast line we were able quite accurately to see and follow its contours on
account of our altitude which gave us great visibility in the clear air.
Away, away to the east we could see Matutum rising above an enormous fog bank which was completely covering its base to half its height,
and the entire Sarangani Valley. It towered sharply—dark and forbidding
above the blindingly white cloud blanket that surrounded it, but due to its
great distance had lost its colossal bulk, but did not lose its beauty nor dignity.
The general altitude of the mountain ranges over which we were flying was
approximately 5,000 feet and was terribly gashed with deep ravines and gullies,
some with almost precipitious sides. One river traversed the peninsula, from
west to east, originating fairly well toward the coast and then running inland,
evidently toward the Alip river. Don and I turned to our left and followed
the enormous ravine down which this river flowed and we could see by the
white water below us, it was evidently quite shallow and full of rapids but
the river appeared suddenly to disappear under a mountain. We circled twice
to see what ailed the river and what had become of it but we were unable
to look very closely into this as we had to turn and follow the balance of
our Element which was now somewhat ahead and General Parker had told us
to keep well within sight at all times. That river however surely disappeared
under the mountains. General Parker and Maughan were flying well to our
right between us and the coast; Old and I had the center and Straubel and his
mechanic Aldrich had the left toward the valley and in this formation we went
down over the unexplored territory. I was busily photographing, both with my
Movie and Still cameras, various interesting scenes. The ever present Mindanao water falls loomed up several times and one in particular must have


12


been a thousand feet high—not in one single fall but in a very rapid succession
of plunges. Its volume was not great and I judged from its appearance, the
proximity of its source to the mountain crest that it might almost if not completely disappear during a prolonged dry period.
No signs of habitation—no clearings not even ancient were evident. No
houses; no trails—just a jungle and jumble of hills—steeprugged and heavily
forested—so steep huge slides were everywhere apparent. Betcha it was lousy
with leeches.
We ranged around in huge circles at time looking for evidences of habitations or clearing and eventually picked up some small groups of shacks at the
lower end of the unexplored country, near some lakes. We next came to a
country that gave evidence of many grown over and abandoned clearings and
then a house or two and eventually the groups of houses became more frequent
and, coming around a high group of peaks we saw ahead of us and to our
left several lakes which appeared to be connected by small streams. A quick
scrutiny of my map showed they were the Sebu lakes at an altitude of somewhere around 3,500 feet and we went down very rapidly to “drag” them. Two
villages of possibly twenty to thirty houses were on the banks of the larger
lakes. In one village was a house larger than the rest which might have been
a school house or a Presidencia. There were two vintas on the larger lake
and we made a dive at them and believe me one could have played checkers
on the occupants’ shirt tails (had they worn shirts) from the speed they were
making, paddling frantically for shore. We circled about them. There were
three men in one vinta and they were certainly tearing up that water making
for a cove. They beached it with what was evidently considerable of a bang
but the moment they touched the rocky shore they dropped their paddles and
without a lost motion and with perfect synchronisation dove over the bow into
the cover of the jungle. They had apparently never seen or heard of an airplane before and very possibly thought the sins of their fathers as well as
their own were roaringly overtaking them. I have often wondered what the
wild people of the earth think when they see these things. Do they wonder
about them or do they just “happen."
I did not see what became of the two men in the other vinta but they
evidently went overboard because when we circled back and about it, there
was no one in it nor could we see any one suimming about so they were
evidently hidden close under the boat, which was several hundred feet from
shore.
The Sebu lakes evacuate into a river and lose altitude through a series
of five separate falls. They have a considerable volume of water and together
are 1,500 feet high but on account of the narrowness of the very deep gorge
the trees at places grow from one bank to where they almost meet the ones
growing from the other and we could only secure very brief flashes for my
photographs. The spray kept the trees well irrigated. The narrowness of the
rocky gorge made the volume over the falls quite heavy. Don tried hard—as
did Fator on a later trip, to maneuver me for good pictures but we never
secured really good air pictures of these great Falls. We spent considerable
time circling the lakes and clearings and villages on their shores, investigating


13


14


SA
:


ir


this strange group of lakes and its surroundings. These lakes are on old
Spanish maps and there is record of only five expeditions by Americans to
these lonely lakes.
Ahead of us appeared a rampart of multicolored and terribly barren and
burnt out rock. It was deeply scarred and scoured thru many centuries of
rain. Large areas were utterly void of heavy growth. Many slides showed as
bare slashes on its sides. This formed a barrier to our path so we began to
climb. We got to an altitude of above 6,000 feet and I had my head down
in my cockpit fitting my Movie Kodak with a new roll when suddenly Don
wagged the stick, violently agitating the ship from side to side. I looked up
and there was Don excitedly pointing over between the prop and the left wing
at an enormous gap or hole in the burnt out mountain. It was a stupendous
thing. I looked around. Straubel at this time was over to our right but
seeing the ship violently agitate he banked sharply to see what the trouble was.
General Parker and Maughan were quite away to our left but were streaking
directly toward the crater. We flew over and I photographed it. I looked at
my map. There were several peaks shown but no volcano or crater. We
circled it several times and I checked its altitude on my altimeter and it
showed about 6,400 feet. Don’s altimeter checked it at 6,100 feet, as some
one had evidently set my altimeter some place above sea level and had not
corrected it.
We circled about it rapidly wondering what it was and quested over to
some other mountain peaks looming in the air hard by to see whether this
enormous crater had any brothers or sisters. It had none. General Parker
came close to our plane and held up his map and pointed to the crater. I held
up my detail map and shook my head negatively. My map was a more detailed
map than his.
Our flight over the unexplored part of the map having been finished we
struck northeast out over the Sarangani Valley and were soon winging our
ways up the enormous and beautifully flat country toward Buluan. Matutum
which we had seen from miles and miles away, as a pimple above a white
blanket, rearing its blackly wooded sides and crests above a white fog blanket,
was looming ahead only as a huge cloud cone. I judged the heavily wooded
sides evidently formed precipitations and condensations, in the form of clouds
on account of its cooler temperature as compared to the bare, hot and yellow
covered plains of the valley. Matutum was running true to form and hiding
behind its white mantel.
Came we fast up the Valley and over some low ridges that extend across
it from west to east and separate the great Buluan-Cotabato swamp area from
the fertile Sarangani Valley, and then dropped quickly into the basin that
forms the Buluan lake area. A small river below us near the lake had on its
banks, evidently built over part of the river itself, a long market house and
we could see dozens of vintas about it while a huge group of people rushed
from it, evidently looking up at us. We crossed the huge moss covered area
that surrounds the lake and particularly noticed the water paths that had
been cut from deep water to the ultimate shoreline, through several kilometers
of moss covered and shallow water and through which the Moros had to pole
their vintas to land. The moss was so thick no swimmer could have survived
its entangling clutches even if he survived the Crocs.
We landed at Buluan and, of course, met Lieut. Navarro and his assistant. General Parker’s first question was for the name of the volcano crater


15


not marked on the map, but Navarro, who had been there eight years knew
nothing of it.
Fat Datu Paglas came wandering in from his Barrio to see Don Old, of
whom he was inordinately proud, as he saw Number 6 and Don, to him was
a "son—a brother—father and mother," and he was asked about it but had never
heard of such a crater. His beetle nut box carrier, a very old retainer of his
wife the Presidenta, was asked but knew nothing of such a mountain or volcano
—“had never heard of it but had heard of a river some place down there that
was Tabu because its waters were not always the same color."
“There was also the valley in which a silver carabao or water buffalo
appeared on nights of the full moon and a sight of which brought pestilence
to those who saw it.”
“There was also the Golden Snake with green eyes which lived behind the
Tigbilaan country into which even Tigbilaans did not wander, because merely
crossing his trail within an hour after the passing of the snake, brought death
to animal or man. All those things he had heard from very good authority:
from people who had been close to that country and had spoken to Bilaans
who had it authoritatively assured them they had it from those whose relatives
had died a strange death in the jungle. Hence he had it of very good authority.
Of a mountain, however, with a huge hole he had never heard and anyway
who would cat out the interior of a mountain and having eaten it, where would
he deposit what he took? The Golden Snake and the silver buffalo he could
not doubt, nor the Giant who lived in Apo—smoking his tobacco and who hurled
curses and rocks at his mate Piapayungan near Lanao who in turn now could
only rumble and growl, but a mountain—a high mountain with a deep hole?—
no that could not be. Some one who would have seen and told of the digging.
Stories had it that Matutum at one time had been a holy fire mountain but
that was quite reasonable because look at the wood and timber upon the sides
of Matutum which the Genii and the Giants could carry to maintain the fire
on its peak or which even Allah could by mere command, cause to be transported into the crater which once held the sacred fires—but a mountain without timber burnt out and mostly bare and no insides?—he was very polite and
would not contradict but no—he had never heard of such a thing and mayhap
our rapid speed had “turned our eyes" or evil spirits “twisted our sight.”
An examination of Navarro’s map also showed nothing. Questioning all
other Moros—Apos—Patriarchs and chiefs brought nothing excepting polite but
very vociferous negatives that they had ever heard of such a mountain—a high
peak that was hollow with water at its bottom. They dug up a Bilaan who
stated he had been to the Sebu lakes and lived there for years but had now
moved to Buluan because of a slight difference he had had with a neighbor—
over his wife. He could produce the wife—now an old woman who had given
him six sons but he could not produce her former husband because he was
not.” And while he had lived in Sebu for many years he knew nothing about
a mountain with a hole in it but possibly such had grown—this very politely,
since he had left there—after he had had a difference with his neighbor over
his wife and which neighbor was now "not.”
Yes he had heard about the Tabu river and had seen it but not then
having had a Prophet—not even Allah, had feared to cross it. The river was
very bad. With the rains it became angry and discolored. Sometimes when
the water was low it became blackish, at other times without the provocation
of the rains, it became yellow and sometimes it became a little reddish. The
(Continued on page 37)


16


17


ELECTION STUFF
The Democrats are busy
Getting ready for the day,
When “Tax Payers” will be listening
To what they have to say,
Regarding “Budjet Deficits,
Those “Tax Payers" must pay.
Franklin D.—"Illusionist".
We think of him with awe,
As the “Greatest Alphabetist"
This old world ever saw:
His latest Alphabetic Code
May put an end to war.
Morgantheau is struggling
Beneath the mid-night lamp,
The sweat upon his honest brow
Is clammy, cold, and damp,
As he tries to balance Billions
Which have gone upon a ramp.
The genial Mr. Farley
Will go on a verbal jag,
He’ll use a lot of Hooey,
And concoct a funny gag.
That will keep “Tax Payers" smiling
“The Bag.
While they sit, and hold"
As “Tax Payers” were, in days of Tut,
Of Moses, and Mark An-tony,
They still are the same, just Suckers,
Who fall for the stuff that’s phony
So they’ll vote for Rubber Dollars
Backed by Hooey, and Baloney.
The G.O.P. will then retire
For another "Four Year Rest";
And “The People” from the North and South
From East, and wooly West,
Will believe, whatever happens,
Always happens for the best.


A. G. HILL.


18


T. F. MCINTYRE IS PROMOTED
Oldtimer Made Deputy Fire Chief Of Manila; In Service 31 Years


Captain Thomas F. MeIntyre, who was in charge of the Santa Cruz fire
station for many years, was elevated to the position of deputy fire chief of the
Manila fire department on March 14. He was appointed by Mayor Juan Posadas upon recommendation of Jacinto Lorenzo, fire chief. His appointment became effective March 15.
The new deputy fire chief was born on April 9, 1879, in Eden Valley,
Minnesota. He joined the fire department on December 19, 1905, as first class
fireman and was promoted three years later as engineer, first class. On November 23, 1909, he transferred to the Manila police department where he
served until August 23, 1912 when he again joined the fire department.
He was promoted to fire lieutenant, on October 16, 1913, and to fire captain
on March 1, 1917. Captain MeIntyre has been serving as acting deputy chief
since Chief Lorenzo was made head of the Manila fire department.


NUTUTRTEVUUTRTTUTTJUUEPYYYXTUUYUTQTTTTTRTRTTTTUTUTTTCVTUTPTUTUYTUYUYUJTITTLTYTITUYUYTUURUTUTRITTVET


LA AMISTAD
WATCHMAKER
JEWELER-OPTICIAN
U. REYES
530 Ave. Rizal
P. O. Box 2019
Tel. 2-93-58


We carry in stock assortments of
Watches, Ear Rings, Bracelets,
Medals, Buttons, Silverware, Fountain Pens, etc.—We do Watch Repairing. Mail Orders Received and
Sent by C. O. D.


  


19


I(UI(NT'T(Y



TNINITAY


KEep Eool this Hat Season


with an
ELELTRIE FAN
We have in our Display
Room Electric Fans from
P5.00 up to P32.00—the
lowest prices ever offered to our customers.


See them at our Store.
Manila Elertrir Lompany


134 San Marcelino


Assorted Cold Meats - Sausages
For
Sandwiches
Buffet
Suppers
R
Afternoon
IAT
Teas


EE
All variefies



Cheese


Stafes
Lan
Vegetables
Dee
and Fruit
International Cold Stores
116-120 ECHAGUE


 DDS O
20


TA D E DS SSI


TRUANCY
Ive tried to write a pretty rhyme
Of trees and birds and flowers,
Old Mother Nature’s lavishness
And gentle Autumn showers;
Of hearts that beat with happiness
And skies of fairest hue;
I’ve tried to smile and smile and smile,
'Cause that’s the thing to do.
I saw a lonely little tree,
A-shivering in the rain;
I didn’t feel so very blue,
Cause spring will come again;
And then I saw a band of sheep
A-standing in a crowd;
They looked so gosh-darned serious
I had to laugh out loud.
I’ve tried to write of joyousness
And fun and other things,
Of lakes and fields and loveliness
And scenery fit for kings;
But, gee! My truant thoughts today
Say, life’s without a thrill,
An' stray, an’ stray, an’ stray
In your direction—still.
ROSANNA ROOSEVELT BLEECKER.


STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP
OF
TI
THE  "
Published in compliance with Act 2580


Editor—E. V. Bartholomai
Managing Editor—E. V. Bartholomai
Publisher—The Pioneers' Club—224 Calle Chica, Manila.
Business Manager—E. V. Bartholomai
Owners or Stockholders holding one per cent or more interest
The Pioneers' Club.
Bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders of one per cent or more
total value: None.
A. W. PRAUTCH
President Pioneers' Club.
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 24th of March 1936.
JOSE CRUZ


Inspection Division
Bureau of Posts.


of


21


WHEN YOU AND I WERE YOUNG, MAGGIE
Quoted from "Detroit Saturday Night.”
I wandered today to the store, Maggie,
Our two hundred bucks to deplete;
But I found that I needed much more, Maggie,
To buy a few victuals to eat.
For money’s become over night, Maggie,
As free as a congressman’s tongue;
And prices are way out of sight, Maggie,
Since you and I were young.
The price of potatoes still mounts, Maggie,
So now they are a quarter a piece:
And pork is a dollar an ounce, Maggie,
And fifty cents more for the grease.
And added to this is the tax, Maggie,
No wonder our credit is sprung;
Two hundred is gone in a flash, Maggie.
Since you and I were young.
I thought we were to be rich, Maggie,
When Townsend’s idea went through;
I listened to arguments which, Maggie,
Convinced me its logic was true.
But now we are old and grey, Maggie,
Much wiser than when we were young;
And poorer by far than the day, Maggie,
When you and I were stung.
(As sung in the year one A. T. P.)
(After the Townsend Plan)


WATA
“the aristocrat of the Orient"


H. C. ("ANDY") ANDERSON
Managing Director


22


BY SPECIAL DELIVERY


Wharley Cabanis left the small trading post of Karuray in the mists of an
O early dawn, intending to hike down the Palawan coast to see the subterranean river of Saint Paul’s near Ulugan Bay and thence over the narrow
divide to the provincial capital. He chose this primitive transportation because
on his arrival on the wild coast, choppy sea and a headwind had so disconr
moded him that for forty-eight hours he had neither called his soul or his
stomach his own. He travelled light with hut few supplies and no weapons
at all, for the furtive pagans of the high hills rarely ventured to the shore
but did their trading thru the semi-civilized dwellers of the coastal settlements.
But he found this traverse no easy task. In places the rocky shores
fell abruptly to the sea, about whose strands he had to wade, while faint
trails led over watersheds and promontories, and the sandy beaches where walking was better were none too common. Above, soft fleecy clouds sailed before
the snoring trade wind and below the sea was alive and leaping in the sunshine. Cabanis journeyed until the Philippine sun began to slant down the
western sky, and the zigzag nature of the trail forced him to make a detour
inland towards the high rugged mountain ranges, to cross a small stream
that debouched from their flanks. Here the path turned into the jungle
abruptly.
The roar of the blue combers and their thresh on the reefs, and the
soft seethe of the brine died away as he struck inland. The heat in the
windless underbrush was stifling. At once he came out on the banks of a
coffee colored stream of considerable width, which he followed up looking for
a convenient ford or a log to raft himself over. The encroaching jungle nad
all but obliterated the trail after the manner of the lush growing tropical
flats, and he pressed aside to escape the sharp reeds and spiny yantoc arching
above him. Ahead was an open space for he saw the green gloom lighten,


23


the blue sky and golden light thru the thinning jungle as he came to the
edge of the silty bank some six feet above the stream.
Suddenly he felt his feet sinking; the screen of the jungle leaned away
as if bowed by a windy gust. Desperately he clutched at the undergrowth
with both hands but this gave way before him. In a smother of reeds, and
lashing saplings he sank downwards—at first slowly—as his heart leaped to
his throat at the inexplicable. Then shooting thru the lighter brush he plunged
fect first into the dark sluggish water. Cabanis went down strait under with
a strangled gasp. His feet struck some tangled yielding mass with force,
from which he rose again with a spring. His head shot above the surfaco
along with debris, leaves and rotting vegetation as he gulped his lungs full of
air.
But before he could clear his eyes and nostrils or recover his self-posession he was stealthily dragged down again. And with a pang of horror he
realized he was caught by the foot below. A powerful swimmer he struck out
mightily and came to the surface at once rising as high as his shoulders.
But again he was violently dragged down struggling and desperate before he
had time to catch his breath. The shock sobered, flashing his full peril before
him. He was securely anchored to some obstruction below that allowed him
to breathe by but an hairsbreadth. With a supreme effort he ceased struggling and contented himself with paddling to keep upright.
This time he came more softly to the surface but just enough to clear
his chin. Sunlight danced into his eyes but he gulped his lungs full again
before he went under. Paddling cautiously he emerged again with his arms
outspread and holding to a precarious equilibrium found he could keep his
mouth above the surface if he held his head back. Keeping still and softly
paddling water he let his wits clear while the agitated waters settled to quiet.
He began to review his plight. He knew he could expect no help as he had
elected to make the traverse and spite of warnings had brought no guide,
and that any direct aid was negligent in that part of the seven thousand Isles
of Philip. He found himself in a sort of cove formed when the seasonal rains
had gouged a new way to the sea, the clamor of whose surges came to him
in a dull murmur. A few meters away the main current swirled past sullenly bearing on its bosom, floating branches, water hyacinths and the floatsam
of torrential streams, while the sound of a waterfall in towards the range
showed the source of the debris. Up and down on his side of the stream
as far as he could see were overhanging trees covered with ferns, ephiphytes
and mosses; across the river rose a labyrinth of nipa palms and stilted mangroves amongst which grew clumps of tall reeds. Cautiously he turned his
head and saw behind him what he had expected. An almost perpendicular
bank of brown silt scarred by the huge gash that had slipped into the river
under his weight.
Within reach of his hand lay half submerged a long leafy sapling, its
roots still clinging to the bank. Gently he laid hold of it testing it in the
chance it might prove solid enough to bear his weight. But it came away at
once in his hand and again his head went under. Cabanis was disappointed
but was completely master of himself by now and in a moment was able to
assume his equilibrium and breathe comfortably. The tropic sun had begun
to burn down on his unprotected head so that the leafage of the sapling was
welcome as a sort of sunshade. He considered awhile but a cautious investigation with his foot convinced him that the trap in which he found himself
could be nothing more than the interlaced roots of some tree that had fallen


24


into the pool from some former caving-in of the bank. In his mind’s eye he
could see in the deep, dark depths the water-soaked slimy, inexorable coil that
had yielded to admit his unlucky foot and then sprung back upon his ankle
like the jaws of a springtrap. He could feel the grip, not painful but uncompromisingly firm, clutching the joint but vise-like in its effect. He drew
comfort from the fact that there was a certain amount of elasticity, a sort of
give, that showed the roots were not too large or too steadily anchored, and
with patience he might be able to free himself. But a certain fear came over
him as he knew these shallow tidal creeks and estuaries were nearly always
infested with crocodiles, great beasts that sometimes swam out to sea in search
of prey, and he had no desire to meet one of these scavengers in the precarious
plight in which he found himself, unable to either defend himself or to get
away from the spot. The crocodile’s sinuous length, spiny armored tail, a
hideous mouth whose yawns revealed rows of ocher teeth and a pinkish yellow
maw that seemed cavernous, gave him the creeps. Gnats and mosquitoes were
numerous in the silent bosque beside the stream, but those annoying him were easily escaped by submerging an inch or so, all the leeway the accident gave him.
Taking a long breath he sank beneath the surface and peered downward
into the amber colored but semi transparent gloom. Little gleams of light
came from the swirls of the outer current. Cabanis could not see the bottom
of the pool which was evidently very deep, but he could see quite clearly the
sunken tree in whose interwoven roots he was so firmly held a prisoner. A
shimmering ray fell just on the spot his foot vanished to the ankle between
the two stout curves of what looked like brown cables. Beyond question it
was a nasty looking trap and he had to admit that he was in a tight place
with no help but his own. Moderately filling his lungs he gathered strength
and dove suddenly downwards and began wrenching with all his might at the
oozy roots striving to drag them apart. They gave a little but not enough
to release his imprisoned foot. Then he had to return to the surface to breathe.
After a short rest he repeated the effort, but as before, in vain. He
could move the jaws of the trap a little, just enough for encouragement but.
not enough for release. The roots were slimy and slippery from long submergence but they were still supple and strong. Again he tried pure force in
the hope he might succeed, for he had not even a knife with him, until at last
utterly exhausted he was forced to rest. The strain had been so tiring that
he was glad to hold his mouth above water by grasping with his teeth a branch of
the sapling so as to rest his wearied arms. As he hung there, safe for the
moment held by the teeth from drowning he pondered over the desperateness
of his immediate situation. He did not want to drown and he could not hold
himself up indefinitely, neither did he wish his skeleton discovered later, nor still
did he desire to fight off some saurian who discovered him as prey.
He took stock of himself in introspection. Few would miss him in the
Islands as he was a wanderer in strange places, a sort of trader at times, self
exiled from the homeland, to which he desired to return, only with a competence.
Even in the second decade of the XXth century the Philippines had left its
mark on Uncle Sam’s stragglers and crusaders. The mark of the Islands was
on their faces. Some had become violent, others sour, and still others, weary.
All had a certain sameness, a common wistfulness, attempting the impossible—
the welding of East and West by methods and motivations. Many sensed the
futility of the task, and of being in a land where they were not particularly
wanted. A few of the lunatic fringe, highly vociferous and armed with the lance
of Don Quixote mouthed platitudes. But the whole question was the impact of
the East on the West never to meet except in romance or pious imagination.
25


As for Cabanis two decades in the Philippines had calmed his spirit. He
had grown tolerant of many things that are not as they should be, having
lost that familiar American longing to reform the world, or to have others
think and do, even as himself. He had learned one Oriental trait of great
value. The art of minding his own business, and of refusing to accept the
dictum that he was his brother’s keeper. This is eminently safe and sane and
conducive to long life in countries who do not subscribe in toto to a Western
morality read into an Eastern theology. Nor did he subscribe to the under-dog
theory any more, realizing that in many cases the under dog is there by his
own volition, that he could better himself by using his power, and that lastly
he is often the under-dog for good and sufficient reasons. No longer did he
work up a healthy wrath at conditions unaffected by laws or equities. In other
words he had become sane and calm whether in prosperity or adversity.
He had found the natives not a particularly lazy people considoring all
the circumstances. They had no urge to labor as the Occidental, as their cravings were few and easily satisfied. They took time over their tasks. A house
or a boat was constructed without haste for time loses its proportion in far-off
places set out of the path. This is different with a hectic civilization scourged
to its tasks by stern necessity, rushing to their inevitable end and slaves to
its cconomic bondage. Here a month is like a week, a week like a day and
they possessed a philosophy of leisure neither unpleasant nor unwise, and unknown except by those close to the equator or the isles laved by such seas.
Unlike those cursed with the efficiency complex, they did not struggle to obtain
economic security—an iridiscent bubble—by way of the bonanza or boom for
it is inevitably followed by the borrasca or depression, and for the unstable
fruit thereof, they care little, for this is the true complex of the Malay untainted by the Mongolian or the hybrids of the fringe of society, who live to
prey upon ignorance, and who exist to mislead for their own special benefit or
at least so mused Cabanis for the moment.
The sun had now sunk further down the sky and soon the dread dark
would come. He could not expect to do other than cling to the sapling that
meant life, but the end must come when his resistance dwindled, sooner or
later. He bemoaned the fact he had given his clasp knife to a sailor at Karuray
who had helped him ashore when the banca upset. Above the trees how safe,
warm and sunny it seemed, yet here he was a prisoner to circumstance, accidental tho it was. No sound broke the tranquility other than the pulsings of
the surf or the elfish gurglings of the current slipping past. Yet here he
was to stay and perish by a pitiless death far from aid and due to utter inability to extricate himself. A dull rage burned in his veins at his impotency.
Across the stream flitted a butterfly with four-inch wings. It chanced to
drop too low, was caught in the current and at once became the prey of an
enemy lurking below. He considered himself facing just such a contingency.
A waft of wind bowed the nipa fronds and tall grasses on the opposite bank
where these sprang from the saline mud. In the still and steaming heat rose
the odor of rotting vegetation from the tidal delta; a pipit alighting on a
slender reed gave forth a series of mournful chirps; and the flop of a calasagan
or waterlizard startled him. However he refused to consider himself beaten
and began searching with his eyes for some sapling branch he might use as
a lever to open the trap. With such a stick he might pry the jaws open.
As his choice settled on such a branch, the harsh bellow of a crocodile camt
from the upper reaches of the stream. Cabanis shuddered. The challenge did
not remain unanswered. Strait across from him on the opposit bank, a hide

26


ous snout emerged from the mangrove tangle, and an appalling bellow split the
quiet. Cabanis submerged to the edge of his lips and kept one eye on this
potential enemy. He had heard that each bull crocodile arrogated to himself a
special reach of river bank as a sort of hunting ground to be held by tooth and
claw against all comers. These in turn eternally challenged this supremacy in
the struggle for survival. The croc however had not noticed him but slid with
a swift determination into the dark waters releasing gases from the bubbles
of mud, while over all hung the dank smell of musk that emanates from these
giant saurians under excitement.
The huge crocodile had accepted the challenge of its rival and intent on
this swam steadily off up-stream, the knobby corrugations along its hoary back
sticking up like a row of fins. Ordinarily the croc swims submerged when only
the knobs above its eyes and nostrils are seen, but they can also inflate themselves during a battle so as to gain a greater advantage over their foes. The
rival bull who had dared challenge its supremacy had also swam down stream
to meet in battle so that Cabanis was to have, so to speak, a ring-side seat
to view the struggle, one that he would have parted with free—gratis.
As they neared each other they both bellowed defiance but at a distance
of a dozen feet they stopped, each glaring red murder at the other. Swaying
from side to side in a rude war-dance their long bony tails alert for a smashing
blow, each bull slowly inflated itself as they gradually moved in sideways and
toward each other. Horrified Cabanis watched their evolutions. Rearing their
fore-parts from the water their roars of rage shattered the hot, dank silence
of the delta after which came only the swish of water from their tails.
The champions came together with a rush their heavy bodies meeting with


a dull thud of flesh, their forearms raking each others scaly armor. They
manouevred and smashed each other with tremendous buffets from their power
ful tails, which only served to add fire to the saurian combat. They tore with
their teeth and raked with their sharp claws, each arching its spine to protect
the vulnerable belly covering. They gulped great drafts of air to panting lungs
and the atmosphere was reeking with the sickly smell of musk as if from some
ancient tomb.


Glaring they backed off again roaring. The first croc sprang in with a
rustling of its armored body and fairly fell on his rival. The latter sensed
it was no match for its enemy and had had enough. He spun about with the
speed of light and made off up the river followed by the other in hot pursuit.
The water eddied and boiled in their wake which broke on both sides of the
stream like that of a motor-boat. Inch by inch the pursuer drew level with its
foe. But the latter in desperation turned to fight for its life, there being neither
truce nor arbitration in the case, one of destroying or being destroyed.
But even as he swung about to face the inevitable, his forefoot was seized
by the inexorable jaws of its enemy crunched and torn, yet held in the viselike jaws of its powerful pursuer. Suddenly releasing this a new hold was
made in the soft underpart of the weaker saurian. The whirl and death struggle was titanic with mighty splashings and the bellows of the anguished bull
being torn to pieces. It was far enough away to assure Cabanis safety temporarily but the waters were tinged with blood that floated downstream. The
challenger had lost the battle. He had taken a chance with death.
Gradually quietness settled on the waters, the defeated bull sank to the
depth below. The victor floated on the water half of its body showing due to
inflation while he roared a triumph. Then arching its tail at a jaunty angle


27


it swam off upstream and away from Cabanis, to announce to all other crocs
of the delta that he was still master in his home domain.


Again Cabanis began the eternal struggle to free his foot. He was too
easy a prey for the crocs who would not hesitate to attack him in their watery
element and darkuess was coming on apace. Still struggling, all his efforts
came to nothing. There was nothing to brace himself against, for the hold
was too unstable being under water. Altho his situation seemed hopeless he
did not despair for to lose hope is to lose all. Resting in the semigloom under
the low lying branches of the sapling he glanced uperiver. He saw being
carried on the current, a fish that gashed in the falls above was floating out
out to sea.


A gentle eddy caught it and drew it into the pool. Sluggishly it came drifting
down towards him on a level with his eyes and chin, its gills scarcely moving
as its life flickered out. About ten metres behind the floating fish came two
parallel knobs advancing swiftly in its wake. The leafy sapling partly concealed the man from the crocodile for in a flash Cabanis recognized the pro
tuberances as the eye-knobs of a large croc intent on gathering in the fish.
whether this was the victor in the struggle or another he did not know, but
a wild idea crossed his consciousness. In fact in his desperate position, like
the proverbial man grasping at a straw, he nerved himself to take advantage
of the fact that the saurian might prove his salvation.
The fish floated past within a few inches of his face. The crocodile surged
on and opening its cavernous mouth took in the fish with manifest content.
At that moment the crocodile felt itself seized convulsively from behind. With
a powerful forward lunge it swept ahead terrified by this unseen submarine
enemy. Cabanis shut his eyes and clenched his teeth against the shock while
his lungs felt as if they would burst. Utterly demoralized from this strange
attack from the rear the saurian forged ahead in a furious spurt. Cabanis
was drawn out taut until he thought his ancle would snap. He almost let himself go thinking that the joint might be dislocated, yet held on with a tenacious
grip ahead of the rear flippers. He was fearful the beast might turn upon him
and attack in an equally desperate effort to defend itself. At that moment
the foot was withdrawn with a fierce jerk and he felt himself being drawn
swiftly into the main current—free.
He relaxed his clutch and came to the surface gasping, blinking and coughing. For a moment he paddled softly recovering his breath. He had an instant
of apprehension whether the croc would turn and attack him and by way of
precaution gave forth a lusty yell of triumph himself. But he had nothing
to fear from that particular crocodile which swam hastily to shore up which it
scuttled and on into the darkest recesses of the delta. His foot was stinging
fiercely but his heart was light. He swam across the stream rather contemp
tuous of crocodiles but nevertheless grateful to his strange deliverer, and he
grinned as he remarked "by special delivery.”
From the silty shore he sighted more crocs swimming down stream on
the prowl for food, part of which they salvaged no doubt from the sea. He
crossed the muddy delta and emerged a wider point of sandy shore, its clean
expanse giving him a great satisfaction. Gone were his supplies, his blanket
and hat but after a bath in the ocean he wrung out his dripping clothes and
hung them on low bushes to dry in the rays of the setting sun and the saline
breeze that swept from the northeast. Then he lay down to rest before he
took up his journey to the south.


28


THE EAST COAST OF LUZON


High overhead the white clouds sweep
Dark shadows moving across the sea,
Below the wind lashed forests leap
To the jagged mountain ranges free.


The blue sea-combers shake the shore
A rock-ribbed coast behind the reef,
Rolled strong a thousand leagues or more
To break in thunderous tones of grief.
—--
Below the steep cliff’s mossy brow
Wanders the spotted woodland fawn,
From tree-fern and towering anahao,
The culasisi greet the dawn.


Still roam thru orchid-lighted glades
The llongot with lance and bow,
Same monarch of these bosky shades
As since ten thousand moons ago.


Long century suns these peaks have kist
This awesome, lonely savage land.
When monsoons wreathe them in the mist
Then cataracts roar their anthem grand.


At times a solitary shaft of pearl
Far off, the traders barque is seen,
Out where the surges flash and hurl
From Engano’s cape to Polillo green.


These peaks looked down on Dampier’s sail
As down the lonely coast they turned,
Beheld the fierce Moro praus prevail
And Casiguran sacked and burned.


Tayfusa’s hosts from far Nippon
Seeking safe landfalls all in vain,
Mauban and Lampon have oft looked on
The storm-tossed galleons of old Spain.


29


Three hundred years of Spanish might
Have left small trace of pride or boast.
It lies as when Salcedo’s sight
First viewed its rocky rugged ccast.


A. G. HILL.





GRANDMA GAVE US MUTTON SUET
NOW MODERN SCIENCE BRINGS US
Penetrating
PENETRO
Made With a Base of Old-fashioned Mutton Suet Containing Menthol,
Camphor, Methyl Salicylate, Turpentine and Thymol
Sole Distributors
THE PHILIPPINE NET & BRAID MFG. CO., INC.
367 JUAN LUNA 369
Phone 4-95-85 and 4-95-63
P. O. Box 320


 S A  D 


Patronize our Advertisers—Pioneers Do
And tell your friends & your friends’ friends tool


AOAHI SEEn


30


THE MACABEBES
By Oldtimer Leo FIsCHER
mrhe following notes on the Macabebes are not intended to be a complete
1 article on the subject but have been compiled by way of a pastime after the
author had looked up a few references for his own satisfaction. Quite a few
Oldtimers have come into contact with the Macabebes during the days of the
Empire and will naturally be interested in learning a little more about them.
Oldtimers who served with the Army on the North Line in 1899 and 1900
will remember the little brown fellows clad in chambray shirts, khaki breeches,
and straw hats ornamented with the American eagle, and armed with 45 cal.
Springfield carbines, who did such good work as scouts and guides and whose
hatred of the Tagalogs kept them active and going where their native indolence
would otherwise have made them take things easier. They were as eager to
fight as their American brothers in arms; but they had to be held in leash
because they were inclined to be too ruthless with the prisoners and civilian
population and were prone to use the old “Guardia Civil” methods for extracting information from those who would not talk. Experts with the bolo and
the paddle, and for the most part familiar with the network of streams and
tidewater canals of the nipa and mangrove swamps of Pampanga, Bataan and
other provinces, they rendered invaluable services.
These Macabebes were the first natives to be employed by the American
Government as combatants in putting down the Insurrection. On September
16, 1899, General Otis authorized Lieut. Matthew A. Batson, of the 4th U.S.
Cavalry, to raise 100 Macabebes Scouts, and on October 18, 1899, General
Lawton was authorized to organize two additional companies, of 128 each. The
battalion which, by June 1, 1900, had been increased to 478 officers and men,
was known as the Squadron of Philippine Cavalry, U.S. Volunteers, and was
commanded by Major Batson. It was officered by U.S. Volunteers who were
paid from army appropriations, while the enlisted men were contract employees
paid from insular revenues. On September 28, 1901, the War Department
ordered all Scouts then employed under these conditions to be discharged as
such and enlisted and paid, from October 1st, with funds appropriated for the
support of the Army. This was done by General Orders, No. 310, Division of
the Philippines, series of 1901. After that, Scouts were recruited from various
tribes, and on October 1, 1902, the force consisted of 4,935 officers and men,
scattered over many provinces of the Islands.
The Macabebe Scouts came mostly from the towns of Macabebe and San
Miguel, Masantol, in Pampanga Province. The inhabitants of that part of
Pampanga are in no way different from the rest of their tribe, the Pampangos,
except that, as W. Cameron Forbes says in his book, “they have been distinguished as partisans of the Spanish, and subsequently, American government
as against other Filipinos.” We fail to find any authority for Forbes further
statement that “the Macabebes are presumably descendants of American Indian
troops brought from the west coast of Mexico and California by the Spaniards
during the seventeenth century and upon completion of military service permitted to settle in the region where the town of Macabebe and adjacent villages
are now located. These foreign ex soldiers and their descendants, although of
Filipino mothers, naturally looked to the constituted government for protection
against the natives of the country and this attitude became traditional." Another explanation is given by Foreman, who says that
“All I have been able to learn of them in the locality is that they kecp
exclusively to themselves, and have little sympathy for, and no cordial
31


Three hundred years of Spanish might
Have left small trace of pride or boast.
It lies as when Salcedo’s sight
First viewed its rocky rugged ccast.
A. G. HILL.


ATAATAVTAN


AENPAMOTETNNEAA


GRANDMA GAVE US MUTTON SUET
NOW MODERN SCIENCE BRINGS US
Penetrating
PENETRO
Made With a Base of Old-fashioned Mutton Suet Containing Menthol,
Camphor, Methyl Salicylate, Turpentine and Thymol
Sole Distributors
THE PHILIPPINE NET & BRAID MFG. CO., INC.
367 JUAN LUNA 369
P. O. Box 320
Phone 4-95-85 and 4-95-63


 N  DES A  NDNA L SE RAVARS


Patronize our Adverfisers—Pioneers Do
And tell your friends & your friends' friends tool


ASAnr SEen


30


THE MACABEBES
By Oldtimer LEo FISCHER


“The following notes on the Macabebes are not intended to be a complete
I article on the subject but have been compiled by way of a pastime after the
author had looked up a few references for his own satisfaction. Quite a few
Oldtimers have come into contact with the Macabebes during the days of the
Empire and will naturally be interested in learning a little more about them.
Oldtimers who served with the Army on the North Line in 1899 and 1900
will remember the little brown fellows clad in chambray shirts, khaki breeches,
and straw hats ornamented with the American cagle, and armed with 45 cal.
Springfield carbines, who did such good work as scouts and guides and whose
hatred of the Tagalogs kept them active and going where their native indolence
would otherwise have made them take things easier. They were as eager to
fight as their American brothers in arms; but they had to be held in leash
because they were inclined to be too ruthless with the prisoners and civilian
population and were prone to use the old “Guardia Civil” methods for extracting information from those who would not talk. Experts with the bolo and
the paddle, and for the most part familiar with the network of streams and
tidewater canals of the nipa and mangrove swamps of Pampanga, Bataan and
other provinces, they rendered invaluable services.
These Macabebes were the first natives to be employed by the American
Government as combatants in putting down the Insurrection. On September
16, 1899, General Otis authorized Lieut. Matthew A. Batson, of the 4th U.S.
Cavalry, to raise 100 Macabebes Scouts, and on October 18, 1899, General
Lawton was authorized to organize two additional companies, of 128 each. The
battalion which, by June 1, 1900, had been increased to 478 officers and men,
was known as the Squadron of Philippine Cavalry, U.S. Volunteers, and was
commanded by Major Batson. It was officered by U.S. Volunteers who were
paid from army appropriations, while the enlisted men were contract employees
paid from insular revenues. On September 28, 1901, the War Department
ordered all Scouts then employed under these conditions to be discharged as
such and enlisted and paid, from October 1st, with funds appropriated for the
support of the Army. This was done by General Orders, No. 310, Division of
the Philippines, series of 1901. After that, Scouts were recruited from various
tribes, and on October 1, 1902, the force consisted of 4,935 officers and men,
scattered over many provinces of the Islands.
The Macabebe Scouts came mostly from the towns of Macabebe and San
Miguel, Masantol, in Pampanga Province. The inhabitants of that part of
Pampanga are in no way different from the rest of their tribe, the Pampangos.
except that, as W. Cameron Forbes says in his book, “they have been distinguished as partisans of the Spanish, and subsequently, American government
as against other Filipinos.” We fail to find any authority for Forbes further
statement that “the Macabebes are presumably descendants of American Indian
troops brought from the west coast of Mexico and California by the Spaniards
during the seventeenth century and upon completion of military service permitted to settle in the region where the town of Macabebe and adjacent villages
are now located. These foreign ex soldiers and their descendants, although of
Filipino mothers, naturally looked to the constituted government for protection
against the natives of the country and this attitude became traditional." Another explanation is given by Foreman, who says that
"All I have been able to learn of them in the locality is that they kecp
exclusively to themselves, and have little sympathy for, and no cordial
31


intercourse with, the natives of other towns, cither in their own province
or elsewhere. A generation ago the Macabebes had a bad reputation for
their petty piratical depredations around the north shore of Manila Bay
and the several mouths of the Hagonoy River, and it is possible that
their exclusiveness results from their consciousness of having been shunned by the more reputable inhabitants."
Macabebe probably existed as a town worthy of note when the Spaniards
landed on Luzon. We read that Fray Sebastian Molina was the first minister
in Macabebe in 1575. An account of encomiendas, dated 1591, mentions the
encomienda of Macabebe, belonging to Pedro de Chaves, as having about 2,300
"tributes," or approximately 9,200 souls.
The Pampangos had in the 17th and 18th centuries the reputation of being
great fighters. Diaz, in his Conquistas, in speaking of the Pampango rebellion
in 1660, calls them “the most warlike and prominent people of these islands"
and adds that “their rebellion was all the worse because these people had
been trained in the military art in our own schools, in the fortified posts of
Ternate, Zamboanga, Jolo, Caraga, and other places, where their valor was
well known.” The Pampangos then had just cause for grievance, as they had
been compelled to cut timber for many months, for the construction of galleons,
and to furnish rice and other provisions to the government, and had received
harsh treatment and no pay. A number of the towns had risen against the
Spanish rule and the Macabebe people were preparing weapons and vessels to
join the movement when the Spanish governor landed in Macabebe with a force
of 300 men and four 4-pounders. The townspeople received the governor (Don
Sabiniano Manrique de Lara) with affected friendliness, as they thought more
troops were coming. The priests were especially useful during the negotiations with the rebels which ensued; but the position of the small Spanish force
was for a time a most precarious one. At one time, the governor and
accompanying officers (which included no less than three generals and two
admirals) were held as prisoners by the rebels. However, the whole affair
ended in a compromise and the revolt was quelled without any bloodshed to
speak of.
During the British occupation of the Islands, the Pampango troops distinguished themselves particularly by their valor and loyalty. When the Filipinos rose against the Spanish government, in 1896, the Macabebes remained
loyal. Colonel Eduardo Blanco then organized a battalion of Macabebe volunteers, 1,600 strong, which fought the Filipino insurgents with great valor from
1896 to 1898. When, thanks to the help of the Americans, the Filipino forces
prevailed, the Macabebes were made to suffer greatly for having sided with
the Spaniards. In Samal, for instance, where a force of 50 Spaniards and
200 Macabebes were surrounded and besieged by several thousand insurgents
until they had to surrender, the Spanish prisoners were taken to Cavite, while
the Macabebes, left in the convento of Samal to the tender mercies of the
“volunteers" of Aguinaldo’s army, were butchered to a man. I was stationed
in that same convento in 1900 (and helped defend it against a determined insurgent attack in April of that year), and an eyewitness of the massacre described to me graphically how those helpless prisoners, who were securely tied,
were cut down with bolos until the blood was ankle deep in the patio. No
wonder that, whenever a detachment of Macabebes came through Samal—
sometimes hours before they arrived—the natives would come to me and beg
me to ask the post commander to take the necessary precautions to keep the
Macabebes from setting fire to the place. On two occasions at least, if we
had not acted quickly, some straggler would no doubt have done the very thing
they feared.


32


One of the Macabebe sergeants, a fine soldier, to whom I spoke of this,
shrugged his shoulders and said: “You would blame us for hating the people
of Samal and the Katipuneros in general if you know what happened here and
in other places, especially in my own town. When the Insurrectos got the upper
hand in 1898, they looted and burnt Macabebe, raped our women and committed
all sorts of outrages. The Macahebes were outlawed under the Filipino Government, and that explains why when the advancing Americans, in 1899, entered
Macabebe, the church bells were ringing and the townspoople grected the
Americans as friends and liberators.”
Those of the Macabebe Scouts who were regularly enlisted and served in
the United States Army during the Philippine Insurrection, became thereby
entitled to pension as Spanish-American War veterans and many of them, and
many widows of such veterans, are now on the pension rolls. But those of
the Macabebe Scouts who served in the first organization and did not enlist
under G. O. No. 310 (1901), are not entitled to any pension for that service.
Those who survive are old men and many bear wounds they received in action
or suffer from disabilities they incurred during the arduous campaign against
the Insurgents in 1899 and 1900. It would be no more than just on the part
of our Government to extend to the few survivors thus deprived of the benefits
of a pension the same rights and privileges enjoyed by the Scouts who were
regularly enlisted. Those first Scouts cast in their lot with the Americans at
a time when the influence of the enemies of the American government was
still very strong throughout the Islands and when helping the Americans in
volved serious peril for any native. And we who served with them know the
great value of the services they rendered to the American Army and Government.


BAHALA-NA
Faces blank
Smiles are few
We’ve got our independence true.
But where are the handshakes,
The applause?
There isn’t any of thet,
Because
We’re bluel
Palms will grow and skies be sunny,
But what are we going to use for money?
Hock our watch and carabao,
The nipa huf, the fields we plow,
Trust to fate, as we do nowl


Bahala-na!


33


—ANON


ETSTENINAATRRIUIAITITATNN


ED. PERRENOUND
SWISS WATCHMAKER
No. 19 Escolta
Opposite Manila Stock Exchange


LUZON BROKERAGE CO.


Derham Bldg.
Port Area


MANILA, PHILIPPINES


P. O. Box 591
Tel. 2-24-21



LICENSED CUSTOMS BROKERS
BILLS OF LADING ISSUED TO ALL
PARTS OF T
HE WORLD
AUTOMOBILES AND FURNITURE STORED





S


This month brings us Easter Sunday and I wonder if it does not bring
back fond recollections when we were just a little younger—days when we
stole, dyed and fought Easter Eggs, and how we all stayed up all night to
watch for the rabbit supposed to lay the eggs.
*
Since Paddy O'Day fell off the sidewalk the other day in two inches of
water and did not hurt himself, Eddie Tait has contracted with him to do
the high dive at the next Carnival.
*
We have just received a letter from Mr. John Garvan, who spent many
years in these Islands living with the non-Christian tribes. Mr. Garvan is
now with the University of California in the Political Science Department.
“Hello" Garvan.
X
Mr. William Ludwig of Iloilo paid us a visit the latter part of March.
When he comes to town his friend Captain Maddy usually pilots him around
to sec the movies at the rate of three shows in one day.
*
During the month, the club has found employment for several of the
Oldtimers.
Did you read the March number of the American Chamber of Commerce
Journal? It contains a very good article in re our Vice-President, Mr. Lawrence Benton.



TCTEFIXTITATAEN


Compliments of
the


Omgol QENmg MAo S


34 ESCOLTA, MANILA, P. I.


U


35


Don't fail to read the Spanish American Vets news. You will find it on
another page of this issue—it may be of interest to you.
*
Everybody is complaining about the weather—Hot Days—Cold Nights.
Well! what are you kicking about, this is the hot season.
*
Oldtimer Joseph S. Johnston of Zamboanga was with us again during the
last part of March. He never forgets the Club when he comes to Manila.
And now that you have found out that this Club publishes a very interest
ing magazine, why don’t you get wise and gladden the heart of some particular
friend in the States by presenting them with a subscription. Just send us
P2.00 with the name and address of your friend and we will mail them a copy
monthly for a whole year.


The following new members were elected at the last meeting:
F. M. King—A. Kelley—William J. Lutz.
*


And now that we know that this country is still under the Sovereignty
of the United States, we hope that both the local Republican and Democrat
delegates to the Conventions will try and impress on these two parties, the


We are still in need of old clothes, playing cards, shoes, etc. Give us
a ring 27-8-04 and we will send a boy to get them.
Our old friend Gioketo has presented the club with a lot of potted plants
and they certainly make the Clut look cheerful.
THITTRITITVUVTTYTYYITYTYITRTIYTTITYITRIYTITYITYEVRTITYYTYTUTYTRYTIYYUTIRTUYTITIYIYIYT
YYYYYTIITYIYIy


349 San Vicente 351
(fronting the Crystal Arcade)


Wa have one of the finest Charcoal Grills in the Orient


OUR SPECIALTIES ARE


GRILLED STEAKS and CHOPS


MONTE—MANAGER


LCADASAACACARRA


36


(Continued from page 16)


Houn' Doggin'


rocks of the Tabu river were colored from the water which was always cold.
Whence it came he did not know because being Tabu he had no curiousity and
having no Gods on which to call he had great fear. He thought that possibly
it could be, that up the Tabu river might be the home of the silver carabao
that came out at night—only in the full moon and brought pestilence to those who
saw it. He had come that way when he departed from Sebu with his neighbor’s
wife but had followed down the stream without crossing it altho he knew his
neighbor’s relatives were on a Blood Feud hunt for him. His pursuers came to
the river and thinking he had crossed, marveling greatly at his daring while
he and his neighbor’s wife were hidden in the bush, turned back into their
own country. He never paid the price to settle the Feud and knew not now
of things in Sebu.


General Parker much intrigued over the fact that the maps did not show
this volcano or rather crater and the further fact that no one knew of it, of
course, desired to know more about it. During our questioning I had learned
that none of us had taken a compass bearing. It was suggested we ought to
have one, tying it to any known landmark, and General Parker wanted it
very badly for future reference, so I volunteered to return as I saw by Don’s
face and eyes he surely was rarin’ to get back there and see more of it.
The General therefore instructed Don and myself to go back. Straubel volunteered to go in my place, but good fellow that he is, I could not see it that
way, so back Don and I went.


We did not monkey much with the Sarangani Valley on our return trip
but made a beeline for the point we thought we ought to find it. We, of
course, went plenty high in order to secure as wide a radius of sight as
possible. The clouds however had been forming over the mountain tops and
were settling very fast. Uncanny Don however kept plodding on and suddenly a violent bump, as he wagged the stick caused me to look ahead and I
saw him pointing almost straight ahead where it lay below the clouds. Breaks
in the cloud formation however permitted us to go through with ease, so we
dropped down below the clouds and circled the rim. By estimating our time
and speed we determined the circumference of this colossal rim was almost
five miles. It was 1-148 miles across according to our estimates, secured by
the same methods, in one way and about one mile in the other direction. We
checked by our compasses the direction both with Makar and Matutum which
gave us a double check.


I secured some fair pictures of the crater with both “stills" and Movies
and then kicked the rudder to make Don look around and I pointed down
toward the water. He grinned and shook his head vigorously in the affirmative
and without another word, below the riim and into the crater we went. My
instruments showed a depth of about 1,800 feet from the rim where we shaved
it in order to secure our altitudes to about 100 feet of the lake’s surface. I
got my beak out over the sides into the slip stream where it was untainted
by our motor exhausts but was unable to detect any odor that might indicate
what the water was below us. We could not see even signs of any bottom.
The lake was smooth, placid and apparently quite deep. The inner walls
were all sheer and I noticed a small bench at the water edge on one side.
We saw some drift wood on the northern shore if it may be called that and
went as close to the wall as we dared and saw there a very shallow stream


37


running from the crater through a high although narrow rift in the crater
wall. As we circled and circled about we were able to see daylight and the


sunlight through the gash or gap. I took


of photo

graphs and finished up the last film I had brought. The last footage I had
was a 50-foot roll Governor General Hayden had insisted I take that morning
as we left Dansalan, he for Manila and I for Unknown Land, and that was
the footage that saved the day in pictures.


While we were down in there 1,600 feet below the crater rim, it suddenly
became quite twilighty, and on looking up we saw we were buried alive by a
cloud of considerable density having topped and covered the enormous top.
It was a peculiar sensation to be flying about down there with a lid over us,
but our investigations finished, Don signalled me toward the gap and as we
again passed it I verified his opinion that we could make it, so we flew to
the farther side, turned sharply and made full speed for the gap. It was
narrow at the bottom—quite narrow with high steep sides and we had to
make several quite sharp turns and banks to get through before we eventually
shot out over a nice grassy valley. Going through that gash however gave
me impressions I could not later verify. What I thought I saw just after we
left the crater proper was a second crater to my right, higher than the one
we had left and a completely burnt out and barren world. We were flying so
fast however and so close to what we saw that it created, as I above stated,
an illusion and two later flights back there to locate that second crater were
all in vain. It does not exist. What I really saw was an enormous curved
ridge that evidently entended from the crater mountain and which had burnt
out, and through a series of avalanches had completely denuded its sides of
vegetation. It was a wild mess. Flying so near its sides and so close to
its base gave an impression of height and shape it did not possess. Once
inside the gash we saw below us a little stream full of rounded boulders which
gave evidences of discoloration. The grade fell away from under us very
steeply and in a very few minutes we were in a broad valley with a flat bottom covered with very lush grass. There was not a single shack however in
that valley. The stream ran into the Alip river farther down. We suddenly
came over a ridge and in a few minutes were over another valley also flat
which we dove into and “dragged" carefully to see whether we would have
a later chance to land there and it looked very good. In this valley there were
shacks evidently belonging to Bilaans. We saw no Silver Carabao nor Golden
snakes with green eyes nor did we see any of the Neighbors Folk who had a
Blood Fued long unpaid. Flying at 130 miles per hour one covers territory
rapidly and in a few minutes we were again over Moro country streaking it
over low ridges for Buluan.


We here reported to General Parker and gave him the carbon copy from
my message book on the original of which I had written: “I hereby name,
constitute and dub thee General Parker Crater which name thou shalt forever
hereafter bear.” This I signed and pushed through the fire wall between our
cockpits to Don who read it, grinned and signed it while I flew the ship. He
passed it back and dropped very low over the water and I threw the dedica'
tion into the crater. The P. I. Government has officially named the crater
General Parker Crater and the lake—Captain Maughan Lake.


CTO BE CONTINUEDY


2


2


2
China’s fighting bandits
Italy is sore
France is arming rapidly
England’s set for war
Soon the league of nations
Will be just a name
Every nation’s arming,
Hitler gets the blame,
Japan’s making warships
We are making planes
Ethiop’s protesting
The Italian gains
Russia’s training soldiers
And she will not cease
Let us feed our armies
On the dove of peace.
BREVITIES
The French Cabinet looks like a
revolving table.—Ohio State Journal.
*
China's two major problems may be
listed as erosion and Japan. Irkansas
Gazette.

Everysody is very busy dropping the
codes they weren’t obeying anyhow.—
New York Sun.
*
Arter all, might it not be well to
streamline the Constitution just a bit?
-Norfolk Ledger-Dispatch.
X
We still believe some preacher is
missing a great opportunity by not biting a snake.—-Montgomery Advertiser.
*
One look at his mustache should
convince any diplomat that Hitler
would not change his mind.—Toledo
Blade.
*
Everrsony is very busy dropping the
revolving table.—Ohio State Journal.

A note containing a dime turned up
at the White House. There was doubt
at first whether it was a chain-letter
or a remittance on the French debt.
—Portland Morning Oregonian.


Go round in the best
of spirits,


Then let the best of
spirits go round:
Robertson s
Scoten Wnisky
as old as History
KUENILE & STREIFF, INC.
343 T. PINPIN
Tel. 2-39-36
an d


48 Isaac Peral 48
Tel. 2-17-62


39


A


VCNTTINATUVANVCOTUAVTNTTYANTTTYITAEATICATIRIIMIAI


Old Timers
and
New Comers


Join the


INOSES


Against
Disease and
Poverty.


and You may win a fortune in doing itl


Fa P..


O2East PREze ..... P200,000
SECOND "..... 100,000
THIRD ". 50,000
and Thousands of other Smaller Prizes
Mid - Year Draw
June 21, 1936
Philippine Charity Sweepstakes
Office: 1893 Rizal Ave.
y2-43-11
Phone:
Manila
12-43-16


40


PUJUTTTTTTUTCTITUTTRTYUYUUUYYJUTYTCYXTUTUYTUTEYITTTYTTUXTIYUTTTTITIIYDTITXTITUTUTOTTUUURTUTOTUUUURTUDTTITYS
TOPICS IN BRIEF



Hirler should remember that some
one sooner or later always “takes"
the challenger.——Manchester (N. H.)
Union.
*
THAT Court ruling may restore the
alphabet to its fundamental use of
making words rather than debts.—
Indianapolis Star.
N
A CONGRESSMAN always faithfully
represents that group of his constituents who scare him most.—Florence
(Alay Herald.
*
ProrosaL has been duly made that
buncombe be excluded from The Congressional Record. Looks like a move
to abolish this periodical.—WinstonSalem Journal.
*
An old-timer is the one who can
remember when the only national problem was the tariff.—Brooklyn Daily
Eagle.

THE French have the right idea.
If you don’t like the Government, wait
five minutes.—Boston Evening Transoript.
X
"LAdY GoDiVA Shocks Broadway.”—
Head-line. Gosh! You reckon she
was smoking a pipe?—Macon Telegraph.
X
THE Young Republican movement
may be based on the theory that the
young ones have nothing to forget.
—Louisville Times.
*
ThE new generation knows nothing
of chain-letters. It never sent request
for a three-day leave via military
channels, to Headquarters, A.E. F.
—Tacoma Ledger.


As a general thing, it is wise to
get your advice form those who have
failed and know the reason why.
—Dallas Morning News.
X
A POLITICIAN's life is no bed of
roses. By the time he finds out what
the people want, they want something
else.—Mobile Register.
*
A MoDEL for mothers is the Kansas
woman who told the judge that she
never struck her children except in
self-defense.—Springfield Union.
*
YES Ethel, this alphabet stuff is all
right if not carried too far, but calling
the Ship of State the SOS just
wouldn't do.—Asheville (N. C.) Citizen.
*
GENERAL GOERING'S pet lion is said
to be a practical joker. The laugh,
however, will be on the lion some day
if it mistakes Der Fuehrer for another
visitor.—Buffalo Courier-Expness.
X
“BLUE EAGLE Substitute Taking
Form.”—Head-line. It will probably
resemble a hen rampant on a nest of
code-storage eggs.—Miami Herald.
X
MaNY a consumer who is denouncing
chiselers also is looking for a place to
buy fifteen-cent cigarettes for eight
cents.—Louisville Times.
*
THE Republicans are in double trouble—they have to find new planks for
a platform and then find a candidate
to stand on them.—Tampa Tribune.
K
LOOKING over the merry countenances in the Dionne photos, we have
an odd feeling that there must be a
sister who does the bawling.—Richmond Times-Dispaich.


41


CEAIEATIYIVYAYAKAATAATYTOCKTODONTDA


Mungy
Oldtmer


White ants, rot and rust
cause you big expense for
repairs. Ordinary paints
for protection cost too
much and do not give full
protection.


BAL TAR
PAINT


will save you money in repairs, and cost less to buy.
it will stop ant infestation,
resist rot, and protect
metal, like G. I. roofs.
In 5-gallon tins and 50 gallon drums. Let us send
you prices and other information.


MANILR GRS
EURPURATIDN


POXTTIXKTVATITCATITATCCCATKORCCRONCETII
INDEPENDENT
SHOE SHOP
E
114 Echague
P. O. Box 2641—Tel. 2-21-77
Keep your feet off your
mind by wearing
Independent Shoes
Ma de to Orde r
Fit Guaranteed
Only the very best
American leather used.
T. G. HENDERSON
Proprietor


S LVA


VIIYYXIYUXYYTYITTPTYYTYYTITIYYTYTTYUYYYYDTDYYYTUPIZ"


Kids just love it because it
tastes good!
For Sale At All Good Drug
Stores
Ag ents
INHELDER, WALCH CO.. Ltd.


 


12


SAINT PATRICK'S DAY
AT THE CLUB
Have you heard what took place at the club on March 17th, or to state
it plainly, Saint Patrick’s Day?
Well, by some good fortune this club has a very generous Oldtimer of
Irish extraction, and as he has been more fortunate than some of the rest
of the Oldtimers, with a true Irish heart, each year he very generously supplies the where-with-all to throw a spread for the club, and invites all of the
Oldtimers to a real Irish feed.
This year some 100 oldtimers attended this party and if you could have
been here to see the happy contented bunch, it would have done you a world
of good.
After the chow, the President of the club, Mr. A. W. Prautch called for
attention and in his usual style said many things of the Irish People and the
good that they have done in this world—no matter where you find them.
This was followed by speeches by our Vice-President Mr. Lawrence Benton—a few words from Edgar Stephenson and—Andy Anderson and a very
nice speech by Mr. J. F. Yeager, and then to cap the climax, a very rousing
speech by the Host himself, Mr. J. J. Dunbar.
The club wishes to thank Mr. Dunbar for his generosity and, as said by
many of the other Oldtimers—“It is just too bad we don’t have more Dunbars",
and we all hope that he lives to be a hundred years old, that he will always be
prosperous and that he will remember us in the coming years.


SNAKES


e have heard stories. We have listened to Bedside Tales. We have
Wlistened to Insurance Agents than which there are no greater talkers
in the world. We have been forced to listen to the protestations of innocence
of men guilty as hell of High Misdemeanor and seen fishermen both sit and
stand looking straight eyed and earnest while they told the most ungodly lies
imaginable. We have read in “Harking Back" about a catfish owned by the
author who, accustomed to go without water, slipped into a stream and drowned:
we tolerated. We read the story of the snake that brought the same author
another toad evidently hoping for another drink of applejack, and we thought
at the time he must have been full of his own hooch. We listened to Maddy
ad libitum and published the photograph of Crow’s fish and then again saw
the faked up tidbit, photographed by Colonel Andreas when he endeavored to
outlie Crow but there is a limit—honestly there is a limit and again there IS
a limit.
Colonel Andreas has just submitted to us a story and Ye Gods, what a story!
It is about a snake—a real snake. No such snake ever did Mackay exhibit
when he faked the public in a circus with a papier mache giant. Never did
Eddie Tait’s shows or Carnivals ever contain even a semblance to Colonel
Andreas’ snake. Endowed with a pure unselfish love—an infallible accuracy
and untiring stamina the snake he wrote in about is the super-snake of all
reptiles. He wrote of the crocodile killed at Buluan and admitted that the


43


49-footer killed, with 18-inch teeth was only what the monster looked like
while it was being captured and imprisoned but that it came down to just an
honest-to god old Croc of ordinary size and standard teeth when it stopped
thrashing about—but this snake he has written about remains the most stupendous thing ever written about right to the end and NOW we understand why
Colonel Andreas was unanimously elected to one of the top ranking member
ships of The Supreme And Grand Exalted Liars Club of the World. Look
for this in the near future. We are afraid to release it without this explanation and it explains in part why the Colonel is leaving late in April for a
world trip.—Ed.


IIAANYIYRXYTYXTYYXYVXVIYIITUEYYIY


TEL. 2-32-74


Hess C& Zeitlin
130 Crystal Arcade
MEMBERS MANILA STOCK EXCHANGE
STOCKS & BONDS BROKERAGE INSURANCE REAL ESTATE


 E


"XYYYYXTTIYIYYIXIETYITIETAAATAVXIITITATTTITAIYIIEUITE
TYTIYXIXTOYT
VTIE


OLDTIMERS
TOOT YOUR HORN
CLEARLY AND MOVE OVER
WHILE YOU TELL
A GOOD ONE"


44


Headquarters Department
Veteran Army of the Philippines
UNITED SPANISH WAR VETERANS
P. O. Box 1264 Manila, P. I.


March 16, 1936.
Department Circular No. 1,
Series 1936-1937
1. The following letter has just been received from Colonel Rice W.
Means, Chairman, National Committee on Legislation, and is hereby published
for the information and guidance of all concerned:
"Washington, D. C., Feb. 12, 1936
Dear Comrade Henderson:


I had a conference this morning with General Hines, Assistant Administrator, Omer W. Clark, who has direct control over the Claim
Service and with the Solicitor for the Bureau, Mr. James T. Brady.
They admitted sending letters such as you forwarded to me was a mistake on the part of George E. Brown, Director of Claims Service.
I am convinced that most of the cases in the Philippine Islands
wherein reduction was made or pension entirely taken away from them
will be corrected and pension returned.
There is a manner provided by law which permits the Administrator of Veterans Affairs to modify any pension claim but in all these
cases the law was not followed. You may rest assured that I will be
watchful of the Veterans Administration in all these cases and I am
confident they will be rectified. Of course, I cannot guarantee this because past experience has taught me that the bureaucrats in the Veterans
Administration cannot be trusted to do this without considerable forcing
on our part. You may tell all my comrades who have been adversely
affected by these decisions that I am hopeful of correction in the very
near future.
Just received word, Henderson, that the furniture you boys gave
Mrs. Means and me is enroute to Washington. I have deliberately waited
to hear this before writing to your Department Commander and all the
rest of you to express our appreciation for all your kindness while we
were in the Philippines. It was a great treat for me and I shall ever
be thankful that we made the trip. Just the knowledge that I have the


Ee
EYITIITAAKXKAE


2


PORTLANO CEMENT
Use RIZAL
The Builders' Choice”
and you will be always sure of your work
HIGH QUALITY
LOW PRICE
MADRIGAL & CO.
MANILA





45


love and affections of all my comrades in the Philippine Islands is a
jewel that I shall always treasure.
Sincerely yours,
RICE W. MEANS
T. G. Henderson, Chief of Staff,
Philippine Department, U.S.W.V., Manila.
2. Camp Commanders are therefore requested to read this Circular Letter
to the members of their camps at the first meeting following its receipt.
By order of Department Commander S. H. BROWN:
T. G. HENDERSON
Department Chief of Staff
OFFICIAL:
HiGinio Pasis
Department Adjutant
RADIOGRAM
1936 Mar 17 PM 10 46
MA14 C WASHINGTON DC 31 I6TH 54APM
DLT T G HENDERSON
POST OFFICE BOX TWENTY SIX FORTY ONE MANILA
HINES ISSUED ORDERS REINSTATING ALL OUR COMRADES HERETOFORE REDUCED OR REMOVED SUBJECT TO REHEARING LETTER
FOLLOWS
RICE W MEANS


ANEYEYNTETGITCONTNYO TANIYAYIXXXEEIXENTATOAATATTTIAINTGIXTIYCATTTGIEYAT


It comes as a boon & a blessing to man,
Tying to his landlord, the old “tin-can".
How? Own your own home & garden in San Juan Heights!
SAN JUAN HEIGHTS CO., INC.
P. O. Box 961
680 Ave. Rizal
Tel. 2-15-01
Manila


 EO SSU


46


THE
SANITARY
STEAM
LAUNDRY CO
(INCORPORATED)


The Sign of Cleanliness
LAUNDRY
DRY.CLEANING
DYEING
MANILA, P. I.
PHONE 2-35-29





OLDTImERS
OURSELDES
We


want
and expect
the
OLDTIMERS'
PATRONAGE.
I. BECK, Inc
ESCOLTA



CFOR more than Thirty years constant and sincere
devotion to the eyesight welfare of those who come to
us has established a firm relationship between our
patrons and ourselves.


Ever the best in quality but never


47


CPTATENEANATTNTNTACTUTAUUTTIYAYGPNTTAATAATEATTTIIIINTITE


FOR THE PHILIPPINES


E


A NEW STANDARD OF REFRIGERATOR VALUE
Point by point, peso for peso, year Tray that pops cubes out instantfor year of trouble-free operaly with no fuss or bother at the
tion ... check these Westinghouse sink ... the Built-in Crisping Pan,
Golden Jubilee models against any Utility Basket, Fold-away shelf
refrigerator you can find. Extes and other features that you would
rior values impress you first .... expect to find only in the most
snowy white High Bake Dulux expensive refrigerators.
finish ... welded all-steel cabinet But most important of all is the
with steel reinforcement.... gracematchless Westinghouse value of
ful streamline styling ... reces money saving EFFICIENCY
sed pedestal base.
the famous time-tested WestingInterior values are even more house Hermetically-sealed Mechan
striking ... Moonstone Ware Waism with four years’ protection
ter Cooler, Triple Food Saver against service expense.
The
Set, and chilling tray the clever Westinghouse Golden Jubilee line
Adjusto-shelf that varies its space is complete ... a size for every
to meet special needs ... the
family ... features to meet every
wonderful new Eject-o-Cube Ice
individual preference.
NESTNGHOUSE olden Jatdlee
REFRIGERATORS
Cull on one of your nearest Westinghouse dealers
Hoskyn & Co., Inc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . Iloilo, Iloilo
Western Equipment & Supply Co. . . . . . . . . . .... Bacolod, Occ. Negros
Visayan Electrical Supply Co. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Cebu, Cebu
Thompson Electric Co. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... Plaza Sta. Cruz, Manila
Cochran’s Simmons Beds-Springs & Bedding .........
Foot of Jones Bridge, Manila
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
123 Pinpin Street
Manila
     D L AAE AO 
48


BOO


H
G
IA
L
F

E
N


CON TML RUL MAILLS
TO THE LARGEST CAPACITY


o LOriesiorro Bobro
& HUnCILS TI NIRo


P. O. BOX 282
TEL. 2-32-13


50-118 Second Street
PORT AREA
MANILA, P. I


BRANCH OFFICE
BACOLOD, OCC. NEGROS


¡Coronas
Especiales


Bellezas
Presidentes