





Vel. XV
Manila, August, 1935
No. 8


KHAKI And RED


August, 1


FOR BEAUTIFUL LAWNS


USE


PHILADELPHIA MOWER
Sole Agents
Manila Machinery & Supply Co.
675-681 Dasmarinas, Manila, P. I.


30 CIGARRILLOS SIN GOMA
MERRA 
DE LAS MEJORES VEGAS
DE LA ISAMBLA
COOL
CLEAN
MILD
FRAGRANT


When The Moon Comes
Over The Mountain
or the sun goes down
over another one----


ROSITAS are good any
and all the time.
TABACALERA
ORIGINATORS OF HIGH GRADE
PHILIPPINE TOBACCO PRODUCTS


ONIVERSTTY OF THE PHILIPPINES
MBRARY
EDUCATIONAL NUMBER


aeng ia a a  a n Ha a  a PIPA 9


KHAKI and RED


May, 193


Official Military Equipment


WnowN as “The Military Store” we
are ready at all times to supply military organizations of every character in
the Philippines with official equipment of
all kinds. This includes, constabulary, police, and school cadet organizations.
For your military needs, call
on us for the correct thing.
INC.
BRIAS ROXAS,
Manila
121-123 Escolta


SKANDIA CRUDE OIL ENGINES
MARINE AND STATIONARY
RELIABLE—ECONOMICAL
“The Standard of the Philippines”
Prices and descriptive catalogs on request.


PENTA
OUTBOARD MOTOR
Efficient
Economical


KOPPEL (PHILIPPINES) INCORPORATED
75 Dasmarinas, Manila
Muelle Loney, Iloilo


VS MEE
NA MEIRA NO MAAA MA MAMEE ELAL IN I


R. G. Hawkins
Editor and Manager


Esteban D. Erispe
Advertising Manager


RHHIT AnG MEE
OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE CONSTABULARY
AND POLICE
Published Monthly
Philippine Constabulary Headquarters.
P. O. Box 618
Tels.: 2-84-31- 4-98-52
Entered As Second Class Mail At Post Office,
Manila on Nov. 6, 1926


SUBSCRIPTION RATES
In the Philippines, United
States, and Possessions:
One Year ............P5.00
Six Months ............P3.00
Three Months..........₱1.50
In All Other Countries in the
Postal Union:
One Year..............P7.00


Vol. XII


MANILA, MAY


No. 5


TABLE OF CONTENTS


Cuts In Expenses of Constabulary Ordered
by Chief .................
Ode To Posture ..........................
Women’s Most Effective Weapons ..........
What Kind of Bird Carries Its Young Like
g Cat!.
Northern Luzon District Officers Hold Successful Convention In Benguet by Lieutenant T. R. Silverio and A. T. Trespeces
Philippine Scouts Should Be Retained by U.S.
says Writer—by Vicente Villamin ......
General Rivers Says Filipinos Are Ready ..
Editorials:
Sprit de Corps” ..................... .
Reorganization Talk Looms Again ......
With Other Editors ................ . . . . . ..
School Problems To Be Taken Up by Legislature .
Private Schools Fill Great Need Says N.
U. Prexy ..........................


12
5
16
16
17
18
20


Wrath of Allah Seen In Recent Jolo Typhoon
Naked Bathing Gains Popularity ...........
Former Soldier Makes Good In Civilian Life
Question Box .............................
What T. R. Thought of Beer ..............
III. The New Penal Code (Continued from
April issue)..
"Profound Regrets, Chief” ...........
Moro Fights Dramatized by Pioneer ........
Mother India Protests ............
XII. Offensive Warfare As Taught In The
U. S. Army School (Continued from
April issue) ...................
Lieutenant A. C. Sese Takes a Bride ......
Jolo Notes by Pioneer .....................
Bontoc Notes ........................ . . . ..
The Cellophane Age ................. . . ...
District Orders ...........................
How Should Chinese Name Be Written? ....


21
22
23
24
24
26
29
30
31


33
35
36
37
37
39
40


(
"FILIPINAS COMPANIA DESEGUROS
"FILIPINAS BUILDING"
21 Plaza Moraga, Manila


WE INSURE


LIFE
HOUSE
FURNITURE
SHIPMENTS
AUTOMOBILES


JFIRE ARMS
BONDS'TRUST
IFIDELITY & SURETY
—o0o—
MORTGAGE LOANS
—o0o—
ROOMS FOR RENT


FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CALL AT:
Central Office, Room No. 205
Filipinas Building
Telephones 2-11-653 &. 2-17.64
Post Office Box No. 745
MANILA


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


Page 2


It Really Is A
Real Savior...


153
66
EG SEACaSN


.. for it has been organized to help the countless number of
the working class, the staggering small merchants those wag
earners and salaried employees and young professionals in their
efiort to own their homes and provide for old age, which
fnevitably must come.


Surely You Can Save at Least
PO.50, or Pl.00 or P2.00


₱1.00 MONTHLY
will give you back P200.00
at the end of 120 months


P50.00 MONTHLY
will give you back
P20,000.00
at the end of 180 months


a month—and you must SAVE because you must move forward!


Save For Your Futurel For The Future Of Vour Beloved Ones!
To those who have not had the fortune of saving before, but who are ready and willing
to provide against the cold charity of the world in old age, we offer the ordinary shares,
which are paid in regular monthly dues, until the matured value of P200.00 per share is reached.
There are three kinds of ordinary shares, namely: (1) Ordinary shares Series "A" payable
at the rate of P2.00 per month per share until the matured value of P200.00 is reached;
(2) Ordinary shares Series "B” payable at the rate of P1.00 per month per share until the
matured value of P200.00 is reached: and (3) Ordinary shares Series “C”
payable at the
rate of P.50 per month per share until the matured vajue of P200.00 is reached. These shares
may be surrendered to the Corporation and the withdrawal value shall be paid to the retiring
stockholders under the rules prescribed in the Corporation charter.
Under normal condition, the management expects that the ordinary shares will, if tho
dues are paid regularly, mature as follows;
Series "A
72 months more or less
Series “B” 120.
 
Series “C” 180,

For the information and guidance of prospective stockholders the following table which is
the result of a conscientious, is herein-below reproduced:


PRACTICAL DEMONSTRATION


Series


Monthly


Number


Maturity


Amount


Profits


Matured


dues


of shares


months


Paid


carned


Value


VAN


₱ 200


1


72


₱ 14400


TF 5600


F 30000


“B”


1.00


120


120.00


80.00


200.00


“C”


.50


1


180


90.00


110.00


200.00


VAN


10.00


7


72


720.00


280.00


1000.00


“B”


10.00


10


120


1,200.00


800.00


2,00000


“C”


10.00


20


180


1,800.00


2,200.00


4,000.00


"A”


30.00


15


72


2,160.00


840.00


3,000.00


“B”


30.00


30


120


3,600.00


2,400.00


6,000.00


“On


30.00


60


180


5,400.00


6,600.00


12,000.00


NAN


5000


35


72


3,600.00


1,400.00


5,000.00


“B”


50.00


50


120


6,000.00


4,000.00


10,000.00


“C"


50.00


100


180


9,000.00


11,000.00


20,000.00


TA


70.00


35


72


5,040.00


1,96000


7000.00


“B”


70.00


70


120


8,400.00


5,600.00


14,000.00


“C”


70.00


140


180


12,600.00


15,400.00


28,000.00


VAV


90.00


45


72


6,480.00


2,520.00


3,000.00


“B”


90.00


90


120


10,800.00


7,200.00


18,000.00


(C”


90.00


180


180


16,200.00


19,800.00


36,000.00


Lucrative
Investment
/
A
(
Dividend of 2 40
On Paid-Up Shares


A Sure Paying Investment


We offer to the public a system of savings and investment
which is as sure as it is free from the fluctuations of
values. To those who have already saved a definite amount,
we recommend the paid up shares of P200.00 each payable in
cash at the time of the subscription. These shares earn a


dividend of 9% or 8% per annum depending upon whether
the said dividends are payable semi-annually or monthly. Caid
paid up shares may be surrendered to the corporation and
the value withdrawn upon written notice in advance of twelve
and six months respectively.


La Salvaciorn
Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos
21-23 PLAZA SANTA CRUZ, MANILA
TELEPHONE 2-11-17
PAZ A. TAMBUNTING
Leonor L. Vda. de Tambunting
Vice President
Treasurer
LEONCIO B. MONZON
ROSARIO ARCINAS
Secretary
Directo:
PANFILO LACONICO
President and Munager


MR. PANFILO LACONICO
President and Manager, La Salvacion.
21-23 Plaza Sta. Cruz, Manila
Sir:
Please send me a copy of your
PROSPECTUS.
Name .


VAddress


Khaki & Red


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 3


Cuts In Expenses
Of Constabulary
Ordered By Chief


Faced by the difficult problem of cutting down
the expenditures of the Philippine Constabulary
in accordance with the strict economy program of
the Government, Colonel Clarence Bowers, acting
Chief of Constabulary, this month issued an “Economy Order” which affected everyone in the service.
Because of the dire financial straits which
the Government finds itself a close pruning of
expense sheets of the various government departments, bureaus and offices has had to be effected.
The Constabulary, according to the economy program must economize to the tune of P987,787.40
during the current year. In view of this demand
upon the Constbaulary it has been found necessary to effect cuts in practically all phases of Constabulary expenditures.
The items included in the forced savings cut
are pay, subsistence and clothing of enlisted men;
quarters allowance of officers, employees, agents,
enlisted men and laborers; forced accrued leave
of officers, employees and agents; traveling expenses of personnel; freight, express and delivery
service; postal, telegraph, telephone and cable
service; rental of buildings and grounds; supplies
and materials; rewards to informers of opium
traffic; maintenance and repair of equipment; and
equipment in general.
Following is Colonel Bowers’ economy order:
1. ECONOMY.—In the Appropriation Act for
1932, it is provided that a total "forced savings”
of P464,868.00 must be made by the Philippine
Constabulary during the current year. In the
recent meeting of the Council of State, it has been
decided that a further reduction of 10% of the
total appropriation of each bureau or office of the
Insular Government must be made in view of the
considerable decrease in government revenues.
This further reduction of 10% in our total appropriation for 1932 which amounts to P522,919.-
40, if added to the P464,868.00 mentioned above,
will give a total "forced savings” of P987,787.40
which the Constabulary must make during the
current year.
In order to meet the “forced savings” mentioned above, it is imperative that the strictest
economy in government expenditures must be observed and radical cut must be made in some of
the items of our appropriation. To this end, the
following statement showing the different items
from which the required "forced savings” could


Every phase of Constabulary
activity affected by slashes
due to forced savings of almost P1,000,000.


Colonel CLARENCE E. BOWERS, Acting Chief
He orders cuts to meet forced savings...


be effected, is hereby published for the information and guidance of all concerned:


Savings
Items of Expense
Pay, subsistence and clothing of enlisted men .................... P460,917.68
Quarters allowance of officers to be
7,120.00
cuti by 10% ................ .
Reduction by 10olo, 8olo, 5olo and 20lo
of pay of officers, employees,
agents, enlisted men and laborers 97,216.42


Forced accrued leave of officers, em

ployees and agenas ....... 20,000.00
Traveling expenses of personnel .... 140,000.00
Freight, express and delivery service 22,000.00
Postal, telegrapn, telephone and cable
8,600.00
Service ........
Rental of buildings and grounds.... 1,000.00
Consumption of supplies & materials 142,000.00
Rewards to informers of opium traffic ....... .. ................. 16,000.00
Maintenance & repair of equipment. 18,000.00
Purchase of Equipment ........... 55,000.00


Total.................. P987,854.10
Effective May 1, 1932, the pay of officers,
employees, agents, enlisted men and laborers will


Page 4


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


be reduced in accordance with the following schedule of rates, as provided in the Memorandum Order of His Excellency, the Gevernor-General, dated April 8, 1932:
More than P5,000 per annum ...... 10 per cent
From P5,00 to P1,201 per annum.. 8,
From P1,200 to P481 per annum... 5,
P480 and below .................... 2 ,,
In computing the pay of officers and enlisted men, the corresponding deductions enumerated
above must first be taken into consideration and
from the balance the corresponding deduction
42 for Pension and Retirement Fund should be
made. All deductions from the pay of enlisted
men corresponding to 5 per cent and 2 per cont
of their respective pay, as the case may be, should
be placed on the payroll on a separate column
created for that purpose only.
Effective July 1, 1932, the subsistence and
clohhing allowances of enlisted men will be reduced 20 per cent. That is, instead of P.40 a
day for subsistence and P.20 a day for clothing,
the, should be entitled to P.32 and P.16, respec..
ively: All payrolls and subsistence voucers
should be prepared accordingly.


(PLEASE PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS)




Allantic, Gulf & Pacifiec Company
Manila


Engineers


Manufacturers


Contractors


71-77 Muelle de la Industrio
MANILA


Ode To Posture


Good posture is an asset
Which very few possess;
Sad to relate, the favored ones
Scem to be growing less.
X
X
X
E
We see the folks around us
All slumped down in a heap
And the way that some folks walk along
Is enough to make you weep.
X
X
X
X
Some elevate their shoulders,
Some hollow in their backsSome stiffen up their muscles
And some just plain relax.
X
X
X
X
The one who walks with grace and poise
Is a spectacle so rare,
That even down on gay Broadway
The people turn and stare.
X
X
X
X
If you would cut a figure
In buciness, sport or school,
Just mind the posture precepts.
Obey the posture rule.
X
X
X
X
Don't thrust yonr head out turtlewise;
Don't hurch your shoulders so:
Don't sag, and drag yourself around;
No stile to that, you know.
X
X
X
X
98
Get uplijt in your bearing,
And strength and spring and vim:
No matter what your worries,
To slouch won't alter them.
X
X.
X
Just square your shoulders to the world,
You're not the sort to quit,
"It isn't the load that break us down,
It’s the way we curry it”
—Author Unknown.



2
—L ZAFIRO

JEWELRY STORE
61—Rosario—63
Manila
You are wel omed at its AGENCY when in Baguic
or in the city where you can find HIGH QUALITV
Watches and Jewelries to suit your purpose. Credit
can be arranged under the easy payment plan of
Sale.
AGENCY IN BAGUIO
58-B. Session Road, Baguio
Mt. Province
AYRUTUOOOUODUOTUYYOYVUYOUOUUTUTYTPUUUUUUVOOUOJOUUVITOUCOYOYXOUOTUUUQUTOOTUOOA


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 5


Women s Most
Effective Weapons


Smiles and langurous eyes,
these are far more dangerous
than gunpowder and steel bullets.


Women are entities that have two peculiar
chief weapons, using them more for a friendly offense than for their self defense. In this short
article, I do not mean to issue a fraterenal challenge against the “Weaker-sex" nor do I mean to
hurt their sensibilities for I am not at all a MISOGYNIST. I am just relating the scanty findings of my association with them.
SMILE is their first and foremost weapon.
To drive men mad, to lure them to extreme and
to lurk them with ephimeral question marks. I
have also perceived that isome women are well
addicted in possessing two varieties of smiles.
Primeval of all, are the fascinating, enticing,
elastic smiles that transport men to the "seventh
heaven of wonder”. Under this particular nature,
I can cite as an specimen the contagious smiles
of our Miss provinces. Secondly, the secluded
smiles that make men blue and faint for a link of
minutes, especially when you do not appear luscious to them. This semi-ordinary fashion is becoming popular everytime the sun rises. I had


been an easy prey of this second class sneer thus
shoveling me into a constrained consequence that
I had to employ foot work to avoid display and
dispute. Anyway, it was not my fault, nor her
fault either, but sure enough, it was the fault of
smiles that you would love to hate.
EYES are women’s second inmutable yet
piercing weapen. Their eyes, languid eyes, melting eyes, the great and exultant enigmas of "life
comedies and human tragedies”. Glances, side
oglings, and stares are the inhibit paroxysm of
love or hate as they casualty may be. They (not
all) are fond of giving you a wink and a leer, intoxicating your galloping heart for a while, leading you to no other recourse than to forget your
anxieties and vexations if you have any. Such
tight-fitting habits make men (not all) proverbial
but not all domestic. There are also eyes, poignant, with such sticky looks benevolent in nature,
deeper than all words can tell and fair as painters dream. Other femenines posses glittering
eyes that are inherently idealistic. Fact, not beau

The instrument you need and ougbt to babe
at camp or barracks—
The NEW


RCA Victor Portable



VICIROLA


Model 2-65


Easier to carry—
Richer in tone—
Simpler to operate—
Hear it at pour nearest
RCA Victor dealer.


KZRM
Radio Manila
Tune in on
Erlanger & Galin(ger, Inc, hatf-how
brogram everp
Tuesday evening
at 7.00 p. m.


RCA Victor Co., Inc., International Division, Camden, N. J., U. S. A.
General Distributors:
ERLANGER & GALINGER, INC.
601—ESCOLTA—609
CEBU
ILOILO
MANILA
RCA Victor Dealers throughout the Islands


NEAN
Radio Manila
Tune in on RCA
Victor Shop program everp Fridap )
evening at 8-30-
RCA Radiotron
Srdprom sten
Sundap evening
at 6:30.


Alagar Bros., Vigan, Ilocos Sur
Stilianopulos, Inc., Legaspi, Albay
Florencio Gonzalez, Jr., Dagupan, Pangasinan
J. Aoyagi, elo Session Bazaar, Baguio, Benguet


San Pablo Auto Supply, San Pablo. Laguna
Lucena Auto Supply, Lucena, Tayabas
American Pharmacy, Zamboanga
Deen & Co., Davao, Davao


Gabriel Bazar, Masbate, Masbate


Page 6


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


ty, is their desires. The higher,—truth is their
aim and not mere fancy or capriciousness.
To say the least, gentle readers, smiles and
glances are not only weapons, insperable from
women, but they are also the most irresistible
ones. It belongs to your nature and mine.


What Bird Carries Its
Young Like A Cat?
The weod duck, also known as the Carolina
or Summer duck, differs from all other species
of duck in that it nests in trees and walks about
on the branches like ordinary perching birds.
Usually the nest is constructed in the hollow of
a tree in the vicinity of a body of fresh water.
Not infrequently the nest is as much as 50 feet
from the ground and half a mile or so from the
water and the problem of getting the young ducks
to the pond or lake is a difficult one. It seems
to be well authenticated that the mother wood
duck sometimes seizes the ducklings, one at a
time, by the back or the nape of the neck and carries them safely in her bill to the ground or water much as a cat carries its kittens. This, however, is not the only method adopted by the parent duck to convey the young ducks from the
nest. Sometimes the young are carried on the
back of the mother or grasped with her feet. Occasionally, when the nest tree is near the water,
the young birds are pushed out by their parents
or they leap or tumble down without any aid from
the adults. The wood duck, which is of medium
size and has a crested head, is the most beautiful
of all American ducks. Scientifically it is known
as Aix sponsa, and the only other species belonging to the genus is Aix galericulata, the gaily colored mandarin duck of China.
)o(-
Doctor—I’m sorry, but you have an unknown
disease that’s incurable.
Mrs. Tony—Oh, doctor, couldn’t you give me
a nice name for it by my next bridge club meeting?
-)o(—
Bruncrush—Know anything worst than athlete’s foot?
Piebust—Sure, some athlete’s brains.


Orders placed with advertisers in
  are assured of prompt
service and square deal, if submitted
thru the Chief, Advertising Department
of  , Oriente Building,
Manila.


May, 1922


KHAKI and RED


Page 7


Northern Luzon District
Officers Hold Successful
Convention In Benguet


Camp Holmes scene of annual
confab and district competition which was featured by
numerous social events.


By Lts. P. R. Silerio and A. T. Trespeces, P.C.


The newly established Camp Holmes of the
Constabulary at Trinidad, Benguet, cozily nestled
among the murmuring pines of a slumbering hill
overlooking the Amburuyan Valley, 8 kilometers
away' from the noise and hubbub of the Pines City,
was the happy scene of the busiest activities ever
held incident to the Annual District Competition
and at the Convention of all Provincial Commanders of the District of Northeern Luzon held on
April 14-16 of this year.
The choice of this camp as the seat of the
competition and convention was indeed a happy
one as it afforded the visiting officers an invigorating climate, free from the sweltering heat of a
scorching sun; unrivalled scenery in beauty made
possible by the marvellous hand of a kind ard magnanimous nature; and a "once over” to their Alma
Mater. Indeed, many of the visiting officers,
majority of whom had no opportunity to revisit
Baguio since their cadet days, marvelled at the
complete change and the new aspect of the city
where they found themselves entirely disoriened
upon their arrival. Most of them were no longer able
to locate the cozy nook which afforded them shelter, peace and romance when having a nice “tetea-tete” with a girl friend in the days of old.
MANY ATTEND CONVENTION
Two days before the convention and competition started, officers and their families began
arriving and so by the 13th everybody was in.
The officers in attendance were: Col. W. E. Dosser. District Commander; Lt.-Col. R. Ochoa, Assistant District Commander; Capt. Antonio N
Villalobos, District Adjutant; Major V. Luna,
District Surgeon; Major E. Tanedo, Provincial
Commander, Bontee: Capt. Angel P. Capadocia of
Nueva Vizcaya; Capt. Luis Quintero of Ilocos Norte; Capt. C. Lizardo of Apayao; Capt. A. C. Campo of Abra; Capt. Pablo R. Suarez of Ilocos Sur;
Capt. M. S. Torralba of Benguet, a revolver competitor; Capt. Manuel Atanacio of La Union; Capt.
A. D. Damian of Kalinga, a revolver competitor;
Ist Lt. Pedro Bulan of Ifugao; 1st Lt. Julian Olivas of Isabela: Lts. P. R. Silerio and A. T. Trespeces of Camp Holmes; and the two competitors
for carbine, Lts. A. Brave and A. C. Sese. The
officers’ ladies who also came along were: Mrs.
Tanedo, Mrs. Quintero, Mrs. Suarez, Mrs. Villalobos, Mrs. Damian, Mrs. Bravo and Mrs. Sese.
With the exception of Capt. Quintero who stayed in one of the beautiful houses of Col. Dosser


Winners in the 1932 District Competition
for the District of Northern Luzon


1, Captain M. S. Torralba, Provincial Commander, Benguet—winner
in the revolver competition.
2. Lieutenant A. C. Sese, C.O. 37th Co.. Lubuagan—winner in the
carbine competition.
3. Sergeant E. Bapaua, 12th Co.. Tuguegarao—winner in carbine
for enlisted men.
4. Sergeant B. Vergara, 38th Co.. Bontoc--runner-up.
in the city, all the visiting officers were quartered in the Army tents purposely set up for theiraccomodation in view of the lack of space in the
Provincial Commander’s and Company Commander’s quarters. These Army tents were secured
through the courtesy and kindness of the Commanding Officer of Camp John Hay and Post Adjutant, Major C. P. Hall and Capt. E. K. Chapman, respectively. All facilities for the comfortable stay of the visiting officers in the Camp were
provided. No effort was spared by Capt. Torralba to make the camp lively and their sojourn en
joyable which was made possible with the ready
and efficient help of Lts. Silerio and Trespeces.
A mess hall was provided where all the offiers


Page 8


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


messed together, with Lt. Silerio as the mess officer. Three radios were available at the camp,
furnishing the visitors wholesome entertainment
both day and night whenever they were not occupied elsewhere.
CARBINE COMPETITION HELD
On the morning of the 14th, the carbine competition was started with Lt. Col. Ochoa, in charge.
Two officers and 26 enlisted men, the best bet
of each company, took part. All the companies
in the district, with the exception of the 21st
Company, Vigan, were represented.
Keen interest and rivalry were observed
among the competitors due to much coveted prizes
to be given to the winners. In the officers’ contest, Lt. A. Sese of Kalinga, disposed of his rival
in easy fashion by besting him in the three ranges.
However, Lt. Bravo had an alibi that his defeat
was due to poor sight on account of age (he is 42
years young, by the way), and also due to the shining reflection that came from his bald head.
Among the enlisted men, the contest was
much keener than that of the officers. None could
foretell as to who would be the winner until the
final smoke cleared up when Sgt. Bayaua of Cagayan was found on top of the rest, leaving his
formidable rival, 1st Sgt. E. Garcia of Isabela,
last year’s winner, a mile behind.


TALKS FEATURE CONVENTION
The afternoon of the 14th was devoted to the
opening of the convention of all Provinrial Commanders in the district, held at the Social Hall of
the Academy. Jurge Marcelino Mortemayor of
the 4th Judicial District was the guest of honor
and had for his subject the “Relation of the
Constabulary to the Judiciary”. Capt. Capadocia
also read his paper about the “Parole System".
Both talks were very instructive. After the close
of the session for that day, all the officers were
invited to a tea party given at the social hall
by the ladies of Camp Allen and Camp Holmes,
bonoring Mrs. C. H. Bowers who was summering
in the Pines City. All the officers with their families in Baguio including General and Mrs C.
E. Nathorst were in attendance. Dancing was
indulged in by the lovers of TTerpsichore, with
the Academy Orchestra furnishing the music.
CAPT. TORRALBA WINS PISTOL SHOOT
On the following morning, April 15th, the revolver competition to determine the best shot of
the district for this year was fought between Capt.
Torralba and Capt. Damian. The big crowd present to witness the firing was eveniy divided between the two as both of them are kknown to be
crack shots. Of course, Capt. Torralba, a veteran
in four district competitions and for the past four


30 CIGARRILLOS SIN GOMA
HEBRA
DE LAS MEJORES VECAS
DE LA ISABELA


everywhere


Originators of High Grade Philippine Tobacco Products


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 9


successive years winner of the district championship in revolver had more followers, and the bet
was naturally two to one in his favor. However,
Lt. Luis Florentin of Visayan fame and noted for
his being stricter than "strictness” itself when
district adjutant of the Visayas, not to be outdone,
called the bet in the form of a box of Corona cigars for Capt. Damian who used to be his comforter and whom he often comforted after receiving
hard knocks from the famous District Commander of Visayas when both were stationed together
in Cebu. Lack of experience in district competition proved disastrous for Capt. Damian, and the
crowd of onlookers to their sorrow had to smoke
his defeat at the expense of Lt. Florentin.
CONFEREES CALL ON GEN. NATHORST
Right after the revolver competition, all the
visiting officers repaired to Baguio, and under the
leadership of Col. Dosser made a call at 9:00 a.m.
on General and Mrs. Nathorst at their cottage at
Camp Allen. The General was found in rarely
good humor, shaking hands with all the callers
and cracking jokes with all of them. Particularly he
noted Lt. Sese whom he knew years ago to be the
embodiment of an ideal soldier with respect to
physique, with chest lifted and arched. But this
time, Lt. Sese was noted by the General to have
stooping shoulders and a crooked spine. The General was informed that Lt. Sese had just been married three days befere. The callers were showed
around the General’s cottage, and later on the
General consented to pose for a picture in front
of his cottage with the callers who enjoyed the visit and had the privilege of taking their last
glimpse at their retiring beloved Chief on the first
day of his retiremeent from the serevice with which
he had spent 31 precious years of his life.
SECRETARY VENTURA GUEST OF HONOR
In the afternoon at 2:00 o’clock, the convention was continued with Colonel Dosser presiding.
Secretary Ventura of the Interior was the very
personification of kindness when he consented to
be the guest of honor, and had to make a flying
trip to Baguio despite his numerous duties in Manila. Capt. E. Baja discoursed on the amendments
of the revised penal code.
At 4:00 of the same afternoon, Lieut, and Mrs.
F. R. Silerio, C.O., 31st Co., entertained the visiting officers at a tea party at their quarters at
Camp. Holmes. Those present were Colonel and
Mrs. W. E. Dosser, Mrs. C. H. Bowers, Mrs. R.
Duckworth-Ford, Lt.-Col. R. Ochoa, Major and
Mrs. B. Valeriano, Major and Mrs. J. N. Evangelista, Major and Mrs. O. M. Johnson, Major and
Mrs. E. Tanedo, Major M. Olympia, Capt, and
Mrs. E. Baja, Capt, and Mrs. L. Quintero, Capt.
and Mrs. M. S. Torralba, Capt, and Mrs. P. R.
Suarez, Capt, and Mrs. V. Punsalang, Capt, and


Mrs. A. Villalobos, Capt, and Mrs. Damian, Lt.
and Mrs. L. Florentin, Mrs. L. Trego, Mrs. J.
Guido, Misses Aguilar, Olympia, Bowers, Montinola, Maj. V. Luna, Capt. A. Capadocia, Capt. C.
Lizardo, Capt. A. Campo, Capt. M. Atanacio, Lt.
J. Olivas, Lt. F. Villaluz, Lt. S. Navarrete, Lt. P.
Bulan, Lt. A. Sese, Lt. A. Bravo, Lt. D. Cuyugan,
and Lt. A Trespeces.
ANNUAL HOP HELD
At 8:00 o’clock of Friday evening, the Annual
Hop of the Constabulary Cadets was held at the
Social Hall with General and Mrs. C. E. Nathorst
as guests of honor. All the officers in Baguio,
Camp Allen and Camp Holmes and their ladies
were present. A bigi crowd was in attendance
made up of the upper crust of the social strata of
Manila and surrounding provinces vacationing in
the Pines City.
The morning of Satunday, April 16, was devoted to the last session of the convention. Major
O. M. Johnson, Acting Superintendent of the Academy, was the guest of honor. Lt. Villaluz gave
also an instructive talk orr the Constabulary company in combat operation. Before the closing of
the convention, a resolution of gratitude and regret was approved and presented to General Nathorst on the occasion of his retirement.
At 11:30 a.m. of the same day, the jovial
Provincial Commander of Benguet Capt. M. S. Torralba and his charming wife played host and
hostess at a cocktail party to their various friends
in Baguio as a comliment to the viisting officers
of Northern Luzon at their beautiful quarters at
Camp Holmes. Prominent among those in attendance were: Acting Speaker Antonio de las
Alas, General and Mrs. C. E. Nathorst, Col, and
Mrs. Dosser, Col. R. Ochoa, Mrs. C. H. Bowers,
Col. Paulino Santos, Director of Prisons, Major
C. P. Hall, Commanding Officer of Camp John
Hay and Capt. E. K. Chapman, Post Adjutant,
all the visiting officers and their ladies, all officers of Camp Allen and their ladies had a record
crowd of distinguished Manilans, Visayans and residents of Baguio, a manifest testimony of the popularity of the Torralbas.
CADETS HOLD DRESS PARADE
At 5:00 p.m. of Saturday, a dress parade made
possible through the courtesy of the Acting Superintendent of the Academy, was held by the Cadets
at their parade ground in connection with the presentation and pining of the medals to the winners
in the District Competition. The winning Officers
were given silver badges besides a rifle offered by
the Tabacalera of Cagayan to the winners in revolver and carbine, while the enlisted man obtained the much coveted gold medal, symbol of the best
shot of the district. Immediately after the parade
and review of the Cadets, the visiting officers were


Page 10


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


again treated at another tea party given by Mrs.
C. H. Bowers at the Academy social hall.. A select crowd of Insular government officials and Manila social sharks were present. Dancing was indulged in with the Academy orchestra furnishing
the music.
Sunday morning was spent by te visiting officers in sighi-seeing around the beautiful spots
in Baguio. At noon of that same day, a luncheon
party was offered by Capt, and Mrs. E. Baja to the
visiting officers at the lawn of their quarters at
Camp Allen. All the officers and their ladies in
Baguio including General and Mrs. Nathorst were
in attendance. Acting Speaker de las Alas was also
present.
At 4:00 p.m. of the same day, as the final event
and climax of the series of parties tendered the
visiting officers, our beloved Colonel and Mrs. W.
E. Dosser played host and hostess to all the officers in Baguio and Trinidad at an elaborate tea
party at their palatial residence considered the best
home in Baguio particularly in respect to the interior artistic finish of the building. All the officers
and ladies mentioned in the preceding paragraphs
were present headed by their retired Chief General
C. E. Nat"orst and his amiable lady. Army officers and several American residents also answered
the roll call.


CONVENTION VOTED MOST SUCCESSFUL
This year’s competition and convention was
voted unanimously as the best and most successful
and entertaining ever held in the district. This
was due, they all claimed, to two reasons: First,
the place is ideal in respect to its climate and location, and in the second place, facilities for the
entertainment and enjoyable stay of the visiting
officers were abundant. In spite of the economic
depression, the rosary of parties tendered the vsitors exceeded their expectations and they returned to their respective stations fully contented and
hoping to return soon to breathe again the perfumed invigorating air of our cloud clad city and enjoy again to the limit the entertainments that are
always awaiding a visitor year in and year out.
Before the visiting officers departed, a special
order was issued at the Headquarters of Lai-son,
famous tailor for Constabulary uniform since time
immemorial, instructing Captain Campo to repors
for new uniforms. The whole city was all agog
when Lt. Olivas ransacked all the stores looking
for a number 30 white collar for his evening dress.
UNIQUE CONTESTS HELD
A series of contests were also held among the
visiting officers and the following were declared
winners:
For having the greatest number of children:





INVESTORS ATTENTION
OrUHlONG SUBSAsOl
“THE COMMUNITY OF EXGEPTIONAL GROWTH"


Grasp this opportunity! Record breaking sale NOW ON! Your
opportunity may soon be GONE. Do not delay. Go to Singalong today. Drive to Sta. Escolastica College, 1523 Pennsylvania
and turn to your left 100 yards. See our branch office at 705
Vito Cruz. Installments as low as ₱15.00 per month. Tels.
5-44-49 and 2-17-59.
Call for Mr. Arabejo or Mr. Rodriguez









May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 11


Capts. Capadocia, Villalobos and Damian. None
has any so far within their homes.
For possessing the best knowledge of American
cards: Capt. M. Atanacio. He beats everybody in
“Bridge” etc.
As radio announcer: Capt. P. Suarez. He
talks even in his sleep.
For the most talkative man: Maj. E. Tanedo.
If you don’t hit him he won’t talk.
For the most philantrophic: Major V. Luna.
He distributed money right and left to his brother
officers during the convention (at a “Bridge” table).
For having the whitest complexion: Lt. P. Bulan. He is the Governor of lfugaos who believe
he is their kin.
For having the best make up: Capt. L. Quintero. He stayed throughout the meet in the famous Pines City Beauty Parlor owned and managed by Mrs. Dosser, the loving and dharming
wife of the District Commander, who fully commands both English and Spanish.
Lt. Olivas was the Luckiest officer because he
carried away two honors to his credit. He was
easily declared winner in the beauty and eating
contest. He had no peer in these lines. He was
also the one who had to don a uniform in borrowed togs because due to his hurry in seeing the bright
lights of Baguio and great anxiety in meeting his
old sweetie there—by the way he was the first officer to arrive—he failed to bring his shoulder
straps.
Captain Lizardo announced himself the happiest man in the world because after twelve years
of married life and daily prayers the white stork
brought him at last a new member of the family.
After this announcement three Catains were seen
always with faces radiant with hope even in their
sleep. With all due respect and without any reversed meaning our loving District Commander
was unanimously voted the handsomest man in the
whole district.
Thus, ended the happiest and most memorable
event held so far during the year in the District of
Northern Luzon which took place in the newly established Camp Holmes glorified by everybody who
has seen it for its heavenly atmosphere and beautiful and enchanting sceneries the lkies of which
is seldom seen in the world.
Come and see Camp Holmse and find yourself in the heavens.


Orders placed with advertisers in
  are assured of prompt
service and square deal, if submitted
thru the Chief, Advertising Department
of  , Oriente Building,
Manila.


FOR GROWN-UPS
Boie’s Emulsion enriches the blood, overcoming anemia and
anemic tendencies.
—regulates the action
of the organs of the
body.
—promotes a feeling
of courage, health and
well-being.
—brings back a hearty
appetite and good digestion.
—prevents infections,
notably of the eyes,
nose, throat and lungs.
—wards off lung attacks and tuberculosis,
and aids in overcoming tuberculosis in the
early stages.


FOR CHILDREN
Boi e's Emulsion
builds strong blood
and sturdy bodily tissues.
—as in grown-ups, it
regulates the action of
the bodily organs.
—it gives the bones
full growth and prevents rickets.
—makes the digestion
and appetite good.
—supplies minerals,
especially calcium,
needed by the blood
and bones, the blood
using the calcium to
wall off infected lung
tissue.
—prevents colds and
sore throats by making the body resist
germs.


Sold by Drug Stores


BOIE'S
142
God Liver Oil


OTHERS
144
Cod Liver Cil


₱1.00
The Peso Bottle is a Bottle of Heatlh


Philippine American Drug Company
BOTICA BOIE


Leading Pharmacists Upward of a century


Page 12


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


Philippine Scouts
Should Be Retained
By U. S. Says Writer
By VICENTE VILLAMIN


In "Washington Post”
The United States Army in the Philippines
consists of 11,000 men, of whom 6,500 are Filipinos, known as Philippine Scouts. This Filipino
organization is under the jurisdiction of the War
Department and not under the Philippine government.
The Philippine Scouts are officered by both
Americans and Filipinos, many of the latter being
graduates of West Point. There is a Filipino,
holding the rank of major, who graduated from
the Army War College here in Washington.
The loyalty and efficiency of the Filipino
Scouts are spoken of by American officers in the
highest terms. The Filipino soldier is brave, resourceful and dependable. He is a military asset
to America today. IThe Filipino people are justly
proud of him.
A part of the United States Army, including
the Philippine Scouts, is in the Philippines as one
of the symbols of American sovereignty in those
islands. It is only logical that America should
bear the expenses for its support. To shift the
financial responsibility to the Philippine governmen is to make that government pay for the upholding of American sovereignty. This would be
a patent incongruity. It would smack of one of
the grivancas of the Thirteen Colonies against
England.
While the Philippines are under the American
flag the Filipinos rightly feel that their government has no need for the scouts. There is already
a force of 6,500 men, known as the Philippine
Constabulary which is keeping law and order
throughout the country. This body is highly commended by American officials.
It stands to reason that if the cost of maintaining the scouts is is made to devolve upon the
Philippine government that organization is as good
as dissolved. Both financial and political considerations will support the action. The net result
will be the abandonment by the United States Government of its own responsibility. It would not
be in the interests of ecoomy to replace the scouts
with American regulars.
This matter is different from the case of the
Philippines, having a standing army, once it is an
independent nation. At that time the Philippine
nation will be solely responsible for its existence.
Then it will have to have an army larger than the
present constabulary force. The sovereign posi

Gen. Rivers Says
Filipinos Are Ready
Major General William C. Rivers, former
Chief of the Constabulary, and who served in the
organization for ten years recently wrote a letter
which was published in the New York Times in
which he expressed the belief that the Filipinos
are ready for independence.
Extracts of the letter read:
“My conviction that the Filipinos are ready
for independence comes from knowledge of the various parts of the archipelago and of the character and capacity of the people who have been for
300 years under tutelage of Western governments".
“The Filipinos, of Asiatic origin and with
many good qualities of mind possessed by most
races inhabiting the oldest of continents, have
shown adaptability, energy, probity and capacity in
many important positions over a long period of
time”.


tion of America in the islands at present creates
a condition of peace.
The cost of maintaining the scouts to the
United States is about $5,000,000 a year. This
sum is equivalent to one-seventh of the entire revenue of the Philippine government.
It is plain that if America desires to prepare
the Philippines for a stable and durable independence the step to take is not to weaken them financially or harass them commercially, blut to aid
them in setting up a new self-sustaining economic
structure, developing their natural resources and
generally strengthening the Filipino commonwealth.








COLECIO DE LA CONSOLACION
Conducted by the Agustinians sisters
RECOGNIZED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Official Courses: Elementary, High School
It also offers especial course for secondary
Domestic Science.
Matriculation Opens May 25, 1932
Classes begins June 6, 1932
Ask for Free Catalogue.
260 S. Rafael
Tel. 2-50-90 Manila


Read KHAKland RED


N


  


Page 13


Major-General WILLIAM C. RIVERS, U.S.A. (Retired)
Former Chief of the Philippine Constabulary
He believes Filipinos are ready for Independence...


(See story on opposite page)


KHAKI and RED


Page 14


May, 1932


Life Insurance Speaks
In Big Figures
By EDMUND W. SCHEDLER


The Foreign Service offices of the Department of State
and Commerce, have furnished figures to the Association of
Life Insurance Presidents which indicate that at the close
of 1929, the life insurance in force thruout the world, totalled
6147.000,000,000.50. Allowing for a small insurance, it is
estimated that the 1930 figures, when complete, will show
an excess of over $150,000,000,000.00 in force at the present
time.
Of this huge amount, 85% of the international total is
owned by the people of English speaking countries, some 70%
heing placed in the United States of America.
This is true even the life insurance originated in Engiand, but it has been so changed and adapted by the more
vigorous North American countries of United States and
Canada, that it can be said molern life insurance is essentially North American. Canada and the United States between them had $115,000,000,000.00 in force in 1930.


Philippine Islands. Three local companies including the
Insular Life, the Filipinas, and the Oriental Life, the organized in 1930; two Canadian companies, the Sun Life and
the Manufacturers Life; and two American compan es, the
West Coast and the Asia Life, comprise the field.
The foreign companies mainly continue to write their
insurance business among the foreigners, altho their Filipino
policyholders are increasing. The local companles have thein
clientele aln ost entirely with the Filipinos, the wage earners,
onals, government employees and property owne
No company has yet devised any insurance scheme to reach
the working man, the farmers, and the low income class.
At the close of 1930 there was P132,000,000.00 of Iife
insuran e in foree, a per capita average of P10.00 of life insurance for each re-ident of the Philippine Islands.
There were 37,000 policies in force, at the end of 1930.
MORE LARGE FIGURES
The person who finds pleasure in reading large figures
will be able to exercise that delight in scanning the 1931
balan e sheet of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company
of New York. At the close of 1931, the assets of this
Goliath of Finance, were $3,600,000,000.00.


PER CAPITA OWNERSHIP HAS INCREASED
At the close of 1900, in the United States there was
$111.00 of life insurance in force for each person. Euccessively, this amount has been increased as follows:
In 1905--$157.00; 1915—$228.00; 1920—$394.00; 1924—
$559.00; and 1929—$843.00.
In other words there is an equivalent of $843.00 of life
insurance for each human being in the United States.
Canada has shown her new world likewise, jumping from
$81.00 per person in 1900, to $640.00 per person in 1929.
Abroad, the United Kingdom, showed a per capita increase from $109.00 in 1900 to $266.00 in 1929.
The Swedes showed an appreciable increase of from
$31.00 in 1900 to $205.00 in 1929.
Next to the United States and Canada, New Zealand
has the largest per capita ownership of life insurance. They
had $358.00 per person in 1929. Australia had a per capita
ownership of $273.00 of life insurance in 1929.


This sum is greater than the assets of any other inancial
institution in the world, indeed it is greater than the assets
of some kingdoms.
The company has a surplus of funds, as a back-log, or
veserve, of $230,000,000.00 in addition to 1egular liabilities.
During 1931 the income of the company was $900.000,-
000.00.
This means that President Ecker (salary of $200,000.00
a year) and his staff must invest wisely and safely more
than $3,000,00000 each working day.
The company has a total insurance of $20,000,000,000.00
ivide l up into $45,000.000 policies, more than any life insurance company in the world.
While the Metronolitan Life balance shect is the most
impressive from the standpoint of figures, there are other
American life companies that annually present balance sheets
with amoants o large that they are almost beyond comprehonsion.


₱10.00 OF LIFE INSURANCE PER PERSON IN P. I.
Altho one foreign company has been operating for several decades in the Philippine Islands, it was not until 1910
that a domestic company was organized, the Insular Life
Assurance Company, and life insurance as an institution,
began to show strength about ten years ago. At the present
time, there are seven companies writing business in the


BARTONS


INE
DYANSP
DOUBLE SERVICE SHOE POLISX


Wonder Shoe Polish
RESTORES COLOR
PRESERVES LEATTER
CONCEALS SCUFFS


Makes Old Shoes Look New


Per bottle
₱1.00


Per dozen
P8.00


Per gross
₱81.60


Colors:
Cordovan brown
black
white kid
light tan
nut brown
oxblood



HAMILTON-BROWN
Shoe Store and Haberdashery
109—111 Escolta, Manila
Sole Agents


Colors:
Cordovan Brown
black
white kid
light tan
nut brown
oxblood


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


A








"


DUIE

NI2
 

N







N


E


4


A LITTLE SAVINGS CASTS A BIG SHADOW.


when part of the savings is used
to buy life insurance.
The Light of Reason shines forth
with the message, "Keep that policy
in force!”
The ingular Lito ASsurance Cosy Cid.


aa aa 
 e l PAmor

Insular Life.
BOX 734, MANILA
!
Y Can part of my savings go into e "Blue Ses" E
4
Policy? Tell me about it. No obligation.
Name.
E
4
Address....
r
 Age . . . . . . . . . Monthly Savings .. . . KR-5-25-32 1



KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


Page 16


KHAKIAND RED


OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE CONSTABULARY AND POLICE
Tels.: 2-84-31
Philippine Constabulary Headquarters
4-89-53
P. O. Box 618


TUBLISHED MONTTLY — SUOL GAD OUENTAVOS
NRI N. G. RAVIINS—MMDA


ESTEBAN D. ERESPE
Advertising Manager


SUBSCRIPTION RATES
In the Phlippines, United States, and Possessons:
 
One Year....
Six Months ..
Three Months
In All Other Countries in the Postal Union:
*
One Year....
Entered As Second Class Mail At Post Office,
Manila On Nov. 6, 1926


₱5.00
P3.00
₱1.50
₱7.00


Vol. XII


No. 5
Manila, May, 1932


EDTORALS


“ESPRIT DE CORPS"
In looking over the old files of the Constabulary our attention was attracted by the following
little piece written by Colonel Peter E. Traub, on
October 31, 1916 while he was the District Commander for Mindanao and Zamboanga. The paper
was sent out to all officers of the district under the
caption “Confidential Remarks To All Officers of
the District” We believe that what Colonel
Traub said siteen years ago relative to “Esprit
de Corps" still holds good and will hold good until
mankind will have done away entirely with military or semi-military organizations. Colonel
Traub said sicteen years ago:
The fact that so many young officers have
joined the Mindanao Constabulary in the past year
makes this an opportune time to cail attention to
certain important matters connected with the career they have elected.
The Officers of the Philippine Constabulary
make the corps what it is at any particular time.
It’s “Esprit de Corps” the spirit that animates
and controls the Constabulary, depends as much
upon those who have preceded us as upon those
who now are the wearers of its honorable uniform.
Our predecessors’ spirit lives in the Philippine
Constabulary and can no more be disregarded by
us than we can disregard our ancestry. We have received into our care this heritage from many highminded men imbued solely with one criterion and
ideal “the good of the service”. It is our duty
who at present are the embodiment of that spirit,
to so conduct ourselves that “Esprit de Corps" shall
be enehanced and handed on to our successors with'
increased vigor and prestige to hearten and to
inspire them.


We must bear constantly in mind that any
act of ours that tarnishes the record of the Constabulary hurts not only ourselves personally. It
injures the reputation of the corps, makes us false
to our trust and is a blight on the growth of a
healthy feeling that the Constabulary is the elite
corps, and that to have the privilege of serving it
is an honor to each and every one of us.
Let us serve it with credit. Let us live well
within our means and spurn all temptation in the
shape of graft, women and wine, keeping ever on
high before us our one ideal “the good of the service and the honor of the corps”. Let this be
the test we apply to each and every question that
confronts us and there need be no doubt of the
oulcome,—safeguarding the trust placed in ouo
keeping by those who have gone before us.
I do not need to be more specific for I am addressing intelligent and knowing gentlemen whom
it is my pleasure to command and concerning w ose
future conduct I have at heart not only their own
welfare but above all the welfare of our corps.
PETER E. TRAUB,
District Chief


REORGANIZTION TALK
LOOMS AGAIN
Tre reorganization icommittee of the house
of representatives of the Philippine Legislature is
reported to be considering the overhauling of the
Constabulary, along with other offices of the Insular Government. On several occassions in the
past there was presistent talk of reorganizing
the service. Now, however, the movement seemes to be towards definite action on the matter.
It is contended by some members of t e reorganization committee of the Legislature that the
Constabulary has too many officers in proportion
to its personnel. By force of economic necessity
the strength of the organization has been cut down
to the smallest unit commenserate with half way
efficient performance of the multifarious duties
that have been imposed upon the Constabulary. Now
it seems, it is intended to take from the organization more of its officers staff.
While the legislators are considering the vexing and complexing problem of the reorganization
of the Constabulary it might be well for them to
make a thorough study of the duties of the orgamization, not only as they appear on the written
statutes but as they are executed, with the resultant difficulties attendant to carrying out such duties with a small force. It might be well, too, to
consider that recently the pay of the already too
poorly renumerated Constabulary officer and soldier, has been cut.
It may be argued that quality is better than
quantity and that the Constabulary might oper

May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 17


..ith Other Laitors


AGGRESSIVE WEAPONS
In Washington Post
Ambassador Gibson’s proposal that "aggressive weapons of war” be abolished was received
with little enthusiasm at the disarmament conference. Great Britain supports it, and Italy and
Germany are lukewarm toward it. But France
is openly hostile. The question involves numerous difficulties over which the conference migat
argue for months, in spite of its apparenti simplicity.
Mobile artillery, tanks and poison gases are
the "aggressive weapons" against which Ambassador Gibson’s proposal is aimed. Apparently
the American delegation made special mention of
these items with a view to directing the attention
of the conference to a specific problem. Ambassador Gibson does not pretend that these are the
only aggressive weapons used in war. Bombing
planes and batlleships are certainly not less aggressive than tanks and gas. When the proposal
comes actively before the conference other nations
doubtless will ask that weapons which they particularly fear be put on the forbidden list.
One of the foremost defects in this plan of
disarmament is the impossibility of drawing any
line between weapons of aggression and defense.
The distinction is largely academic. What one
nation may consider a defensive weapon serves
as an instrument of aggression for another country. Great Britain, for example, would like to have
bombing planes and submarines abolished because
they constitute a threat to her safety. The lesser
sea powers would like to see the battleship abolished. If the special aversion of all countries
were place on the prohibitive list there would be
few weapons of war available. Hence, it is not
easier to agree upon this type of disarmament
than upon general reduction in the relative strenth
of the powers.
* Ambassador Gibson’s arguments were couched so as to make an appeal to France. Premier
Tardieu’s government, like all other French ad

ate as efficiently with a smaller number of men.
Yet there is such a thing as using the trimming
knife too liberally in cutting down personnel. It
is far better for the government to invest, in these
times of economic depression and social unrest,
in an entity that may have more men than is believed necessary and be assured of peace and good
order than to make a sparse outlay for an undermanned organization that can not carry out any
of its designated functions with promptness and
dispatch due to lack of men or of facilities.


ministrations, insits upon security before making
any move toward disarmament. By abolishing
the weapons of aggressive warfare, says Mr. Gibson, a larger degree of security may be obtained.
But the fact remains that a nation with a grievance can make war whether or not it has tanks.
poison gas and movable artillery. As a substitute for the French plea for political guarantees
the Gibson plans is extremely weak. The fact
that it was put forward as a security measure
gievs assurance of bitter opposition by the French
and foreshadows its failure. Indeed, Premier Tardieu has already rejected it.
The nations are making themselves ridiculous
by prolonging the fiasco at Geneva. Thhere will
be no agreement upon reduction of armaments,
and all the delegates know it. They are deliberately maintaining a mockery conference for the
purpose of misleading the peoples. If the delegates had the courage join in a statement of the
blunt truth they would say: “None of the nations
wishes to disarm. Each makes proposals which
it knows the others will reject. Each is trying to
make it appear that the other fellow is responsible for refusal to disarm. All are equally guilty.
We refuse to participate in the fraud any longer,
and this conference is hereby adjourned”


For The Ladies
Or The Home,
VISIT
GOLDEDERGS
DEPARTMENT STORE FOR LADIES'
APPAREL
Complete Stocks of Silks
and
Dress Materials in Remnants and full pieces
American Silk Hosiery & Shoes
New shipments received regularly
Highest quality goods—Latest styles—
Lowest prices
Household goods a specialty


 WHOLESALE & RETAIL
GOLDENBERGS
Tel. 2-39-42
P. O. Box 1421
194 Juan Luna
Manila, P. I.
(One block from China Bank Bldg.)


Page 18


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


School Problems
To Be Taken Up
DO
By Legislature
As the month of May draws to a close, the
opening of the school year early in June draws
the attention of educators and their subjects ana
their subjects’ families and the legislature. This
year the Philippine legislature has before it several distinct and separate problems which force
educational matters into the minds of our country’s
lawmakers to a greater degree than in any recent
year.
There is the ever-existent problem of insufficient revenue and insufficient accommodations. This problem is more acute than ever
on account of the depression. Several
schemes have been brought forth to alleviate it,
some of which may find their way into the statutes.


Various educational questions
face educators and legislators.


mental action will be threshed out on the floor of
the house and several controversial topics are up
for discussion.
First among these is the question of the language medium of instruction in the public schools.
Some further proposals for the adoption of a local
dialect as the medium of instruction will be advanced and debated Mr. Anonas in a recent address at the University of the Philippines stated
that he favored the adoption of a single dialect to
be chosen by an academy of linguists and the conscious enlargement and perfection of this dialect
until it would be suitable for language use. Last
year a proposal was made to utilize several dialects
as the medium of instruction but it did not reach
the stage of legislative action.


Representative Gregorio Anonas, chairman
of the house committee on public instruction has
indicated that several major educational problems
will have a conspicuous place in the deliberations
of the forthcoming session of the legislature, Matters which require legislative rather than depart

A second question is the much-debated problem
of te adoption of the single-session system. Proponents of this plan are prepared to urge that it
will afford education facilities to a larger number
of students while its opponents assert that it will
put too great a burden upon teachers.


TUTTOTTUPTOYOYTTOPOYYOYTYTUTYOTYYTYXYYYYUYYUYUURY


BOTSBO
INSURANCE


FIREARM,
AMMUNITION,
JUDICIAL,
CONTRACTS,
CUSTOMS,
INTERNAL REVENUE,
FIDELITY


Fire, Marine, Earthquake,
Typhoon,
Rent, Compensation, Accident,
Automobile,
Plate Glass and Flood.


Call or wrile for Particulars.
FIDELITY AND SURETY COMPANY OF
THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS


Tel. 2-12-55


GEO. C. DANKWERTH,
President
Monte de Piedad Bldg.
Plaza Goiti


Manila, P. I


May, 1932


  


Page 19


A proposal of Governor General Roosevelt will
be the third point of discussion. This is that vacation schedules be so adjusted as to allow students
to assist their parents during karvest time in the
various provinces. This would necessitate some
type of sliding scale vacation, but is believed by
many persons to be feasible.
The text book question will also come up for
further discussion, as will, finally, the proposal to
withdraw all government aid from the high schools
of the Philippines. This proposal means the suppression of the public high school as such and the
relegation of its functions to the private schools.
It is urged as an economy measure as well as in
the belief that te funds thus saved could be used
to offer wider educational facilities in the elementary division. Representative Anonas has indicated, however, that this proposal must be dealt
with carefully since the high school offers the
connecting link between the elementary schools and
the institutions of higher learning. Therefore, he
believes, the matter of its suppression is not to be
rushed inte lightly, and the merits and demerits
of the plan will be carefully weighed.
Apprehension that numerous changes in text
books this year would throw too heavy a financial
burden on the community has been quieted by Luther Bewley, director of the bureau of education,
who asserts that great discretion will be used in
recommending changes.
The legislature in its last session undertook
to put off any changes for the time being because
of economic pressure, but the measure was not
acted upon by the senate, and therefore the previous provisions of the law are operative. Under the regulation the text books in use are subject to revision or change every six years. In
practice, however, this provision has received flexible interpretation so that many books now in
use have not been altered for the last 11 years.
Prior to the current drop in revenues and
the prevailing signs of economic pressure, it was
planned to undertake a thorough revicion this year,
and the text book board was appointed for this
purpose. Numerous suggestions were made, and
some changes adopted.
The text book board, kowever, it is now indicated, will not enforce the changes so rigidly as
to impose a financial burden either upon the government or upon individuals. When revision or
change is positively necessary it will be carried
out but the wide degree of discretionary latitude
will be allowed so as to make any cost involved
as light as possible. In no case, it is declared,
will changes be arbitrary or burdensome.
There has been much speculation and discussion as to the course of action to be taken, and it
is not unlikely that the forthcoming session of the
legislature will again take up the text book ques

tion and attempt to modify the provisions of the
present code so as to take into account the present economic condition of the ountry. Legislative leaders have indicated that this question will
again be discussed although no concrete proposals
have as yet been formulated or made public.
It is possible that the discretionary action of
the bureau and the board will make it unnecessary, to take any drastic legislative steps at this time
and that the present code can be tided over the
current conditions until it can become operative
under more normal influences.


what Is The Fastest Train in The Worid
The Cheltenham Flier, a train belonging to
the Great Western of England, is the fastest train
in the world. It makes the regular run from Swindon to Paddington station in London, a distance
of 77 miles, in 67 minutes.
)0(-
Lulu—My dear, I can’t imagine why the
Skinners continue to invite the Ripsnorts over to
their house of evenings when the Skinners gossip
so much about them.
Lola—Well, they wouldn’t get invited over to
the Ripsnorts, any other way, and the Ripsnorts,
you know, have such wonderful midnight suppers.


TKA-ARa
MANUEL ZAMORA
THE ORIGINAL-THE BEST!
This famous Tiki-Tiki has
saved and still saving millions
of mothers and children
against Beri-Beri.
Thousands are telling us
as to its being the BEST, and
the MOST EFFECTIVE remedy. There is only one TIKLTIKI MANUEL ZAMORA.
¡DO NOT BE MISLED!


Sole Manufacturers:
FARMACIA DE
MANUEL ZAMORA
FEDERICO AMACIO, Mgr.
928 R. Hidalgo, Manila Tel 2-65-25


KHAKI And RED


May, 1932


Page 20


Private Schools
Fill Great Need
Says N. U. Prexy


Nobody can deny
now that private
education has a fixed role in the economic advancement
of our people. The
growth of private
schools in response
to the demands of
parents and the
sheer expression of
confidence which
this group of citizenry bestows upon
private institutions
of learning are
proofs that private
education has a


GABINO TABUNAR
mission in the upPresident, National Uniersitp
bringing of the
youth of the land. Far and wide, the private
schools are to be seen now. They dot conspicuous
sections of our cities, and are now to be seen, established and enjoving the confidence of the public, in numerous provincial towns.
It is one important function of private insti

tutions to supplement and help the public schools
in advancing the cause of the youth of the country. The time has come when our government
cannot adequately answer the needs of our people.
With so many of our children clamoring for ad

mission into the class-rooms and with so limited


a number of them being assured admission for
lack of funds, it can be readily seen that the entry
of private schools in the educational field is more
than justified. Our aims are unmistakably identical to the aims of the public schools. We mbe using a different course, traversing a different path, but just the same,, it is clear that we
are striving for the same end that the public
schools are working to attain. Towards that goal,
there is no royal road. Unity and diversity of
ends and means characterize both of our labors.
In religion, as in education, the public can see that


one’s berth in heaven, or whatver place a man
strives for after his death, can be secured throug'i
a profession of different faiths. The only difference may lie in the course that one takes.


What is the future of private education in
the Philippines?
That future, allow me to say it myself, is
established. And when I say it is established, I
am backed up by the history of private education
in the Philippines, and by hundreds and hundreds


President Gabino Tabunar
believes time has come when
government cannot adequately answer needs of people
here.


of private schools, not to mention the thousands
that are now enrolled in these institutions.
However, I wish to emphasize, in connection
with this discussion of the role of private education in the Philippines, something which should
be said in justice to all privane institutions of
learning. There exists in the mind of the public,
and in the minds of certain sections of our people,
a prejudice against products of private colleges.
Where this prejudice started and how is only too
obvious to be elaborated on.


I am of the opinion that this is not at all justified. I am not afraid of, nor do I detest, comparisons. In fact, I welcome them whenever they
can prove that one is better than the other. It
is disheartening, however, to note that in comparing one private institution with the state university, the wrong kind of comparison is being used.
If we must compare, therefore, a private institution with a public school, we must compare
the worst in one with the worst in the other, or
the best in one inctitution with the best in the
other institution. Then and only then can we sce
both entities in the light of w at they really are,
and not in the deceptive light in which many are
apt to regard them.


for every
Amateur Rackef P7.00
(Strung)
Now you can afford
to play tennis and
KEEP FIT


Offered by


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 21


A


Wrath Of Allah
Seen In Recent
Jolo Typhoon


An interesting
sidelight on the
recent typhoon
which laid the
Sulu Archipelago in ruins last
April 29 is told
by the Moros of
the region who
lsee in the destructive storm
the wrath of Allah. Following
is the Moro belief of the cause
of the devastating storm as recounted by Lieu.
tenant Alejandro
Lieutenant ALEJANDRO SUAREZ, P.C.
Suarez, Station
Commander at Camp Romandier, Sulu:
“From time reaching back to before history
as written, even before Allah sent missionaries
to Jolo to make true believers of the unenlightened, the crime of incest was punishable by death.
When te Sultan was the ruler of Jolo, a brother
who took to wife his own sister, was brought to
the Sultan’s tribunal and sentenced by both parties being bound together and then dumped into
the sea. So was the law of Allah fullfilled, and
rio disaster visited the land. Sometimes incest
was committed secretly, whereupon Allah became
angry and caused an earthquake as a reminder
to the Sultan to find and punish the offenders;
and when this was done the eartquakes ceased.
“Now times are changed. The enforcement
of the law regarding incest is only a tradition.
The American government does not sanction the
old traditional punishment for this horrible crime.
But Allah does not forget. When the sees that
the Sultan cannot, or does not, enforce the law,
then He takes in hand the guiding of the morality
of the Joloans and with justifiable wrath gives
punishment for laxity in this unpardonable crime.
Among followers of Islam the crime of incest is almost unknown. But during recent years
some laxity has grown up in the minds of a few.
There are three known cases of incest, ione in
Talipao, one in Patikul and one in Pata, all in
the provinces of Sulu. Allah observed the law
was not enforced, so He took His own method to
clean off the land the criminals. He caused a


Interesting version of cause
of devastating storm told to
2U8
Lieut. Alejandro Suarez, P.C.
terrible typhoon to sweep over the Sulu Islands.
All the Moros know why. Allah is great."
The official report of Lieut. Suarez relative
to the storm follows:
May 10, 1932
1. In the afternoon of April 29, 1932, the
typhoon that visited this district rendered all its
inhabitants homeless. With the exception of four
houses which were left upright (but with missing
roofs), no building escaped from demolition.
Among the government buildings that were totally destroyed were the Public Market, Public Dispensary, School Buildings of Bilaan and Pantao,
and the Constabulary Barracks and Sickward. The
Seool House in Bud Bayog and the Municipal
District Building in Bilaan are still standing but
with missing roofs. The trees, about 70%, were
levelled to the ground. The newly planted crops
were washed away. 110 persons were injured by
flying pieces of either galvanized iron roof or
wood, and sixteen persons lost their lives, namely:
1. Ansing—about 50 years old of Mahala, Talipao. He was killed by cold.
2. Ibat—about 60 years old of Bandang, Talipao. She was struck by a piece of G. I. on the
head and died the following day.
3. Maas Hasinon—about 60 years old of Lingkaban, Talipao. He was crushed by a tree.
4. Amadeo—about 22 years old of MungitMungit, Talipao. He is still missing up to this
date.
5. Mohamad—about 3 years old of Kamontayan, Talipao. He was killed by cold.
7. Lampa—about 10 years old of Sionogan,
Talipao. He was struck by flying pieces of wood.
9. Sahibal—about 14 years old of Pantao, Talipao. He was killed by cold.
10. Mohamad—about 45 years old of Tandu
Patung, Maimbung. He was killed by cold.
11. Lail—about 70 years old of Pandang, Talipao. He was killed by cold.
12. Abdullah—about 4 years old of Bilaan,
Talipao. He was killed by cold.
13. Mohamad—about 14 years old of Tuyang,
Talipao. His corpse was found floating near the
shore.
14. Hadjirol—abcut 40 years old of Tuyang,
Talipao. His corpse was found floating near the
shore.
15. Sahida—about 2 months old of Lianagan,
Talpiao. She was killed by cold.
(Continued on page 25)


Page 22


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


Naked Bathing
 Gains Popularity
S
In Europe
Naked bathing! Horrible thought; enough to
send the cold shirves up and down the backs of our
Puritan ancestors! But naked bathing between
persons of the opposite sex is now an accepted
commonplace of German life, looked upon by the
police without the slightest disfavor. All through
the country are little groups. Dresden, Nurnberg,
Munich, Leipzig, all have their nude societies.
But in Berlin the movement is strongest, with
some 20 clubs.
The cult started in Germany way back in
1900 and was much persecuted by the authorities
in imperial days. Since the war, however, several
court decisions have been handed down in its favor. Finally, two years ago, the highest German
court turned in the decision that the Adam and
Eve costume was to be allowed in places where
no observers could view the proceedings; that is
to say, either in a building or out of doors in a
fenced-in enclosure. So now, untroubled by law,
the movement has approximately 25,000 members,
and is continually growing.
ELABORATE MEMBERSHIP REQUIREMENTS
The requirements for membership are diverse
but are getting stricter all the time. The largest
organization, the Deichsbund fur Freikorperkultur
(National Asseciation for Free Development of
the Body), demands that a very elaborate formula
be filled out. Among the questions asked are:
Whether the husband (or wife) is also joinning
and, if not, why not. If the applicant is divorced
the reason must be given. The condition of health
must be also stated. Whether prohibitionist, nonsmoker or vegetarian. The candidate must pledge
himself to maintain absolute silence about the
names of the other members. Some of the clubs
are considerably less strict and merely use the
club idea in order to keep within police regulations.
The most frequently clubs are around the
Motzen lake, in the suburbs of Berlin—an idylic
little body of water amid wooded hills. Here nine
associations have their parks. There is one for
every political tendency and social caste. The
most exclusive is patronized entirely by the nobility and German officers. There is also one of the
upper middle class, for the socialists, and even the
communists have their own camp. The best equipped—and also the oldest, opened in 1911—is Freisonnland (Free Sun Land), where no political
distinctions are made and the best of post-war society mingles with the cream of the literary and
artistic world.
In these places devotees of the sun wander


Back-to-nature cult has
large following in GerDO
many.
along pine-clad hillocks and lie on the sandy beach.
Their whole bodies drink in health-giving rays of
the sun. Most are so tanned that this in itself
seems a sort of covering. Against the yellow of the
sand, the blue of the water and the deep green of
the pines, the human bodies stand out in complete
beauty. Followers of the cult believe that exposure
of the body will cause people to take better care of
it. When they cannot cover up their deficiencies,
they will change their attitude toward the unhygienic habits that produced them.
LIVE NAKED THROUGHOUT DAY
At Freisonnland there is a pleasant club-house,
several shelters for dressing and undressing and
a score of little cabins where the week-end may be
spent. These are completely open at the front and
have a simple cot and a couple of chairs. When
nights are cool, blankets are used, but otherwise
the enthusiasts go naked for the whole 24 hours of
the day. When the bungalows are filled, the others
spread out blankets and sleep under the sky.
On sunny days most of the members gather at
the beach of the littie lake, to play water ball, dive,
swim, or merely bask in the sun. For the very
young children there is a shallow pool with rubber balls and barrels. In another part of the
grounds a platform serves a luncheon place, and
en warm nights there is dancing. German folk
songs are continually to be heard.
To another park, in Lichterfeld, one of the
suburbs of Berlin, come the office workers which
have only a short time to spend after their day’s
toil. Especial stress is laid here on organized physical culture, as the greatest benefit must crowded
into the shortest time. The rhythm of these graceful, tanned bodies, flashing in the sun, is hard to
erase from memory.
WINTER ACTIVITY
The chief activity of the movement in winter
is in physical culture schools, gymnasiums and
closed swimming pocls, in all of which the followers of the cult appear completely undressed. By
far the best of the schools is conducted by Adolph
Koch in the Friedrichstrasse in the center of Berlin. Koch, the most vital and intellectual leader
in the movement, feels that absolute nakedness is
necessary from a mental as well as from a physical
angel. As many of the courses are given under
artificial sunlight, the body has practically the
same benefit it receives from nakedness out-ofdoors. Koch has strong medical authority for the
contention that, especially during exercise, the body
(Continued on page 25)


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 23


Former Soldier
Makes Good In
Civilian Life


Sgt. Serafin Fortuno, who
helped Colonel Crockett wipe
out the pulajanes of Samar in
1904 has held several public
posts since his retirement
from the service.


What become
of those men who
retire from active service and
again enter civilan life? Majority of them,
by virtue of their
training in the
Constabulary are
able to obtain
positions of trust
honor and prestige in their respective communities. One such
retired soldier is
Serafin Fortuno,


Sergeant SERAFIN FORTUNO
as he appeared in 1905


former enlisted man in the Constabulary.


Fortuno, who is a native of Nabua, Camarines Sur, served under Colonel Cary I. Crockett
in Company “A” Manila Battalion during the
years 1904 and 1905 in Luzon and Samar and was


given a medal for bravery in action against pulajanes on the Gandara River on August 21, 1904.
It will be remembered that at that time Col. Crockett practically dealt a death blow to the pulajanes in Samar, subduing the fanatics after nearly losing his own life.


Since his retirement from the service Fortuno has held several public offices in his town. In
1912 he was chief of police of Nabua. From 1017
to 1919 he was a municipal councillor in the same
place. Then he served as municipal vice-president from 1922 to 1925. He also held the position
of deputy sheriff for eight years and has since
been a member of the municipal council of his
town.


Fortuno was also one of the organizers of
the rural credit association of his town and served three terms as a member of the board of directors of that organization. At present he is vicepresident of the Nacionalista Party and also vice

Orders placed with advertisers in
  are assured of prompt
service and square deal, if submitted
thru the Chief, Advertising Department
of  , Oriente Building,
Manila.


president of the Parents and Teachers Association.
The commendable record set up by Sergeant
Serafin Fortuno after his retirement from the
service, as Colonel Crockett says, "should serve
as an inspiration for the men of the Constabulary” Here is one man at least who has carried
on the tradition of the service.


SERAFIN FORTUNO as he appears today with his wife


-)0(-
What Was The Massacre Of The
Innocents?
This is the name generally given to the slaughter of the male children of Bethlehem “from two
years old and under” after Jesus was born, as
related in Matthew 2:16. Herod the Great gave
the command for the destruction of all children in
Bethlehem in the hope that he might thus kill
'the babe” destined to become "King of the Jews”.


Page 24


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


QUESTION BOX




Question submitted by Corpl. Alberto C. Opiano,
95th Company P.C. Answer by Robt. G. Woods,
Chief Clerk, P.C.
Q.—Are pensioners of the Philippine S-outs
entitled to enlistments in the Philippine Constabulary?
A.—It depends on the age and physical qualifications of the undividual.


Question submitted by Sgt. Andres B. Sinlao, 60th
Co., P. C. Answer by Major M. Aguilar, Acting
Quartermaster, P. C.
Q.—Private A, was honorably discharged
from the service on January 5, 1932 per expiration
of term of enlistment and did not reenlist. On
May 10, 1932. he requested transportation from
the place of his previous enlistment for which he
has not yet been furnished. Is Private A entitled
to such transportation, If not, for how many
days or months does the transportation of Private A hold valid? P. C. Regulation is silent about
this.
A.—Discharged soldier entitled to return transportation to place of enlistment, under the provisions of Par. 170, P.C.R. 1930, must apply for it
within sig months after discharge (Par. 1, Bulletin No. 15, H. P. C., 1923).
X(-
What T. R. Thought Of Beer
An Eastern ex-brewer who wishes prohibition
wiped out so he can make more millions, made a
public statement the other day, “that re-legalized
beer would help to develop men of character, courage and vision," which caused a writer to the New
York Herald to quote the late Theodore Roosevelt’s
estimate of beer: “Beer,” said Roosevelt, "stupefies without invigorating and its effect upon the
brain is to stagnate thought. There is not a thought
in a whole hogshead of beer nor an idea in a whole
brewery.”


Orders placed with advertisers in
  are assured of prompt
service and square deal, if submitted
thru the Chief, Advertising Department
of  , Oriente Building,
Manila.


TALAATATABRA
CIGAno
AND
CIGARelid
Have maintained their undisputed leadership for over
33 Years.
CIGARS
CORONAS de la ALHAMBRA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
PRESIDENTES
VICE-PRESIDENTES
BELLEZAS
LONDRES ETC. ETC.
T
CIGARETTECAGAYANES
CORTOS
CHORRITOS ORIGINAL
ENTRE LARGOS
ROYALES CORK TIP ETC. ETC.
Provincial Distributors
Redline Transp. Co. . . . . . . . ..... Aparri
Kuenzle & Streiff, Inc. . . . . . ..... Cebu
P. Oliver . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Dagupan
V. Montojo .......... . . .... .... Davao
Alhambra . . . . . . . . . . . .. Ilagan, Ysabela
Hoskyn & Co., Inc ..... . . . . . . .... Iloilo
J. R. Hermogenes . .... . . . . . ... Legaspi
Bazar Gran Capitan .......... TaclobarKuenzle & Streiff, Inc. .... Zamboanga
ALHAMBRA CREATES
OTHERS IMITATE


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 25


Naked Bathing Gains
Populariiy In Europe
(Continued from page 22)


Wrath Of Allah Seen In
Recent Jolo Typhoon
(Comtinued from page 21)


needs to be wholly exposed to light and air. It
thus has the possibility of taking in life-giving
lements and exhaling used up substances. And
Koch considers the niental effect equally vital. He
thinks that nakedness means affirmation of the
body, clothing negation. The feeling of shame
about nudity must be conquered before consciousness of the physical make-up is achieved.
The other side of the naked movement in
winter concentrates in the glass-roofed swimming
pool in Luna Park. Here twice a week, once in the
evening and once in the morning, followers of the
movement meet. All who are not registered members in good standing are refused entrances.
NOT ALL NUDES ARE BEAUTIFUL
In any nudist gathering one comes to realize
that all nudes are not beautiful. Many figures are better hidden. A generation which lived
primarily on pork, potatoes and beer and took little exercise cannot be expected to meet the final
test of bodily perfection. But it is extraordinary
what changes many have gone through since they
joined the movement. Almost all the young people
are slender, lithe and muscular. It is like a rebirth
of the old Hellenic idea. Indeed, there is something
distinctly Grecian about them; and this breath of
Athens would seem to prove that there is something in the main contention of the cult. The
younger generation will never allow themselves to
get into the potbelied condition of their elders. They
know their bodies and are proud of them.


16. An unknown person, decayed, found floating near the shore of Lumapit, Talipao.
2. From the people it was learned that the
storm was the first of its kind that ever visited
the district.
(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO SUAREZ
ist. Lieut., P.C.
Station Commander
EVEN THE FLAPPER BLUSHES
To the new member, however, the first moment at one of these clubs is a ticklish one. After
the formalities of entrance, he is allowed to cover
himself with a bathrobe, for a carefully cultivated
sense of shame is not easy to shake off by act will.
Even the modern flapper, used to looking things
straight in the face, finds the first plunge not
without terror. But once among those hundreds
of Adams and Eves, the novice in his bathrobe begins to feel ashamed of his covering. Now he is
the one who is immodest. Almost before he realizes
what he is doing he has slipped off his robe.
To many people the moral argument will be
the weightiest one. But I believe a serious study
of conditions would convince them that there is no
basis for sure here. The very fact that looseness is suspected makes the members lean in the
other direction. And I assure you that the continual sight of the naked human body tends to remove all sensual reaction. There is no mystery
any longer, nothing for young people to brood over.
Sex takes its normal place in the round of life.



Tho PHILPPINE GUARANTY CO, Inc.


(Our Bonds are accepted by the United States Army, United States Navy and by all the Bureaus
of the Insular Government)
SURETY BONDS
FIRE INSURANCE
We execute Bonds of various kinds specially CUSTOMS BONDS, FIRE ARMS BONDS, INTERNAL REVENUE BONDS, PUBLIC WORKS BONDS FOR CONTRACTORS; COURT BONDS
for Executors, Administrators and Receivers and Personal Bail Bonds in criminal cases.


We Also Write Fire Insurance


Loans secured by first mortgage on properties in the City of Manila, San Juan and Pasay on the
monthly amortization plan.
Call or write for particulars:
2nd Floor, Insular Life Bldg.,
290 Plaza Cervantes, Manila, P. I.
J. MCMicking
V Singson Encarnacion
Manager
President
P. O. Box 128.
Phone 2-41-11


Page 26


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


III. The New Penal Code


(Continued from April issue)


(For the benefit of the officers and men of
of the Constabulary and Police services we are reprinting the New Penal Code. Following is the
third installment.—Ed. note).
ArT. 34. Civil interdiction.—Civil interdiction
shall deprive the offender during the time of his
sentence of the rights of parental authority, or
guardianship, either as to the person or property
and of the right to dispose of such property by any
act or any conveyance inter vivos.
ART. 35. Effects of bond to keep the peace.-
It shall be the duty of any person sentenced to give
bond to keep the peace, to present two sufficient sureties who shall undertake that such person will not
commit the offense sought to be prevented, and
that in case such offense be committed they will pay
the amount determined by the court in its judgment, or otherwise to deposit such amount in the
office of the clerk of the court to guarantee said
undertaking.
The court shall determine, according to its
discretion, the period of duration of the bond.
Should the person sentenced fail to give the bond
as required he shall be detained for a period which
shall in no case exceed six months, if he shall have
been prosecuted for a grave or less grave felony,
and shall not exceed thirty days, if for a light felony.
Art. 36. Pardon; its effects.—A pardon shall
shall not work the restoration of the right to hold
public office, or the right of suffrage, unless such
rights be expressly restored by the terms of the
pardon.
A pardon shall in no case exempt the culprit
from the payment of the civil indemnity imposed
upon him by the sentence.
ART. 37. Costs—What are included.—Corts
shall include fees and indemnities in the course of
the judicial proceedings, whether they be fixed or
unalterable amounts previously determined by law
or regulations in force, or amounts not subject to
schedule.
Art. 38. Pecuniary liabilities—Order of payment.—In case the property of the offender should
not be sufficient for the payment of all his pecuniary
liabilities, the same shall be met in the following
order:
1. The reparation of the damage caused.
2. Indemnification of consequential damages.
3. The fine.
4. The costs of the proceedings.
Art. 39. Subsidiary penalty.—If the convict
has no property with which to meet the pecuniary


liabilities mentioned in paragraphs Ist, 2nd and 3rd
of the next proceding article, he shall be subject to
a subridiary personal liability at the rate of one day
for each 2 pesos and 50 centavos, subject to the foilowing rules:
1. If the principal penalty imposed be prision
correccional or arresto and fine, he shall remain
under confinement until his fine and pecuniary liabilities referred in the preceding paragraph are
satisfied, but his subsidiary imprisonment shall not
exceed one-third of the term of the sentence, and
in no case shall it continue for more than one year,
and no fraction or part of a day shall be counted
against the prisoner.
2. When the principal penalty imposed be only
a fine, the subsidiary imprisonment shall not exceed
six months, if the culprit shall have been prosecuted for a grave or less grave felony, and shall not
exceed fifteen days, if for a light felony.
3. When the principal penalty imposed is
higher than prision correccional no subsidiary imprisonment shall be imposed upon the culprit.
4. If the principal penaity imposed is not to


INGUMARUI
ACCIDENT
MARINE
FRE
WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION


PLATE GLASS


Atlas Assurance
Company Lid.
Continental Ins, Co.


AUTOMOBILE
The Employer's
Liability
Inssurance Corp. Ltd.
Orient Insurance Co.


Insurance Co, of North America


-:000:-


L. E. ELSER
GENERAL AGENTS
TEL. 2-24-28
KNEEDLER BLDG.


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 27


be executed by confinement in a penal instit ttion,
but such penalty is of fixed duration, the convict,
during the period of times established in the preceding rules, shall continue to suffer the same deprivations as those of which the principal penalty
conzists.
5. The subsidiary personal liability which the
convict may have suffered by reason of his insolvency shall not relieve him from reparation of the
damage caused, nor from indemnification for the
consequential damages in case his financial circumstances, should improve; but he shall be relieved
from pecuniary liability as to the fine.
SECTION THREE.—Penalles in which other
accessory penalties are inherent


carry with it the forfeiture of the proceeds of the
crime and the instruments or tools with which it
was committed.
Such proceeds and instruments or tools shall
be confiscated and forfeited in favor of the Government, unless they be the property of a third
person not liable for the offense, but those articles
which are not subject of lawful commerce shall
be destroyed.
CHAPTER FOUR
APPLICATION OF PENALTIES
SECTION ONE.—Rules for the application of penalties to the persons criminally liable and for
the graduation of the same


Art. 40. Death—Its accessory penalties.—The
death penalty, when it is not executed by reason
of commutation or pardon shall carry with it taat
of perpetual absolute disqualification and t at of
civil interdiction during thirty years following
the date of sentence, unless such accessory peralties  ave been expressly remitted in the pardon.
Art. 41. Reclus'on perpetua and reclusion
temporal—Their accessory penalties.—T e penalties of reclusion perpetua and reclusion temporal
shall carry with them that of civil interdiction for
life or daring the period of the sentence as the
case may be, and that of perpetual absolute disqualification which the offender shall suffer even
thongh pardoned as to the principal penalty, unless the same shall have been expressly remitted
in the pardon,
Art. 42. Prision mayor—Its accessory penaltes.—T e penallly of prision mayor shall carry
with it tat of temporary absolute disqualification
and that of perpetual special disqualification from
the right of suffrage which the offender shall
suffer although pardoned as to the principal penalty, unless the same shall kave been expressly
remitted in the pardon.
ART. 43. Prision correcional—Its accessory
penalties.—The penalty of prision correccional
shal carry with it that of suspension from public
office, from the right to follow a profession or
calling, and that of perpetual special disqualification from the rigt of suffrage, if the duration
of said imprisonment shall exceed eighteen months.
The offender shall suffer the disqualification provided in t is article although pardoned as to te
principal penalty, unless the same shall have been
expressly remitted in the pardon.
ART. 44. Arresto—Its accessory penalties.—
The penalty of arresto shall carry with it that of
suspensidn of the riglit to held office and the
rig't of suffrage during the term of the sentence.
ART. 45.- Confiscation and forfeiture of the
proceeds or instruments of the crime.—Every penalty imposed for the commission of a felony shall


ART. 46. Penalty to be imposed upon principals in general.—The penalty prescribed by law
for the commission of a felony shall be imposed
the principals in the commission of such felony.
Whenever the law prescribes a penalty for a
felony in peneral terms, it shall be understood as
applicable to the consumated felony.
ART. AI. In what cases the death penaty shall
not be imposed.—The deatn penalty shall be imposed in all cases in whioh it must be imposed under existing laws, except in the following cases:
1. When the guilty person be more than seventy years of age.
2. When upon appeal or revision of the case


y








ATHLETIC


EQUIPMENT


DRAPER-MAYNARD
The Lucky Dog Line
BASEBALL
INDOOR BALL
BASKET BALL
TENNIS
SOCCER
BOXING
VOLLEY BALL
SWIMMING
JOHNSON OUTBOARD MOTORS—
HOME EXERCISERS


 Eet C. ALKAN, INC.PMAD


HEACOCK BUILDING


Page 28


KHAKI and RED


by the Supreme Court, all the members thereof
are not unanimous in their voting as to the proriety of the imposition of the death penalty. For
the imposition of said penalty or for the confirmation of a judgment of the inferior court imposing the death sentence, the Supreme Court shall
render its decision per curiam, which shall be
signed by all justices of said court, unless some
member or members thereof shall have become
disqualified from taking part in the consideration
of the case, in which event the unanimous vote and
signature of only the remaining justices shall be
required.
ArT. 48. Penalty for complex crimes.—When
a single act constitutes two or more crimes, or
when an offense is a necessary means for committing the other, the penalty for the most serious
crime shall be imposed, the same to be applied in
its maximum period.
ART. 49. Penalty to be imposed upon the principals when the crime committed is different from
that intended.—In cases in which the felony committed is different from that which the offender
intended to commit, the following rules shall be
observed:
1. If the penalty prescribed for the felony
committed be higher than that corresponding to
the offense which the accused intended to commit,
the penalty corresponding to the latter shall be
imposed in is maximum period.


All Golfers Want
The New Burke
SALROTO


The sele is rounded—No power is lost
by ground contact—They take no
divots.
The weight is in the sole—directly behind the point of impact—giving
greater distance and more accuracy.
Ask to see the new Burke
SMITHIRONS


SQURRES BINGHAMCO.
Sportsmen's Headquarters
15 Plaza Goiti Manila Phone 21301
E


May, 1932


2. If the penalty prescribed for the felony
committed he lower than that corresponding to the
one which the accused intended to commit, the penalty for the former shall be imposed in its mayimum period.
3. The rule established by the next preceding
paragraph shall not be applicable if the acts committed by the guilty person shall also constitute
an attempt or frustration of another crime, if the
law prescribes a higher penalty for either of the
latter offenses, in which case the penalty provided for the attempt or the frustrated crime shall
be imposed in its maximum period.
ART. 50. Penalty to be imposed upon principles of a frustrated crime.—The penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed by law for the
consummated felony shall be imposed upon the
principal in a frustrated felony.
Art. 51. Peantly to be imposed upon principles of attempted crimes.—A penalty lower by
two degrees than that prescribed by law for the
consummatde felony shall be imposed upon the
principals in an attempt to commit a felony.
Art. 52. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices in a consummated crime.—The penalty next
lower in degree than that prescribed by law for
the consummated felony shall be imposed upon the
accomplices in the commission of a consummated
felony.


(To be Continued)


EXCELLENT
Autobus Service
For Excursionists
We

offer the

safest and most
comfortable means of
transportation at a comparatively low cost and take
you anywhere in
the Provinces
of
RIZAL, CAVITE, BULACAN, LAGUNA,
TAYABAS AND BATANGAS.
PASAY TRANSPORTATION CO., INC.


Manila Office:
55 Alejandro VI
Tel. 2-26-28
Manila


Main Office:
Tambo, Paranaque
Tel. 5-76-64
Rizal


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 29


"Profound
Regrets, Chief!"


Following is a resolution passed by officers of
the District of Northern Luzon on the occassion of
the retirement of General Charles E. Nathorst as
Chief of Constabulary:
Whereas, it has been published in the press
that General Charles E. Nathorst, Chief of the
Philippine Constabulary has applied for his retirement from the service;
Whereas, said application has been duly approved by His Excellency, the Governor-General,
effective April 14, 1932;
Now, therefore, be it resolved by the officers,
D.N.L., now in convention assembled in the City
of Baguio, to express as is hereby expressed their
ftrofound regret for losing the valuable leadership of their beloved Chief who for more than
thirty years has dedicated the best part of his life
for the interest of the service which he so ably
commanded during his incumbency;
Be it finally resolved that a copy of their resolution be furnished General Nathorst as an expression of high and sincere esteem and regard
for him by the signers of this resolution not only
as their Chief, but also as a brother officer who
has won his spurs in the service through merit.


Unanimously adopted, April 15, 1932.


W. W. Dosser,
Ramon Ochoa,
Colonel, P. C.
Lieut.Colonel, P. C.
Asst. Disti Commander District Commander


Eulalio Tanedo
Major, P. C.
Angel P. Capadocia
Captain, P.C.
Claro B. Lizardo
Captain, P.C.
Pablo R. Suarez
Captain, P.C.


Benito D. Valeriano
Major, P.C.
Inspector
Victoriano Luna
Major, P.C.
Luis E. Quintero
Captain, P.C.
Alastacio C. Ocampo


Manuel V. Atanacio
Captain, P.C.
Andres D. Damian
Captain, P.C.
Pedro Bulan
ist Liet., P.C.
Porf. R. Silerio
2nd Lieutenant, P.C.
Alfredo C. Sese
2nd Lieutenant, P.C.


Margarito S. Torralba
Captain, P.C.
Antonio N. Villalobos
Captain, P.C.
Antonio Bravo
ist Liet., P.C.
Julian Olivas
1st Liet., P.C.
Delfin Cuyugan
2nd Lieut., P.C.


Alejandro Trespeces
3rd Lieut., P.C.


(PLEASE PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS)





Telephone 2-20-42 P. O. Box 1495


ACAGS CIG.


SUGAR MANUFACTURERS
GENERAL MERCHANTS


Sub-Agents For
Fire & Marme Insurance Companies
Manila, P. I.
719 Echague
SOUERCO
UOUUYUOUYDZOUUOOUQCUNROUOYYODOQUUODOUUDOUTUDOCTUDZUYIUY


Page 30


KHAKI and RED


Moro Fights
Dramatized


By PIONEER


I
On a moonlight
night before
Thanksgiving Day while the
dance given by
the American Officers of the M.
B. Marinduque
was in full swing
in the South Seas
Club, a band of
about two hundred moros under
the leadership of
Jailini and Edjasani was essembled in Camuntayan to attack DaCaptain LEON ANGELES
nag, (16 kilomeConquers moro outlaws.....
ters from Jolo)
a police station of fourteen shotguns under the command of Chief Yusup.
The telephone bey of the club approached.
“Sir, you are wanted on the telephone.”
“Hello! Captain Angeles speaking."
“This is Chief Yusup, Sir. Several moros
are playing their agongs at a distance from my
station. I am watching their movements. I will
report later if there is any serious development.
So far everything is all right.”
At about 2:30 a.m. Lt. Suarez of Camp Romandier reported that hhe heard shots from the
direction of Danag.
The Captain telepehoned Danag but the central operator reported that Danag could not be
raised. The wire was cut.
A native school teacher of Danag who came
to Jolo practically running frem Danag reported
to the Captain that the police station of Danag
was attacked by several moros. The policemen
were firing at the attackers. The Captain without
any delay called for the bugler.
I
“Call to Arms” was sounded.,
Officers and enlisted men in their field uniforms assembled. Extra ammunitions were issued
and hand granades were prepared.
Captain Angeles with eight officers and fifty


May, 1932


Graphic picture of how notorious outlaws surrender
to Captain Angeles is here
SA
presented.
men left for Danag at 3:00 a. m. November 25,
1931, on six trucks.
One could observe the anxiety of the soldiers
to fight by their conversation as soon as the order
“Follow my car” was given by the Captain.
Silence. The soldiers must be thinking of the
dear little kids and mamma behind or thinking how
to fight the enemies. One whistled a sentimental
kundiman. Another, a lively fox trot. Then everybody on the alert. The trucks passed thick abaca plantations. Surely one can read the feeling
of the entire detachment. The suspense was temporarily broken when the trucks were halted and
the men were in ambush formation.
One kilometer from the scene of the attack,
the detachment reformed by twos and fixed bayonets. The moon was then blanketed by thick clouds.
It was raining hard. The approach was favored
On the way the telephone wire was found and repaired. The detachment arrived at day break in
Danag but found no more enemies.
The policemen were guarding their station like
lions at bay. They looked haggard due apparently
to the excitement and the lack of sleep. But they
were deceided to die with their guns rather than
give up their station.
One moro raider was killed and two were
wounded.
The seditious moros were followed to their
stronghold in Camuntayan by the Constabulary.
Twenty moros with spears and barongs were hidden in the bushes to ambush the pursuers. But
the Captain is an old cat in this kind of game. The
moros did not charge this time, failing in their
tradition as fierce fighters. Thhe detachment ad
vanced in such a formation that it looked lile a
fence with bayonets sticking out and hard to penetrate. So instead of rushing the line, the moros
took the better part of valor and ran away with
their precious lives. No firing was done.
From that time on the Constabulary took
charge of the affair and placed detachments in
Danag and Camuntayan.
At 6:00 o’clock in the morning of December
16, 1931, Captain Angeles went down from Danag
to Jolo to meet Colonel Stevens who was coming
with Director Guingona on the S. S. Jolo. In the
mean time Lt. A. Suarez went out to patrol the
boundary line of his district near Camuntayan.
“How is everything, Captain"', the Colonel asked.
“So far everything is all rigkt, Sir.”


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 31


The rest were swallowed by the thick bus' es and
disappeared like smoke".
Under the circumstances, nothing could be
done. The inevitable happened. The trail of the
law is usually sprinkled with blood and laurel.
For several days nod ing definite could be
obtained as to the whereabouts of the outlaws. Report of secret service men was, that the outlaws
roamed in the forests and mountains. Ambushing the patrols was their game. The patrols commaned all their hiding places. It was getting hot
for the outlaws.
III
On February 9, 1932, at about one o’clock at
noon Jailani appeared alone and surrendered himself to Captain Angeles.
“Captain, I am here to surrender myself. My
life is at your mercy. You can do with it as you
please.
The Captain, hard boiled as he is, could not
help but show sympathy to this famous outlaw.
Jailani looked pale and thin, the telling effect of
his escapade and lack of sufficient nourishment.
February 13. The night was extraordinarily
bright. The Captain with his experienced soldiers, the selected flowers of the Constabulary were
soundly sleeping in their temporary quarters at
Camuntayan. One young officer was dreaming
of his sweetheart in the far away Laguna. Another was talking in his sleep, “Give me some
hope, my little Queen. Drop me a letter. This
place is lonely".
“Halt! who is there?” This sharp command
pierced the stillness of the nignt. The alert sentinel saw at a distance, the approach of a shadow.
The Corporal of the guard rushed to the aid of
the sentinel. Those soundly sleeping were awakened by the thunderous voice of the guard. Automatically each one grabbed his firearm and lisened. The Captain came out and inquired. The
guard reported.
Then in Tausug dialect, the shadow which
stopped dead on the spot, answered that he was Edjasani and wanted to approach. The guards with
their fingers on the tiggers were almost tickled to
squeeze and fire.
“Captain, I have chosen this night to surrender to you. I forget my life to you”
Then Edjasani thanked the Captain for being
very kind to his small children who were left practically at the mercy of the patrol.
Thus ended the career as outlaws, of Jailani
ind Edjasani. It was a moonlight night when
they turned outlaws and the same silvery moon
witnessed their surrender.
There was a telephone call for the Captain.
“This is Lt. Suarez, sir. My patrol was ambushed in Camuntayan mountain early this morn

MOTHER INDIA PROTESTS


Mrs. Mohandas K. Gandhi, 60-year-old wife
of the idol of the Indian nationalists, was sentenced at Surat to serve six weeks in prison for
urging the villagers to adopt her husband’s principles of boycott and civil disobedience. The short
sentence hurt her pride. "Why are you giving me
only six weeks in prison", she asked the judge.
“Do you want me free again so quickly to receive
the lathi blows with my countrymen? I won’t
remain quiet even after I am released. Please give
me the same sentence you give my sister workers". Miss Maniben Patel, daughter of the imprisoned head of the All-India Congress, at the
same time was given 14 weeks at hard labor and
fined 100 rupees for taking part in unlawful assembly. A “Ruy Indian League” was organized
at Karachi home manufactures, and at Bombay a
bonfire of foreign cloth was burned as a symbol
of the opening of the campaign for independence.
Business in India is almost at a standstill and the
nation is threatened with commercial ruin. G.
B. Haltead, American missionary, resigned as director of the Lucknow Christian college under
pressure from the government because he sympathized with Gandhi’s independence movement.
ing. Two spears pierced the body of Sergeant
Guzman. He died. Two outlaws were shot to death.


SPECIAL OFFER FOR CONSTABLES


No. 100.—Nickel plated case white
enamel dial .......
.....₱2.35
No. 105.—Same watch, but raidolite
luminous hands ................ P3.00
No. 110.—Same watch, silver metallic dial with secundary
hands .................... P3.25
No. 115.—Same watch, radiolite dial
and hands ...........P3.75
LEVY GA BLUM, Inc.
345 Echague
Manila


Send P1.00 deposit with your C. O. D. order.


Page 32


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


Noy Portablo Phonograph
Embodies Many Improvements
A new portable phonograph embodying improvements that make it comparable in performance to a full-sized Orthophonic instrument kas
been put on sale at Erlanger & Galinger, Inc., general distributors of RCA products in the Philippines.
The new instrument, which weig’s only 16
pounds, incorporates the most advanced type of
portable phonograph mechanism ever before available. Weighing a full eight pounds less than last
year’s model and contained in an attractively colored fabrikoid carrying case, the new portable
may be conveniently transported and used whereever reliable entertainment is desired.
Playing the new portable is a oneanded
operation, Mr. Mascunana, manager of the Victor
Dept., said. The turntable automatically starts
when the tonal arm is lifted, and it stops automatically at the conclusion of the record. When
in transit, the sound box is held firmly in place
by a special clip to prevent jarring. It is equipped with a strong spring for longer playing, and
produces a mere brilliant tone than ever before
possible in a portable machine. Mr. Mascunana
attributes the unusually good tone quality to an



g
 * AIGOAMAAHA
(Formerly N. T. Hashim & Co.)
Constabulary Contractor


MANUFACTURER OF ALL KINDS
OF MEN'S CLOTHING.


MILITARY UNIFORMS
AND UNDERWEAR A SPECIALTY.


Cable Address:
"Hashim—Manila"
Office and Factory:
881 Avenida Rizal Codes used: ABC Ath & 5th
Manila, P. I. Editions and Bentleys
P. O. BOX 120
TEL. 22856


improved type of Orthophonic sound box, and a
horn of fibrous material which prevents metallic
resonance. Extra records are carried in a special
record holder fitting over the turntable.


England Going To Sea
Some day there won’t be any England, they
say. For England is crumbling into the sea at
the rate of 6,600 acres every 35 years. So says
a royal commission appointed to study the phenomenon. But at the present rate of erosion, the
commission figures, it would take more than 172,
656 years for the entire country to disappear beneath the waves. And of course England will take
neath the faves. And of course England will take
steps to prevent or check the eating away of her
shores.


(PLEASE PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS)







AVOID COLD


A slight cold is likely to develop into a
severe one if you will not prevent it.
COFEDRINE INSCO is the best remedy
for cold, sore throat and asthma.
FOR SALE IN ALL LEADING
DRUG STORES
MANUFACTURED FOR
INSULAR DRUG COMPANY, INC.
Manila, P. I.


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 33


XII. OFFENSIVE WARFARE AS TAUGHT AT
THE U. S. ARMI SCHOOL


(Continued from April issue)


The following is the twelth of a series of installments
which Khaki and Red is reprinting from the Infantry Manual used at the Officers' Training School at Fort Benning,
Georgia. In view of the fact that the promotional examinations ane based bargely upon the Infantry Manual these series
should prove valuable as well ias merely instructive for those
who plan to take such tests. The glossary for these sereis may
be found in the February, 1931 issue of Khaki and Red—
Editor's Note.
h. In all offensive operations the positions of the artillery should be well forward. The offensive implies an
advance on the part of our forces; hence it is not only necessary that the guns should be placed where they can reach
well into the enemy’s position at the beginning of the attack, but they also must be prepared to move forward with
the advance and make their support continuing. The difficulties inherent in this latter maneuver add to the necessity for advance positions. Technical considerations alone
would indicate 1500 yards from the enemy’s front line as
the limit of forward emplacement of the guns. Consideration, however, might reveal that guns so far forward would
be unncessarily exposed. No rule can be given, but we
may on the average, expect the light guns to be emplaced
somewhere about 1500 to 3000 yards in rear of our infantry’s line of departure. In each case, the situation, especially the terrain, must govern the selection of the positions.
Since the prime considerations in emplacing them are ability
to reach well into the enemy position, and facility of forward movement, there is little disposition in depth in an offensive situation.
i. In combat an artillery liaison officer, with a detachment, accompanies each infantry battalion. There liaison
Getachments are in direct wire communication with the artillery battalion sending them out. Their duties are to keep
the artillery-battalion commander informed of change in the
tactical situation, and of the cooperation desired by the supported infantry. During an attack, frequent requests for
fire support on targets holding up the advance can be anticipated; the liason officer with an infantry batallion has
the duty of transmitting such calls to the artillery upon
the request of the infantry-battalion commander. The information sent should be clear and definite and should cover
the following:
(1) Exact location of target with reference to terrain
features or by coordinates.
(2) Exact description of target.
(3) A definite understanding as to the duration of the
fine and of the time it is to commence.
j. The infantry commander should neither specify the
method of fire nor the kind of ammunition to be employed.
In addition to the above-described liaison with assault battalions, the commanders should adjoin the command posts
of the infantry elements which are being supported. Where
the situation is such that the command posts of supported
infantry and supporting artillery cannot be located together,
the artillery must send a liaison officer to the supported
unit. Thus, in the division, either an artillery command
post or artillery liaison officer will be at every command
post of units engaged, from the division to the infantry
battalion inclusive.


48. AVIATION.—a. GENERAL.—The division aviation operates directly with front-line units by means of
liaison airplanes and contact planes. The term “liaison" is
applied to their work in assisting the command to maintain
touch with our own troops, and “contact” to their activities
in keeping the command in touch with the enemy.
b. INFANTRY LIAISON MISSION.—(1) The primary duties of the infantry-liaison airplane are those related to keeping the commander and his staff continually informed as to the location and needs of the infantry advanced
lines. So long as these duties do not suffer, it can also carry
out other work, and it frequently acts as contact airplane
when it is not necessary to have these missions performed
separately. It is employed, at the wish of the commander,
during actual contact and through the entire time while
the infantry is advancing or withdrawing.
(2) The hour of arrival of this airplane as set in prders will seldom be in advance of the infantry attack, for
such an untimely appearance might give the enemy information of our intentions. It can be identified by distinctive
marks such as colored streamers, or by pyrotechnics. It reports to the division command post by radio, and proceeds
to the front lines, where it begins its work by flying over
the zone for a short reconnaisance, at approximately fifteen
hundred feet, to note any changes along the front and observe generally. After this has been done, the observer fires
the identification rocket at several points across the area.
Several men are detailed in each infantry platoon to watch
for identification signals, such as this; from the liaison airplane.
(3) Having checked in, the observer is charged with
the following duties:
(a) To report to division headquarters by radio every
ten minutes, and oftener if necessary.
(b) To follow the progress of attacking troops and
reserves.
(c) To observe and transmit the signals of infantry
command posts and front line units.
(d) To report, in general, everything of importance
that take place in the line of battle.
(e) To reccomend that artillery fire be directed on such


SMOKE!


 91
(6
cErondo Or


LA YEBANA


Page 34


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


enemy batteries, machine-gun nests, and strong points as
hold up the advance of the assault troops.
(f) To report to the division commander when gaps
in the line occur.
(g) If the advance be halted, to call for display of
panels and check the front-line position for the information
of the division commander.
c. INFANTRY CONTACT MISSION.—(1) The primary duty of the contact mission is to assist the infantry
advance. It is performed by division airplanes, only, and
is also designed to give the commander information of the
enemy advance elements during the battle.
It is employed when our attack is first launched, when
the advance is stubbornly contested, during a vigorous defense
or a withdrawal of our forces, and at such other times as
the commander desires. Except in these cases the mission
of the contact airplane is usually performed by the infantryliaison airplane.
(2) The manner of performance of the contact mission
is the same as that of the liaison, expect that the airplane
can best perform its duties by flying over the enemy’s side
of the line, whereas liaison aircraft fly over our own troops.
The contact airplane uses two methods of communication;
radio and dropped messages. Radio messages are ordinarily
sent to the artillery-brigade commander at intervals of ten
minutes as the division radio is usually monopolized by the
liaison airplane. Every thirty minutes a message is dropped at division headquarters.
(3) The principal duties of the contact airplane are as
follows:
a. To report the position of the enemy advance
clements and gaps in his line.
b. To report indications of enemy withdrawal and
zones of maximum resistances.
c. To report enemy troop concentrations from which
local counterattack might be expected, and to call for artillery fire upon them.
d. To aid in every way the advance of our infantry.
(4) The greater part of the work is with the advance
elements, with whom it communicates by pyrotechnics and
dropped messages. It reports to the commander all possible
information covering the disposition and activities of the
enemy.
(5) The contact missions aids the infantry advance by:
(a) Maintaining contact with the enemy and informing
friendly treops of hostile dispositions along their immediate
front; this information is given by firing tracer bullets at
the position occupied by the enemy, or by dropping messages
at our battalion command posts.
(b) Assisting to reduce enemy strongpoints by machine
gun fire, and by dropping small bombs.
c) Assisting to bring artillery fire on enemy massing
for counter attack.
GAS AND SMOKE. a. GAS.—Conditions in stabilized
situations are especially favorable to the use of gas, on account of the greater quantities of ammunition available and
the more exact knowledge of the enemy’s dispositions. The
neutralization by gas of a portion of the hostile front permits the concentration of the attacking force at other points.
Persistent gases are employed against areas which are not
to be passed over immediately by the attackers troops. On
the other hand, nonpersistent agents may be used freely in
the preparation and in the support of the attack. Their
employment is subject only to the restriction that the placing
of gas on successive areas should cease in time to insure that
the cnocentrations shall have become ineffective before the
attacking troops arrive.


b. SMOKE. —Smoke is employed primarily as a means
of blinding hostile observation. The basic condition for its
use is that, while screening the attacker’s dispositions and
movements from hostile view, it must not impede his observation or adversely effect the control of commanders over
their troops. The employment of smoke, therefore, must
carefully be limited with respect to the area to be covered
and duration of the sereen. Smoke screens that cannot be
localized may have deleterious effects that cannot be foreseen. The general employment of smoke over an extended
section of the battlefield is seldom practical or advantageous.
Subject to these conditions smoke may be used to protect
the flanks of the attack from observation, to blind hostile
observation posts and organized tactical localities, and to
prevent aerial observation on the part of the enemy. It
may also be used in connection with intermittent gas attacks, to keep the enemy in a state of uncertainty as to
whether gas is being used. (Jo be Continueo)


Tramp (at door)—Is your husband at home?
Mrs. Well bred—Gracious! A tramp with a
college education.


Alicia Santiago daughter of the Santiagos of Juan
Luna, Tondo. Weight 4 kilos; Age 4 months; Born
on her seventh months; constant dose of Tik-Tiki.
Santos Ocampo from birth; no sickness suffered up
to date.


The discovery of the TIKI-TIKI against BERIBERI, is one of the greatest achievements of the
medical profession in the Philippines, personified
in the eminent and never-to-be-forgotten Dr. Manuel
S. Guerrero.
Its medicinal form is due to the pharmaceutical
profession and to the Bureau of Sceince.
But, its quality of being CHEMICALLY PURE
and of INDEFINITE PRESERVATION, is due to
the SANTOS OCAMPO LABORATORY.
UNIVERSAL DRUG STORE
Manila, P. I.


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 35


Lieutenant A. C. Sese
Takes A Bride
The Union Evangelical Church of Bontoc,
decked in its holiday attire, early in the morning
of Sunday, April 10, 1932, was filled to capacity
to celebrate one of the outstanding events of the
month. Eagel friends and relatives of Miss Luz
C. Belen and Lieutenant Alfredo C. Sese of the
Constabulary, had come to witness the marriage
of the two sweethearts.
Rev. Enrique C. Sobrepena, pastor and moderator of the Union Evangelical Church of the
Philippines, officiated at the simple but impressive and solemn ceremony. Captain and Mrs. Nicasio Balinag acted as sponsors.
Immediately after the ceremony, the nuptial
train, led by the bride and birdegroom, repaired
to Belen’s Hotel where a modest breakfast, consisting partly in dainty cakes and nice eats, awaited the guests.
Among the well-wishers to the newly-weds,
and those present at the wedding, were Col, and
Mrs. W. E. Dosser, Governor of the Mountain
Province and District Commander of the Constabulary of Northern Luzon, Rep, and Mrs. H. P.
Clapp., Dr. and Mrs. E. P. Romulo, Asst. Provincial Treasurer and Mrs. E. Dolojan, Mr. and Mrs.
A. Vallejo, Mr, and Mrs. V. Ringor, Dep. Gov, and
Mrs. A. Galo of Bontoc, Dep. Gov, and Mrs. N.
Balinag of Kalinga, Lt.-Col. R. Ochoa, Maj. and
Mrs. E. Tanedo, Capt, and Mrs. Pio P. Rosas,
Capt, and Mrs. A. D. Damian, Lieut, and Mrs. A.
P. Carandang, Lieut. E. Villase, Engineer and
Mrs. R. Peredo, Mr. and Mrs. M. Berja, Mr. and
Mrs. Diaz, Mr. D. Gil, Mr. and Mrs. A. Yandoc,
Mr. and Mrs. J. J. de Guzman of San Juan Heig ts,
Capt, and Mrs. A. N. Villalobos, Mr. and Mrs.
Ganacias, Mr. and Mrs. A. Pablo, Mr. and Mrs.
Dacio, Mr. and Mrs. M. Arceo, Mr. M. Adachi, Mr.


and Mrs. Jose Lorenzana, Mr. and Mrs. Estranero, Mr. and Mrs. F. Florez, Mr. and Mrs. C. Flores, Mr. and Mrs. C. Ramos, Mr. and Mrs. P. Katly, Mr. and Mrs. J. Dunuan, Mrs. Francisca Manahan, Mr, and Mrs. A. Crespillo, Mr. A. Crespillo, Pastor and Mrs. E. C. Sobrepena, Dr. Jose
Mendiola of the Malaria Control, Pastor Salanga,
Dr. and Mrs. V. M. Zaratan, Mr. and Mrs. Bandonil, Mr. J. Dacayon, Mrs. J. Gasmena, Mr. Bulaong, Mr. Lakandola, Mrs. Velasquez, Mrs. Abad,
the Misses J. Tombo, E. Lumnay, M. Langsa, Carolina and Olympia Velasquez, C. Dario, Calica,
Bucago, Nati Villalobos, Fising Quismurio, Nati
Pablo, Tovera, S. Gasmena, M. Basilio, Virginia
Peredoe, Angelita Peredo, and scores of others,
besides Mrs. Fermina C. Belen and Mr. Inocencio
Sese, mother of the bride, and father of Lieut.
Sese, respectively.


Where Was Washington’s Funeral
Oration Delivered?
-The official oration at Washington’s funeral
was delivered by Henry Lee, then a member of
Congress, December 26, 1799, in the German Lutheran church in Philadelphia.


LO mSHICA
CIGARS & CIGARETTES





HERE
THERE ANYWHERE
ALWAYS


S


May, 1932
KHAKI and RED
Page 36
RIRISRICIOIRALCJURCUOIERURIOITIOREmIAOON Eemioroooroormmorleel ince by the Provincial Commander at noon and a
E
dance at night.
P
JOLO NOTLS *
SUB-DISTRICT COMPETITION HELD
E
a
RERICIOIJUCOIIOIO BD PIONEER MEICROCRIOROENO
AT JOLO


The Constabulary of Sulu for a time last
month forgot about chasing juramentados and
spent three days in competing in an athletic meet
and pistol competition held on April 8-10.
Results of the athletics games were:
Indoor Baseball:—Won by the combined team
of 100th-110th-116th. Runner up—combined team
of Co. G. &H. 2” G.S.B. Score 11-8.
Volley Bell:—1st Combined team of 100th110th-116th. 2nd—Combined team of Co. G & H.
2"G.S.B. Score, 21-15,16-21, 22-20.
Basket Ball:—Won by—Combined team of Co.
G. & H. 2"6.S.B. Runner up—IlIth Company.
Score, 22-20.
Tennis Ladies Single:—Won by Mrs. L. Angeles; Runner up: Mrs. Jacaria.
Tennis Officers Doubles:—Won by Lts. Delgado and Asistio.
Bowling, Ladies::—Morning Glory: Mrs. Angeles, Mrs. Salacup, Mrs. Abia, Mrs. Rasul. Rose:
Mrs. Jacaria, Mrs. Arsenio, Mrs. Vicente, Mrs.
Escurdero. Won by the Morning Glory Team.
An interesting Volley Ball game was played
between the officers and the champion team.
With tall killers like Lts. Arellano, Asistio, and
Arba, accurate tossers like Capt. Salacup and Lts.
Villanueva and Adle and fat but agile stoppers
like Lts. Deigado, Arsenio and Cruz, the champion
team had no chance. The Provincial Commander
showed his sportmanship by joining the game.
Score: 21-17; 18-21; 22-20. Won by officers.
The daily luncheon during the meet which
was offered by the officers of Jolo was ably handled by Lt. Jacaria.
The meet was fittingly closed wita a 2-hour
lecture on Peace and Order condition of the prov

Rifle: 1st, Cpl. E. Yicyecan, 11Ith Co., Seit
Lake; 2nd, Sgt. Lopez, 114th Co., Siasi; Srd, Pvt.
A. Hijastre, 111th Co., Seit Lake.
Revolver: 1st, Stg. Lopez, 114th Co., Siasi;
2nd, 1"Sgt. Suacito, 116th Co., Jolo.
DISTRICT COMPETITION HELD AT
ZAMBOANGA
Rifle: First, Corpl. Yicyecan, 11Ith Co., Sulu.
Revolver: First. Sgt. Lopez, 114th Co., Sulu.
The Constabulary of Jolo, headed by Captain
Leon Angeles, provincial commander of Sulu
earned the gratic ide of the thousands of typhoon
victims which had been rendered homeless and
destitute by the storm which swept over the region on April 29. Capt, Angeles and his men
set about to clear roads and help locate the missing. The storm was te worat that has ever
visited the Sulu archipelago.
—)o(—
What Is Meant By Robin Hood's Barn?
Robin Hood’s barn is the great out-of-doors
and alludes to the fact that Robin Hood, the legendary English outlaw and hero of the ballads,
stabled his horses under the canopy of the blue
sky. “To go around Robin Hood’s barn" is an
cil phrase meaning to attain one’s end or the
desired result by a roundabout way. When a
person arrives at the rigat conclusion by very
indirect methods he is said to wander all about
Robin Hood’s barn. “Robin Hood in Barnsdale
stood” is the only extant line of an old ballad
and it is often used in allusion to a person who
speaks irrelevantly. In the English courts lawyers who speak beside the point or quote irrelevant cases are told by tthe judges that they might
as well say that “Robin Hood in Barnsdale stood”.


G
SUELET-SOrO
Contractors
TRACING-CLOTII, TRACING-PAPER, DRAWING-INK
CATADYN—FILTERS, the only Bacteria
killing Filter in existence
POSITIVE PRINTS BY DRY DEVELOPMENT
STEEL-PILES, PAINTS ETC.
J. Luna 189
P. O. Box: 1080
Phone: 2-51-64.


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 37


BONTOC NOTES


Senator Elpidio Quirino of the First Senatorial district accompanied by Engineer Garcia of
Ilocos Sur motored to Bontoc yesterday from Vigan. They arrived in Bontoc at 3:30 o’clock in the
afternoon and left immediately for Banaue after
visiting the Bontoc Hospital which was showed to
him by Representative Hilary P. Clapp.
Senator Quirino and Engineer Garcia spent
the night at Banaue and were the guests of Lieut.
Pedro Bulan who is Deputy Governor of Ifugao.
Prey retuinel the next morning to Bontoc where
they were entertained at a luncheon by Captain
Mrs. Antonio N. Villalobos.
The luncheon was attended besides the guests
ef honor by Representative H. P. Clapp, Colonel R.
Ochoa, Major Eulalio Tanedo, Captain Fidel Soliven, Deputy Governor Anacleto Galo, Justice of the
Peace Juan M. Barba and Nilo de Guia. Immediately after the luncheon the party of Senator
Quirino motored to Lubuagan.
At Lubuagan he was entertained at a canao tendered to him by Deputy Governor Nicasio Balinag and Captain Andres D. Damian. On tha
lext day Senator Quirino drove to Baguio passing thru Segada, Senator Quirino used a Stutz
car in his trip in the Mountain Province. This
dispels the fear of many that heavy cars can not
run in the Mountain Province.
Senator Quirino states that his visit in the
Mountain Province was for a twofold purpose:
a pleasure trip and to obtain first hand information of the conditions of the people, and the none
to well advertized beautiful views in the province.
The Senator was gratified to find that the Moun

tain Province is enjoying excellent peace, health
and financial conditions. He stated that the
rice terraces he saw especially those of Banaue,
are the best he has seen so far. Senator Quirino
stole a march on the other prominent Filipinos
who have been to the province as in one trip he
practically saw all the places that are worth visiting. He also wanted to ride to Maroyao Ifugao
ad Gobgob. Kalinga but time did not permitted
it as he was expected to be in Manila next week.
-)X(—
The Cellophane Age
Cellophane, that wrapping which started with
cigarettes and now comes about almost everything
but new born babies, is a du Pont product made
possible by post-war research. Claim has been
made that the French discovered it 15 years ago
and old timers even argue that the material is not
different from the product of the same name they
used to paste (and a hard job it was, too!) over
their bathroom windows to make it look like colored, leaded glass. However, it remained for
a du Pont chemist in trying extract some
value from a surplus of gunpowder which
canceled war contracts had left in the storehouse
to stumble across the present article. And they
were the ones who really popularized it—and
how! Now it’s going into hats that look like
straw, fake water scenes for the stage, artificial
grass, matrices for false teeth, ribbons for boxes
and wrappers for things from fruits to frozen
fish. Spruce pulp sheets of cardboard thickness
can be taken and transformed into films 8-1
000tes of an inch in thickness. Cellopkane, besides being highly moisture proof, lets the sunlight through, including 60 per cent of the infrared rays and 60 per cent of the ultra-violet rays.


The GERMAN
Codliver-Oil-Emulsion
combined with Yolk of Egg.
The only codliver-oil-emulsion
containing the four vitamins
A., B., D. and E.
Sold at all Drug Stores
or by C. O. D. from Agents:
Inhelder, Walch Cas, Ltd.
China Bank Buikpas
P. O. Box 1182 Manila
C. O. D.—P2.50 postage paid
per original bottle of 300
grams.


It Tastes Good!
Just like sweet cream!!!
Easup digestible.
Powerful reconstructive for
CHILDREN and ADULTS,
who suffer from general
debility, malnutrition, anemia,
rickets, BERI-BERI, scrofulosis, neurasthenia, and other
ailments caused by lack of
vitamins.
Formula: Codliveroil 409%, Yolk
egg 10% Calc. lact. 0,3% Calc.
hypophosph. 0.3%, Trag canth
4,29% Aq. dest. 45,2%.
Examined by Bureau of Science
laboratory No. 172,372
Approved by Board of Pharmacy
Permit No. 321.


Page 38


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


SAFETY, COMFORT and CONVENIENCE
are the important considerations in
TRAVEL
All of these are offered to you in the railroad coaches.
Remember that the MANILA RAILROAD can serve you whether
you go North of Manila to the Ilocos Provinces or South to the Bicol Region.
FOR NORTHERN PROVINCES
Through Train and Bus Service daily between Manila and Laoag
with stops at Vigan and important towns is now available for travelers to Ilocos Provinces.
MANILA TO LAOAG IN 15 HOURS
Passengers are transported in commodicus fast motorbuses driven
by experienced Chauffeurs.
Through Tickets for Joint Service are now sold at Reduced Rates.
Holders of Through Tickets to Laoag are entitled to stop—over privilege at San Fernando, La Union, or at Vigan and assured of connecting transportation to destination at scheduled hour.
FOR SOUTHERN PROVINCES
Daily Boat Connection, except Sunday, is provided for the Legaspi
Division comprising the Provinces of Camarines Sur and Albay.
Through Service to Legapsi Division is extended to Putiao and Sorsogon. Holders of through tickets to or from these points are entitled
to stopover privilege of 3 days at Daraga.
For sailing dates of connecting boat to port of call of the Motorship “Alabat" in Camarines Norte and Tayabas, please inquire from our
Information Window at Tutuban Station, Telephone 4-98-61, or from
our Downtown Office at 523 Dasmarinas, near People’s Bank, Telephone 2-31-83.
Manila Railroad Company


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


Page 39



District Orders

DISTRICT OF NORTHERN LUZON
SPECIAL ORDERS No. 36
1. Subject to confirmation by the Chief of
Constabulary, the following changes in the assignment of officers in the district are ordered:
First Lieutenant FILOMENO B. VILLALUZ, having been assigned to this district by paragraph 4, Special Orders No. 81,
current series, H. P. C., is assigned as Commanding Officer of the 27th Company, Ilagan, Isabela. He will proceed to his new
station, where, upon arrival, he will relieve
First Lieutenant MARIANO E. RIVERA.
First Lieutenant MARIANO E. RIVERA is, upon being relieved, assigned temporarily to the office of the Provincial Commander, Ilagan, Isabela, and pending receipt of the approval of his application for
accrued leave of absence. He will report to
his Provincial Commander for duty.
Paragrap's 112, 414, 415 and 672, P. C. R.,
will be complied with. The travel of Lieutenant
VILLALUZ is necessary in the public service.
2. Subject to confirmation by the Chief of
Constabulary, Private JESUS LOPEZ, 22nd Company, Camp Manning, Vigan, Ilocos Sur, at his
own request, be discharged from the service upon
receipt of this order by his Commanding Officer.
(Paragraph 164 (bl), P. C. R.)
3. The sum of P100.00 alloted the 51st Company Detachment, Kasibu, Nueva Vizcaya, per paragraph 1, Special Orders No. 17, current series, these
headquarters, is hereby made available for repair
of temporary buildings at Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya.
By order of the District Commander:
(Sgd.) ANTONIO N. VILLALOBOS
Captain, P. C.
Distriet Adjutant
DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN LUZON
SPECIAL ORDERS No. 58
1. Subject to confirmation by the Chief, Private LEONCIO LACQUESTA, 8th Company, Lipa,
Batangas, will at his own request be discharged
from the serviee upon receipt of this order by his
Commanding Officer. (Par. 164 (b-1), P. 'C. R.,s.
1930).
By order of the District Commander:
F. I. TORRES
Captain, P. C.
District Adjutant


DISTRICT OF VISAYAS
May 3, 1932
SPECIAL ORDERS No. 39
1. The travel of Major MIGUEL NICDAO,
Inspector, P. C., from Cebu, Cebu to Dumaguete,
Negros Orinetal and return from April 4 to April
6, 1932, in investigating the complaint of Acting
Provincial Fiscal E. Supnet against Captain G. R.
Gador, is hereby confirmed as having been necessary in the public service.
2. In compliance with the order of His Excellency, the Governor-General, the Provincial Commander, Cebu, will detail the necessary guard to
conduct the person of Chino CHIONG TEAN YU
from Cebu, Cebu to Manila for delivery to the Superintendent, Ineelligence Division, P. C., for deportation. The travel directed is necessary in the public service.


May 7, 1932
1. Subject to confirmation by the Chief of
Constabulary, the following proceedings, findings
and sentences by summary courts are approved
and the sentence in each case will be duly execeuted:
MANGAO, MAGNO, Pvt., 63rd Co., Det.
Odiongan, Romblon—OFFENSE: Absence from special duty for 55 minutes; drunkness while on special duty and assaulting a non-commissioned offi
cer. (Ist conviction)—SENTENCED TO: To forfeit
P4.00 of his pay and to be confined at labor for 10
days.
SUMAGAYSAY, FLORENTINO, Pvt. 48th
Co., Sumaguete, Neg. Or.—OFFENSE: Disobeying
lawful order of a non-commissioned officer, threatening and insulting another non-commissioned officer (Ist conviction)—SENTENCED TO: To forfeit
P3.00 of his pay and to be confined at labor for 10
days.
By order of the District Commander:
B. FERNANDO,
1st Lieut., P. C.
District Adjutant
DISTRICT OF MINDANAO AND SULU
May 3, 1932
SPECIAL ORDERS No. 146
1. Third Lieutenant JUAN CRAME, Junior
Officer of the 113th Company, Camp Andres, Sulu, is assigned temporary Commanding Officer of
the same company, relieving First Lieutenant
PEDRO MANIGQUE, who will go on accrued
leave of absence. Paragraphs 72, 112, 412-415,
619-630 and 672, P. C. R., will be complied with.
2. Second Lieutenant SANTIAGO J. ARCENO is relieved from duty with the 116th Compary, Jolo, Sulu, and is assigned as Commanding Of

Page 40


KHAKI and RED


May, 1932


ficer of the same company, relieving First Lieutenant SATURNINO ABRERA, who will go oh accrued leave of absence. Paragraphs 75, 112, 412-
415, 619-630 and 672, P. C. R., will be complied
with.
3. Private ONOFRE FERNANDEZ, 98th
Company, Lebak, Cotabato, will, upon receipt of
this order by bis Commanding Officer, be discharged as being unsuited to the service. (Paragraph 164-b, P. C. R.)
By order of the District Commander:
(S9d.) H. C. PAGE
Captain, P C.
District Adjutant
CHANGES OF ASSIGNMENTS OF OFFICERS EFFECTIVE APRIL, 1932
1. Balbuena, G. (2"Lt) from 23rd Co. to J.O.
15th Co., Capiz.
2. Balolong, L. (2"Lt) from Off. P.C. Cotabato to C.O. 79th Co.
3. Borromeo, P. (2"Lt) from Leave to J.O.
23rd Co. Fort S. Pedro.
4. Buno, G.P. (3"Lt) from 119th Co. to J.O.
108th Co. Cagayan.
5. Crame, J. (3"Lt) from 120th Co. to J.O.
113th Co. Camp Andres.
6. Cramer, R.P. (2"Lt) from Hatrs. D. M. S.
to C.O. 94th Co. Upi.
7. Cruz, A. C. (3"Lt) from Co. “H” 2” GSB,
Jolo to t.d. Hatrs, Manila.
8. Cantero, DV. (2"Lt) from 113th Co. to
J.0. 77th Co. Tankulan.
9. Devera, B. (2"Lt) from 11th Co. to J.O.
49th Co. Cabanatuan.
10. Espiritu, P. (I"Lt) from Leave to C.O.
Co. "D” Manila Garrison.
1. Fajardo, A.G. (3"Lt) from 105th Co. to
J.0. 92nd Co. C. Keithley.
12. Fran, A. (1"Lt) from Leave to Assistant
P.C., Negros Occidental.
13. Marohombsar, L.R. (3"Lt) from 78th Co.
to temp. C.O. 78th Co. Buluan.
14. Mortera, C. (I"Lt) from 79th Co. to t.d.
Office P.C. Cotabato.
15. Olano, M.R. (3"Lt) from 49th Co. to J.O.
Co. Malolos.
16. Quejada, F. (3"Lt) from 14th Co. to J.O.
47th Co. Bais.
17. Rana, F. (3"Lt) assigned J.0. 120th Co.
Zamboanga.
18. Rosales, J.P. (Maj) from Leave to t.d.
Office of Chief Surgeon.
19. Saludares, R.C. (2"Lt) from Leave to J.0
21st Co. Laoag.


20. Sison, B. (Capt) from Leave to Prov.
Comdr. Marinduque.
21. Tando, J. (1"Lt) from Acting P.C. TawiTawi to C.O. 115th Co.
22. Villaluz, F.B. (Ist Lt) from Academy to
Dist. Northern Luzon.
23. Villasis, B. (3"Lt) from 92nd Co. to J.0.
105th Co. Malabang.
-(o)-
How Should Chinese Names
Be Written?
In China surnames are always written first.
For instance, in Sun Yat-sen “Sun" is the surname, while “Yat-sen" corresponds to the occidental first, given or Christian name, as it is variously called. According to the prevailing practice of learned authorities and institutions, when
a Chinese name is written in English the surname is capitalized, while the two parts of the
given name are hyphenated and only the first part
capitalized; as, Chiang Kai-shek, Li Hung-chang,
and Chang Tso-lin. The Division of Chinse Literature in the Library of Congress sayis that
most Chinese surnames consist of only one syllable, but there are several hundred dissyllabic surnames. When a Chinese has such a surname and
a given name, two hyphens are used; as, Ssu-ma
Hsiang-ju. In such cases only the first part of
each hyphenated compound is capitalized. If a
Chinese has only two names both are written.
without the hyphen; as, Chang Hung. When regular Chinese names like Sun Yat-sen and Chiang
Kai-shek are abbreviated the anglicized form and
order are usually followed. as, Y. S. Sun, K. S.
Chiang, T. L. Sung, H. J. Ssu-ma.


When your hair is all
gone, nothing will make it
grow again. But if you
have any hair left
CHARM,
a hair tonic prepared by
Dr. Carlos Jahrling, will
prevent it from falling
and in time it will make
your hair grow thick. We
guarantee satisfaction.
BOTICA DE SIA. CRUl
Dr. Carlos Jahrling
Proprietor
TEL. 2-10-29 TEL. 2-10-33
Plaza de Goiti Manila


May, 1932


KHAKI and RED


BDLINDERS


STOCKHOLM
(SWEDEN


Heavy Duty Crude Oil Marine Engines
THE BEST
THE WORLD PRODUCES


6H. P.—G0 H. P. SIZES
CARRIED in STOCK
FOR
IMMEDIATE DELIVERY
Send For Prices And Catalogues
Eamshaws Docks & Honolulo tronWorts
Manila
110 Second Street Exclusive Agents


A
OIUOS OPORROAP


to acquire an uncrowded and lucrative profession at
CONSIDERABLY


REDUICED RATES


Founded in
1914


THE BEST EQUIPT DENTAL CLINIC IN THE ORIENT
THE OLDEST ESTABLISHED
DENTAL ACADEMY IN THE ISLANDS!


Recognized
1916


PHILIPPINE DENTAL
COLLEGE
The Alma Mater of the Most Distinguished Members
of the Dental Profession!


FREE
SCHOLARSHIPS
to all
VALEDICTORIAN
HIGH SCHOOL
GRADUATES
of the
PHILIPPINES!


SPECIAL!
AFTERNOON CLASSES
to accommodate
WORKING STUDENTS
in a modern well-ventilated laboratory, equipped with the
necessary apparatus for instructing 100 Pupils... Illumination equal to day-light!


SPECIALIY HEDUCEO
MATRICULATION
FEES
to all High School
alutatorians
in the Philippines
and to
Graduates
IEDICINE..
PHARMACY
EDUCATON:


Matriculation Now Proceeding ... Regular Classes Open June 13th, 1932
TEL. 2.10-58
R. PAPA (Corer Lepanto) PHILIPPINE DENTAL COLLEGE


NO
COVER
PAGE


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


N



O








CTo


TRePHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY


From


Well Wisher
A


And


2
riend


Page 2


KHAKI And RED


August, 1935


THE
ASOBARX LAA E
ASSURANCE COMPANY, ITD.
OFFERS YOU AND YOUR FAMILY
Oer Orron Oueioy
Perfect Protection Policy
WHICH COMBINES ALL
The Conditions, Advantages and Privileges of
Our Family Income, Old Age Pension or
Annuities and Blue Seal Policies.


How Our Silver Jubilee Policy Solves
YOUR LIFE PROBLEMS
I.—OLD AGE PENSION:
Are you aspiring to accumulate a competence
when you reach the sunset days of life? Statisties show that less than three men in one hundred
are successful in accumulating a fortune; that
less than thirteen out of one hundred can retire
at age 65.
Will you be one of the fortunate few?
II.—CLEAN-UP FUND:
Suppose you should be suddenly be taken away
from the midst of your family, there will naturally be plenty of bills to pay, such as current
obligations, outstanding accounts, expenses of last
sickness, general expenses, etc.
III.—SUPPORT FOR YOUR FAMILY:
You are now providing for your family their
needs and expenses from your present income.
Have you saved the necessary amount to
provide this income, when you are no longer by
their side?
IV.—PROBLEM OF INVESTMENT:
Investments of all types have suffered great
losses. Others have been completely wiped out.
Life insurance as investments have stood the test
and have not decreased in value.
Can you think of any other safe investment
at this time wihout any problem of worry, supervision and depreciation of value which will yield
at least 12902
Surely, you wish to save your Family from the
temptation of speculative enterprises, in order
that your savings of a life-time may not be lost
in a few years!


Your Life’s Most Important Problems.
THEIR SOLUTION
I.—THIS SILVER JUBILEE POLICY SOLVES
YOUR FIRST PROBLEM—When you reach
age 60 or 65 the commonly accepted retirement
age, there will be absolutely guaranteed to you
for at least 10 or 15 years, or for life, an income
of P100 per month, or in a lump sum, if you
prefer. Besides this amount, you will also receive
your accumulated dividends.
II.—THIS SILVER JUBILEE POLICY SOLVES
YOUR SECOND PROBLEM by providing a
Clean-up Fund of 20% of your insurance, payable
in cash upon your demise.
This Clean-Up Fund Will “Wipe Your Slate
Clean", and Square Yourself with the World.
III.—THIS SILVER JUBILEE POLICY PROVID.
ES A FAMILLY INCOME—a sure, steady, and
definite monthly amount to be given to your
Family to provide for their daily comfort and
their most absolute necessities,—in the form of
monthly checks, like “beautiful love-letters you
send them regularly from beyond the grave."
IV.—THIS SILVER JUBILEE POLICY SOLVES
THE DIFFICULT PROBLEM OF INVESTMENT. Absolute Safety, Combined with Maximum
Returns of 15%.
Our Company will pay interest on your insurance proceeds at the rate of 1-144% a month in
advance or 15% a year. No taxes, no repairs,
no depreciation, no administration expenses.
Your Family gets without fail more than 15% a
year net.
The amount you will receive on P10,000 from
this Policy is equivalent to the income from
P20,000 invested at 67%.


The Insular Life Assurance Company, LTD.


Officers:
V SINGSON ENCARNACION .... .. President
JOSE MCMICKING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Manager
G. ABELLA .... Secretary and Assistant Manager
ANTONIO F. GONZALES Assistant to the Mgr.
EMETERIO ROA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Actuary


General Agency Staff:
C. S. SALMON ........
.... General Agent
EDMUND W. SCHEDLER Assistant General Agent
ISAAC BARZA . . . . . . . . . . . . National Supervisor
D. B. AMBROSIO Second Assistant General Agent


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 3


Every s ire
—means
ATIO
MILEAGL.
Yes! That’s Dunlop for you.
The numerous satisfied Dunlop
fans all over the world, claim that
this tire has no equal for mileage
and service.
Ask your fellow officer in
that efficient and respectable organization known as the Philippine
Constabulary and you will be told
the naked truth. He is the best
booster we have for DUNLOPS.
The
Next time you
need a tire insist
On


Distributors
MONSERRAT
ENTERPRICES CO, LTD.
477 A. Mabini Tel. 5-72-51


P


44
PaKeRE
Trom me...
Itakesyou
furiner


—erE’s the motor oil that’s
 made to master any motor heat or speed... and Veedol
has proven that ability on the
speedway, in the skyway, and
on the highways . .. the motor
oil that is 100% Pennsylvania
at its finest. Drive in today for
free crankcase service and
change to veedol Motor Oil
.. . the oil of champions and the
champion of oils.


Associated Oil Co.
MANILA


Page 4


KHAKI AN RED


August, 1935


Felicitations From Governor-General Murphy


Office of the Gonernor-General
of the yhilippine gslauda
Manila, July 20, 1935
To the officers and men of the
Philippine Constabulary:
(Through "Khaki and Red”)
During the year just passed, the Philippine Constabulary has demonstrated an improvement in operating efficiency that entitles its entire personnel to sincere congratulations.
This is reflected in an enhanced morale which is, after all, most important. I firmly believe that every officer and man of the Philippine Constabulary is today a better man
at his task because he feels secure in the conviction that his tenure and advancement depend upon merit.
From all parts of the Islands encouraging reports have come to my office. In the
regular routine of its highly important police duties, and in the meeting of special emergencies, the Philippine Constabulary has acquitted itself well.
Most important of its emergency activities were those in connection with the Sakdal uprising last May. There can be no denial of the fact that the Constabulary acted
with commendable promptness and courage. Several of its members gave their lives in
the course of their duty, and thus demonstrated again to all the people of these Islands
that the Philippine Constabulary can be depended upon to make the supreme sacrifice in
their defense when necessity requires.
Thirty-four years have elapsed since the organization of this force, which today is
more firmly entrenched in the public confidence than ever before, and is now in the process of considerable expansion.
It is my earnest hope that the years to come will justify the promise of the present
and that this fine and useful organization will re-dedicate itself on its 34th anniversary to
the high ideal of unselfish and disinterested service.


Governor-General.


August, 1935


KHAKI And RED


Page 5


Governor General FRANK MURPHY
Commander-in-Chief, Philippine Constabulary


Page 6


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


Bigger Responsibilities Ahead
Says Chief Of Constabulary
August 6, 1935.
TO THE OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE
PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY.
On August 8th of this year, the Philippine Constabulary will enter into its Thirtyfifth year of existence. Thirty-four years—almost three and a half decades of constructive work, of loyal and efficient leadership, mark the rugged highway over which this
organization has traveled to its present position. Let us, in retrospect, look at these years
with a feeling of pride in service faithfully rendered—and, inspired by our past record,
march onward into the future determined to maintain the high standards that have won
for us so large a measure of public admiration and confidence.
When the Constabulary was organized in 1901, its main purpose was to rid the provinces of existing bands of outlaws who remained at large after the cessation of hostilities
between the United States and the Philippine Islands. This work was performed efficiently by the Philippine Constabulary, and many officers and enlisted men sacrificed their
lives in the loyal fulfillment of their duties.
Now our problems are different. The high cost of living, the love for luxury, the
economic depression with its attendant evils such as unemployment, have brought about
a situation in the Islands where there seems to be restiveness among our masses. Communist leaders, taking advantage of this, are busy spreading dangerous and subversive
propaganda, and among our poor and ignorant classes their doctrines are not always unwelcome. They are easily led, and emergencies like the recent Sakdal uprising may occur at any moment. The Philippine Constabulary has to be on the alert continually to
protect the peaceful citizens from the depredations of a few malcontents.
After the inauguration of the Commonwealth, the Constabulary will be called upon
to shoulder bigger responsibilities, and it is our solemn duty to loyally carry out any mission with which we may be entrusted by our Government.


Brigadier-General
Chief of Constabulary.


August, 1935
KHAKI ANd RED
Page 7



Brigadier General BASILIO VALDES
Chief, Philippine Constabulary


N





*


4

*







4




Page 8


KHAKI And RED


August, 1935


lias Tne insulor ¡ofice fulhlled the
Purposes For Which It Was Organized)
By ROBT. G. WOODS
Chief Clerk, Philippine Constabulary
Thirty-two Years A By Stander


The Insular Police Force was organized thirtyfour years ago on August 8, 1901, to replace United States volunteer troops who had returned home
to be mustered out of the service.
Upon request of the Civil Governor William H.
Taft, about the middle of 1901, for an Army officer to organize an Insular Police force Captains
Henry T. Allen of the 6th U.S. Cavalry and D. J.
Baker of the 26th U. S. Infantry were detailed to
organize and put the force on foot. Later the War
Department detailed 14 other officers, namely,
Captains W. S. Scott, H. H. Bandholtz, James G.
Harbord, W C. Rivers, Herman Hall, Mark L.
Hersey, J. B. Bennet, John W. Craig, Dennis Nolan, Lieutenants Louis J. Van Schaick, J. C. Rhea,
C. E. Kilbourne and Majors M. D. Cronin and Peter E. Traub to assist in perfecting the organization of the new force.
The discipline imposed, the momentum, training and prestige given to the Insular Police force
by these officers will endure beyond the life of any
individual in its service today. Its thirty-four
years under the strict regime and tutelage of the
United States of America have rounded out and
made of it the greatest force of its kind in existence.
Whatever the future may hold for this force
—be it expansion or complete dissolution as a unit,
nothing can eradicate the record of its past achievements. The accomplishments of the organization
are indelibly written on the pages of Philippine
history there to remain a monument to devotion
and unswerving loyalty to duty. Whatever the call
in the past, the Constabulary has not been found
wanting. Singly and in groups, men and officers
en different occasions have trudged through mud
and swamps where no trails existed and threaded
the courses of streams in lieu of roads in almost
impassable jungles and waded neck deep across rivers infested with crocodiles.
Heavy tolls to the ravages of black water fever, dysentery and malaria have been paid. They
have stood guard in districts where cholera raged,
put down uprisings of fanatical sects, stormed fortified places and met the wild rushes of bolo men.
They have braved the poison arrows of wild men


in the forest, the fatal knives of the Pulajans, and
the death dealing razor-edged blade weapons of
Sulu and Lanao.
Some have performed spectacular deeds of heroism and were rewarded with medals and fitting
decorations; but the steadfast devotion, loyalty
and bravery of the rank and file have been little
acclaimed. True to their calling, they have followed where their leaders led without question and
given their lives without hesitation.
Within a short time, so short, that we may say
tomorrow, this organization will be delivered by
its present Commander-in-Chief, the GovernorGeneral, inte the hands of the President of the
Philippine Commonwealth, its new Commander-inChief, and we hope, as the nucleus of the army
of the Commonwealth, for it is entirely fitting that
the Philippine Constabulary whose record is so replete with glorious deeds and whose ability to meet
situations as they arise as has been so constantly
proven, should become the nucleus of the larger
unit more able to cope with the changing requirements of the times.
In parting with this unique force which we
think has no counterpart—we wonder if it has fulfilled the purpose for which it was organized or
whether it has come up to the standard expected
of it by the organizers, at least eight of whom have
passed to the Great Beyond? To these at least during the early years of its organization, three enlisted men of the force proved their loyalty. Permit me therefore to detour for a moment to describe the devetion to duty of these three men, six
months after their enlistment, who might have
been disloyal and lived but instead chose loyalty and
death.
THE COLACHE AMBUSH
Their detachment consisted of five second class
privates returning to their station at Bulusan from
the barrio of San Vicente in Sorsogon province, an
approximate distance of five miles. About one
half hour after leaving San Vicente, the detachment was attacked by an outlaw band under the
leadership of Antonio Colache, Sorsogon’s chief
bandit. The place of attack was admirably located


Major General J. G. HARBORD (Retired)
Colonel and Assistant Chief, Philippine Constabulary
1903-1913


for an ambuscade. The road led down a hill and
crossed a low swamp ravine which was overgrown
with low under-brush through which ran a large
stream. Colache selected this spot for his attack
and distributed his men estimated at about 140 to
the right and left of the road on each side of the
stream.
The detachment was commanded by 2nd Class
Private Ambrosio Fruto, who, with Gabino Dio and
Sergio Dellosa were marching abreast; about 30
paces behind them came Eugenio Faraque and Fer
nando Filonia. The men in advance had crossed
the stream and were completely surrounded when


the bandits showed themselves. Fruto immediate.
ly ordered his men to open fire, and shoot their
way to the sea, which was about 50 paces to the
left. The attempt to do this proved futile, as they
found bolomen massed on that side. The detachment then turned and succeeded in shooting its
way through the bolomen in the direction of San
Vicente, and it seemed as if they might escape as
they had gotten back some 300 yards, when a new
and more determined horde of bolomen came up
from the direction of San Vicente and attacked
them from the rear. In this rush from front and
(Continued on page eleven)


Page 10


KHAKI And REI


August, 1935


BONDS


FIREARM
AMMUNITION
JUDICIAL
CONTRACT


CUSTOMS
INTERNAL REVENUE
FIDELITY
VARIOUS


INSURANCE


FIRE 4 MARINE


Our bonds are aoceptable to the Government of the Philippine
Islands and the United States Government


Call or Drile for Particulars


The PiriipoineGuarantyCompany, inc.


FERNANDO REGUERA
Manager, ILOILO BRANCH


Progreso Street, Iloilo


Telephone 36


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 11


Colonel LOUIS J. VAN SCHAICK
Inspector and Commander, First District, P. C.
1906-1908


Has The Insular Police Fulfilled The Purposes
For Which It Was Organized?
(Continued from page nine)
rear Ambrosio Fruto and Gabino Dio were cuu
down. Sergio Dellosa, Eugenio Faraque and Fer
nando Filonia survived the rush, again got through
the circle, and made their way some 300 yards bada


which put them well up the hill.
The bolomen seeing their prey about to escape,
became frenzied and made another mad rush at
the soldiers, and succeeded in cutting down Dellosa, who had fought them with the desperate resistance of a trapped tigress. At this point the road
ran along a cliff which extended over the sea.
(Continued on page twelve)


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


Lieut. T. BALLESTEROS
His courage, which exemplifies the
spirit of the Constabulary service,
helped to make the history of the
organization,


recover the bodies of their dead comrades. The next
morning the detachment found the bodies of the
men, the condition of which chilled their blood. From
the toes of these dead soldiers to the tops of their
heads, there was not an inch of flesh on their bodies that had not been cut or hacked by bolos. Their
legs and arms had been disjointed and their stomachs laid open, the frames of their bodies hung
together by strips of flesh. Their remains were
picked up in sheets and buried at Bulusan.
These Filipino soldiers gave their all for their
country. They made a gallant fight, without even
a soldier’s heritage of a fighting chance. Suspicion
was on the conduct of Faraque and Filonia, the two
survivors, but after the campaign which followed
this disaster, officers questioned captured prisoners
closely relative to the conduct of the two constables
(Continued on page fourteen)


Major General MARK L. HERSEY


Insular Police Fulfilled The Purposes
r Which It Was Organized?
(Continued from page eleven)


When Dellosa was killed, the two remaining soldiers jumped from this cliff into the sea; one of
them dropped his gun as he leaped and the other
threw his rifle into the sea, and recovered it the
following morning. The two soldiers swam out to
sea and were picked up by a friendly fisherman.
The first news of the engagement to reach their
commanding officer was through a note from the
"Teniente” of the barrio of San Vicente, stating
that the Constables had been attacked and had fallen back to the barrio. The Company Commander
sent reenforcement of ten men who upon arriving
at San Vicente, found the two Constables who had
escaped, but owing to darkness they were unable to


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 13


MajerGeneral C. E. KILBOURNE, United States Army


Inspector, Philippine Constabulary
1909-1911


Page 14


KHAKI and RED


August, 1935


Has The Insular Police Fulfilled The Purposes
For Which It Was Organized?
(Continued from page twelve)
during the Colache fight in April and learned that.
while these men were probably not as steady as
their three comrades, they did not desert them, nor
did they attempt to run until they found themselves
all that remamed of the detachment. Taking into
consideration that the two survivors were new in
the service with overhelming odds against them, it
was not thought that their conduct could be justly
criticized.
This engagement is considered by members of
the Constabulary the most remarkable in its histo
ry because the outlaws repeatedly called to the soldiers that if they would surrender and turn over
their arms their lives would not be taken. The loyalty of these soldiers in the face of such conditions
and odds is deserving of the highest commendation.
Subsequent engagements of different detachments under command of American officers in Luzon, Samar, Leyte and in Mindanao and Sulu -
proved to the satisfaction of the High Command
that Filipinos serving in the Constabulary during
those turbulent days had no superiors as fighting
men and that their loyalty was unquestionable.
A THRILLING PERSONAL ENCOUNTER
The most thrilling personal encounter experienced by any Constabulary officer, occured at midnight June 24, 1921, in Parang, Sulu, when Lieutenant Tiburcio Ballesteros battled for his life
against two moro outlaws with huge blade weapons
in which he killed his attackers after he himself
had been seriously wounded.
Maharajah Mahang and Datu Maulana with
their band of outlaws held up a Jolo garage truck,
murdered the chauffeur and conductor, took their
arms and cask and robbed the passengers of jewelry and money. This band consisting of fifty moro
outlaws, attacked Lieutenant Ballesteros and twenty-five Constables a few hours later at Parang MauWag and in the encounter Mahang was wounded
and two of his leaders killed.
Mahang, later organized a band of desperados
who were responsible for several robberies and
murders in Silankan. He communicated to Lieutenant J. Olivas that he, (Mahang), wished to meet
him (Olivas) in a house a few hundred yards from
the detachment station, to convey certain information to him. Olivas with a few men went to the rendezvous dressed in moro costume and unarmed as
agreed. After partaking of a moro supper, he arranged with Maharajah Mahang to meet again in
a moro mosque nearby for the purpose of having
Mahang and followers surrender to him. This
agreement was communicated to the Provincial Commander, who discussed the matter with Olivas, and


other officers, and finally concluded that the proposed surrender was a ruse of the outlaws to kill
officers and men and get their firearms. Olivas
was consequently withdrawn from the field and
Mahang informed by the soldiers that the officer
could not be present at the surrender due to another assignment.
It should be mentioned here however that Maharajah Mahang was protected and controlled by
Panglima Jalmany, the strongest and probably the
shrewdest datu in the Sulu archipelago, and that
Friday, the day set for the surrender, is considered by a Moro the most propitious day to run amuck,
and be killed. The different detachments in the vicinity of Silankan were therefore ordered to proceed to the neighborhood of the mosque on the day
set for Maharajah Mahang to meet Lieutenant Olivas, to hide in the bushes, and to be ready to render assistance to the Provincial Governor and Provincial Commander who had posted themselves in
the house next to the mosque, with a few men, to
receive the unconditional surrender of Maharajah
Mahang and his band. Neither Mahang nor his
band appeared.
Lieutenant Ballesteros, with a detachment of
twenty-five enlisted men was stationed at Silankan,
about twenty miles up the coast from Parang and
after an enagement with the outlaws, fate decreed
that he visit Jolo, the capital. At noon, on September 24, he set out with a trusted corporal on a vinta enroute to Jolo, and arrived at Parang, the station of a brother officer, Lieutenant Alfonso M.
Tigno, around six o’clock in the evening where he
expected to spend the night and possibly the next
day. He dined with his friend and with him called
on two Moro lady teachers. At ten-thirty o’clock
the officers returned to Lieutenant Tigno’s quarters.
Before retiring, Tigno confided to Ballesteros
that four Moros wanted for murder might visit him
sometime that night to make arrangement for the
capture of Maharajah Mahang and Datu Maulana,
conditioned that they be exempt from prosecution.
He asked the cooperation of his visitor who assured him of any assistance that might be required.
About the same hour, in the jungles a few miles
from Parang, the outlaws Hassan and his followers, Indassan and Isarael, went to the house of Policeman Uhad, and requested him to accompany
them to Parang, as the Constbaulary had called
them for an investigation. Uhad knew Hassah because both had at one time worked with the Constabulary in an investigation of petty crimes.
It was also known to Policeman Uhad and to
Lieutenant Tigno that a letter had been written in
Moro dialect and sent to Hassan requesting him to
go to Parang for an investigation. As Uhad, knew
that Hassan and followers were causing much disorder and discontent in Silankan and other neigh

Page 15


Aug


KHAKI And RED


Major General D. E. NOLAN, United States Army
Colonel, Philippine Constabulary, 1907-1911
EE'Y


boring districts, he with his nephew and three
other Moros accompanied them to the Constabulary
station in Parang that they might request Lieutenant Tigno to inform the Provincial Commander at
Jolo -ofHassan's Willingness to be investigated
which might help in the, capture of Maharajah Mahang.


At 12:00 midnight, as arranged, the seargent of
the guard at Parang notified Lieutenant Tigno that
seven armed Moros wanted to see him. As a precautionary measure the officers, Tigno and Ballesteros placed their service pistols in the waistband
of their pajamas and invited the armed outlaws into the sala where they, Hassan, as spokesman, ex

Page, 16


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


plained their mission.
The Officers, convinced that the Moros had a
sincere desire to help in the capture of the other
outlaws, accepted their proposal and promised exemption from criminal responsibility if the mur
derers were apprehended. Just as the outlaws prepared to leave and were on the porch, Lieutenant
Tigno expressed his desire to ascertain whether the
agreement entered into with them met with the ap
proval of his provincial commander, Captain Miguel
Nicdao, whoi he informed by telephone at Jolo of
the arrangement. Captain Nicdao, not only refused to consider the proposal of the Moros but ordered Lieutenant Tigno to disarm and confine them in
the Constabulary guardhouse.
Lieutenants Tigno and Ballesteros were sorely
disappointed at the turn of events but in view of
explicit orders of the provincial commander they
reluctantly informed the outlaws that the agreement just entered into had to be annulled. When
informed that necessity demanded that they be disarmed, the outlaws assumed a belligerent attitude
and accused Tigno of treachery, whereupon a wordy
battle ensued between the officer and Hassan,
spokesman for the outlaws.
While Tigno argued with the Moros, Ballesteros slipped out of the Sala, got four armed soldiers
from the barracks, and reentered the quarters
through the kitchen unnoticed by the Moros who
were on the balcony.
Two of the soldiers were stationed at the door
of the sala, with bayonets fixed and guns loaded.
The other two were posted in the office with Lieut.
Ballesteros. Thus, reinforced, Tigno informed the
Moros that they were under arrest. The outlaws
resisted the attempt of the soldiers to arrest them
and Hassan attempted to strike Tigno with his barong. To protect himself, Tigno fired his pistol
point blank at Hassan. Whether he hit his target
will never be known. The outlaws rushed at the
Constabulary men and for a few minutes bedlam
reigned.
No one knows what really happened nor how it
happened. It appears however that Tigno dashed
into the dining room of the house with two moros
at his heels slashing, cutting and jabbing with campilan and kriss. A soldier at the door knocked one
of the moros down with the butt of his rifle while
the other soldiers began to fire at the moros on the
porch. The light—from a single kerosene lamp in
the dining room—having been extinguished in the
tumult, all was in stygian darkness with six amok
moros on the war path.
Lieutenant Tigno was fatally wounded and af
ter running through the kitchen and down the back
steps he dropped dead in the yard. Some of the
frenzied moros entered the bedroom which was enshrouded in aarkness and jabbed. cut, and liter. lly
slashed the bedding of the two officers into shreds.


In the meantime, the soldiers kept up a fussilade of shots while Ballesteros remained in the office, with the barong of Policeman Uhad, his back
to the wall awaiting development. He had not long
to wait. Two husky outlaws dashed into the room
with kriss and barong drawn. Both slashed viciously at the officer who parried and countered.
His blow reached home, to the heart of one of the
Moros who sank to the floor dead. The other Moro’s kriss, alse found its mark when it struck home
on the officer’s lower lip and chin; the lip was
split and a tooth was lost—only the hard chin bone
saved an officer for the Constabulary.
Blind with rage and pain, Ballesteros, flew at
his antagonist like a he-lion in mating time, aiming
to grasp the outlaws throat but missed it. The moro then seized him by the throat and from the impact both fell to the floor, each trying to cut the
other’s head off. The moro, an expert with cutting
weapons, the kriss and the barong, was making such
progress that Ballesteros attempted to grasp the
wrist of the Moro’s right hand with which he was
wielding his weapon, but instead he grasped the
kriss, the sharpest two edged blade weapon in existence. The moro attempted to regain possession
of the weapon by pulling it through the officer’s
hand. The hand was cut severely but Ballesteros
held on to the kriss like grim death while he used
his own barong to advantage. He slashed the moro


ELLSWORTH
Vines


TENNIS
M
BALLS
M

I
E

4
The ball
A
SN
with real
PEP
DIiaan
ORDER THEM TODAY
ATHLETIC SUPPLY CO.
114- 116 T. PINPIN — MANILA
Distributors of
TuAon
a
ATHLETIC EQUIPMENT


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 17


on the right shoulder and almost severed the arm
therefrom. He then proceeded to slash head, neck
and body until he had finally cut the moro to ribbons and to death because there was nothing left
of him to live.
The officer rose from the floor more dead than
alive, went to the door and stopped the shooting
which was still in progress. The three moros who
escaped death and the wounded, including Uhad, the
policeman, had disappeared. In addition to the
wound on his chin and lip and in the left hand,
Lieutenant Ballesteros received several wounds on
various parts of his body. A doctor and the Provincial Commander were sent for and arrived in a
short time to find Ballesteros in a serious condition
and scarcely able to speak. Lieutenant Tigno and
two moros were dead and one moro was wounded.
All of this fighting, including the verbal encounter, took place within the short space of about ten
minutes. Ballesteros is still an officer in the Philippine Constabulary. The elimination of the outlaws was in the performance of a duty assigned.
In thirty-four years of service, the Insular Police has fought more than two thousand engage
ments with outlaws, bandits, pulajans, colorums.
moros and sakdals. In 1905 its greatest campaign
year it had 383 engagements or more than one a
day. Casualties for that year were three officers
killed, and seven wounded, fifty-one enlisted men
killed and twenty one wounded. During 34 years
of service the organization lost 111 officers, 59
Americans and 52 Filipinos. During the same period it lost 2107 enlisted men in enforcing the laws,
maintaining peace and peserving order. Today it
is better prepared, numerically, mentally financially, physically and has better and more modern
arms than in the days of the Empire when disor
der was at its peak. In handing the organization
over to the President of the Commonwealth it is
done with the firm conviction that this body of men
will, in the future as in the past, never be found
wanting in any emergency.
Upon the advent of the Philippine Commonwealth, the second “New deal” in 37 years, its first
line of defense, the Philippine Constabulary finds
itself faced with new duties to perform, civic duties, which require much patience and intelligent
thought. Discontent caused by communists, sakdalism, anak Pawisism and other organizations with
subversive tendencies are on the rampage. The third
Internationale representatives headed by Bolsheviks
with instruction from Moscow caused the communistic congress to convene for the purpose of urging concerted attacks on the new commonwealth.
The defective relationship existing between
landlord and tenants based on tradition and the
pernicious feudal system of the middle ages encouraged the ignorant taos to follow where Karl


Marx disciples lead. A crowd of jobless and hungry peons follow blindly with shouting and hurrahs
the red banner of the soviet leaders who promise
them jobs and food in plenty, from fish and rice to
peaches and cream, and, believing that they have
everything to gain and nothing to lose; they fol
low—verily, environment, conditions and circumstances lead them to stake their all on the creation
offered by Karl Marx.
COMMUNISM, as acceptedly defined, among
local members, is an organized effort to overthrow
organized governments. The communists in the
Philippines stand on the same platform and advocate the same principles and aims as the communists in Moscew, Berlin, Paris, London, China, Japan and the United States. They all take their orders from the Third Internationale with headquart
ers at Moscow and obey them implicitly. In the Islands, there are a large number of communists and
persons with communistic inclinations scattered
throughout the rice-producing regions of Central
Luzon, in the sugar cane fields of Negros and
Iloilo, and in various factories, business establish.
ments and transportation companies in and around
Manila.
The leaders conduct surreptitiously intensive
campaigns in the rural communities in an effort
to prepare for a showdown to accomplish theit
aims. They campaign among non-communist organizations with the end in view of converting
them to cominunism through gradual injection of
Marxian doctrines and principles.
In their propaganda they advocate and foster
class struggle, proletarian dictatorship, state control of all natural resources and factories, abolition
of inheritance tax and other radical innovations.
They at first resort to constitutional methods as
practiced in democracies in promoting their objectives, such as peaceful assemblies, demonstration parades, and strikes until new members and
new converts have become familiar and accustomed
to their tactics that very little encouragement is
required to goad and inflame their minds towards
social upheaval. The central theme of the Red
movement is the final use of force to bring about
chaos and anarchy in order to overthrow the socalled capitalistic system.
The Communist organization in the Philippines
is not yet a member of the Third Internationale
because the active members have not reached the
required membership number. The local organization then is a branch of the Far Eastern Bureau
of America and China, and is controlled by the socalled Political Bureau composed of the Executive
Committees of the National Confederation of Peasants in the Philippines, locally known as the "KALIPUNANG PAMBANSA NG MGA MAGBUBU.
(Continued on page fifty-sia)


KHAKI And RED


August, 1935


Page 18

Former
Chiefs


Brigadier General HENRY T. ALLEN
Chief, 1901-1907


Brigadier General H. BANDHOLTZ
Chief, 1907-1913


Brigadier General RAFAEL CRAME
Chief, 1917-1927


Brigadier General HERMAN HALL
Chief, 1911-1917


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED

f Constabulary


Page 19





Major Gemeral WILLIAM C. RIVERS, United States Army
Chief, 1913-1914


Page 20


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


y
y
To All Constabular,
Officers


August 6, 1935


Gentlemen:


Do you realize how small a monthly
outlay would provide your family with
₱100.00 every months for 20 years?
The Asia Life Insurance Company’s
Special Salary Allotment Plan will aid
you in guaranteeing this P100.00 income a month not only for your family
but yourself as well.
Your social position as an officer
and a gentleman places certain limitations to the number of financial investments and activities you can make due
to the expenditures necessary to maintain your position in society. Personal
contacts of many years with the gentlemen of the Constabulary has given me
an unusual opportunity to know your
needs and requirements. These perP. E. NAVARRO
sonal contacts qualify me to know you
Life Underwriter
well to prescribe the plan of insurance
protectien with savings features best
suited to your rank, income and responsibilities
In view of the fact that I devot special attention to writing Constabulary
insurance policies and make frequent trips to the different stations, I would be very
glad indeed to visit you at your station, should you but indicate your interest in
the plan.


Very sincerely yours,


Gp. CE. Javario
Life Underwriter


August, 1935


KHAKI ARd RED


Page 21


Former Chiefs Of Constabulary


Brigadier General C. E. NATHORST
Chief, 1927-1932


Brigadier General LUCIEN R. SWEET
Chief, April 15, 1932-June 18, 1932


Brigadier General C. H. BOWERS
Acting Chief, April 15, 1932
Chief, 1933-1934


Page 22


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


. . . . Administrative


Captain PEDRO TABUENA
Inspector and Assistant
Adjutant-General


Colonel GUILLERMO B. FRANCISCO
Chief of Staff


Major FEDERICO G. OBOZA Lieutenant VICENTE TORRES
Adjutant-General
Aide de Camp


, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 23


staff Officers .


Colonel CHARLES E. LIVINGSTON
Inspector General


jor ARSENIO NATIVIDAD
Inspector


Major CELESTINO NAVARRO
Inspector


August, 1935
KHAKI AndRED
Page 24 - 1
QUARTERMASTER DIVISION
4


Lieutenant Colonel MIGUEL AGUILAR
Quartermasten


Majon HIPOLITO GARMA
Assistant Quartermaster and Inspector of
Properties and Supplies


Lieutenant LUIS FLORENFIN
Assistant to Quartermaster
(Paymaster)


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 25


INTELLIGENCE DIVISION


Major ALBERTO RAMOS
Acting Superintendent, Intelligence Division
and Inspector at Large


Captain JOSE P. GUIDO
Inspector and Assistant Superintendent


Lieutenant AGUSTIN GABRIEL
Inspector and Assistant
Superintendent


Lieutenant MARIANO C. REYES
Inspector and Assistant
Superintendent


Lieutenant JUAN CRAME
Member of Opium Custodian
Committee and Member and
Recorder, Pension Board


Page 26


KHAKI And RED


August, 1935


THE TIEDICAL DIVISION


Lieutenant Colonel VICTORIANO LUNA
Chief Surgeon and Inspector


Lieutenant JOSE C. VILLANUEVA
On duty, Office of Chief Surgeon; In Charge,
Office of Pharmacist


Major LUCIANO FERRAREN
Dental Surgeon


Major EMILIANO M. PANIS
Inspector and Assistant to Chief Surgeon


August, 1935


Page 27


KHAKI And RED
AIIO AX
COrps


The Constabulary Air Corps was created under Act
No. 4194 of the Philippine Legislature, approved December 8, 1934. The Act became effective January 1,
1935.
In pursuance with the ppovisions of the Act the
Constabulary sent Majer Porfirio Zablan and Major
Manuel Olympia to the United States to make studies
with the end in view of organizing the new corps. The
services of United States Army air officers from Nichols
Field were also secured to aid in the organization.
Unfortunately, Major Zablan was killed in an airplane
accident just before finishing his course at Kelly Field,
Texas, on June 18, 1935. Major Olympia took the
course of flight surgeon and is now back in the Philippines.
The Constabulary also sent two young men to Randolph Field for training. They are Manuel F. Alcantara, a graduate of the college of engineering of the
University of the Philippines and Third Lieutenant
Marcus G. Soliman. These men are at present at Randolph Field.
More recently, two other young men were selected
to take the training course at Randolph Field. They
are Vicente Luna, a graduate of the Constabulary Academy in 1933 but who later served as a private in the
19th Company, Cebu, P. C., and Jose Francisco, a graduate of the Naval Academy of Annapolis in 1931, and
who is connected with the Iloilo-Negros Air Express

Company.
After providing for the creation of the Constabu

Lieutenant BASILIO FERNANDO
Acting Commanding Officer, Air Corps


Major MANUEL G. OLYMPIA,
Flight Surgeon


lary Air Corps, the Legislature at its succeeding session, failed to approve a bill providing for P42,000 for
the purchase of a suitable site for a landing field for
the new aviation unit.;"A, site was found in Mandaluyong, Rizal and work was begun toward preparing it
for a landing field in anticipation of the approval of
the bill but the Legislature adjourned without acting
on the measure.
Following is the Act creating the Constabulary
Air Corps:
INo. 41941
AN ACT CREATING AN AVIATION UNIT IN THE
PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Legislature assembled
and by the authority of the same:
SECTION 1. There is hereby created within the
Philippine Constabulary an Aviation Unit which shall
have and exercise such functions and duties as may from
time to time be prescribed and designated by the Chief
of Constabulary.
In addition to the normal functioning of this Unit
as a basic part of the Constabulary, the aircraft, personnel and other facilities of the Aviation Unit may,


Page 28


August, 1935


KHAKI And RED


upon prior approval of the Governor-General in each
instance, be used for the control of locusts or other
pests, for assisting the customs or immigration authorities in the performance of their duties, or for such
other purposes as he may deem expedient or advisable.
Sec. 2. The Chief of Constabulary is hereby charged with the responsibility and vested with the necessary
authority to organize, train, and administer the unit
herein created, and he is hereby especifically authorized
and empowered to make such rules and regulations as
he may deem necessary therefor and as authorized under existing provsions of law, and within the limits of
available appropriations made by the Philippne Legislature:
(a) To transfer from other divisiens of the Constabulary such personnel as may be necessary for the
organization of the Aviation Unit;
(b) To increase the number of commissioned officers in the Constabulary by not more than ten officers,
if such action should become necessary due to the failure or unwillingness of Constabulary officers to qualify
as aircraft pilots, in order to have ten commissioned
officers as aircraft pilots in the Aviation Unit;
(c) To provide for the examination and training
of the personnel in the said Unit;
(d) To provide for appropriate grades and ratings fer personnel of the Unit; Provided, however,
That due to the high mortality rate among flying personnel, officers whose duty requires regular and fre

quent aerial flights, shall receive an additional compensation equivalent to twenty-five per cent of the basic
pay received by non-flying personnel of the same rank
or grade: And provided, further That due to the necessity for technically trained enlisted personnel to properly maintain flying equipment, those enlisted men
not to exceed fourteen per centum of the entire enlisted personnel of the Unit who qualify as air mechanies, first, second, and third-class, shall receive a monthly pay of seventy-five pesos, fifty pesos, and twenty
five pesos, respectively;
(e) To acquire, cperate, and maintain such aircraft and accesories and provide shelter therefor, within the limits of available appropriations made by the
Philippine Legislature, as he may deem necessary for
executing his duties and functions under this Act.
(f) Upon prior approval in each instance by the
Governor-General, to make available to such extent as
he may deem advisable all aviation facilities of the
Aviation Unit to other branches of the Philippine Government that may request same for offiicial business,
provided the requesting branch defrays the cost of such
operation;
(g) To incur such expenditures including expenditures for personnel services and rent at the seat of
the Government and elsewhere, and for bocks of reference, and periodicals as may be necessary to carry
cut the purposes of this Act and as may from time to
time be provided fer by the Philippine Legislature;


FREE
SWEEPSTAKE TICKETS!


A share in a PHILIPPINE SWEEPSTAKE Ticket
is given FREE in exchange of the following labels
25 empty wrappers of ALHAMBRA cigarettes
Or
10 rings of ALHAMBRA Coronas, Excelentes or
Especiales cigars
or
20 rings of ALHAMBRA Bellezas, Alcaldes or
Presidentes cigars
or
50 rings of ALHAMBRA Alco, Duplex or
Blunts cigars


ALHAMBRA
Cigar &. Cigarette Mfg. Co.
P. O. Box 209
MANILA


Read
crHe
Adrertisements
In Every
Issue
They Are A
Good Market
Guide.


August, 1935


KHAKI And RED


Page 29


(h) To provide at any airport or emergency landing field owned or operated by the Philippine Constabulary, whenever he may deem it advisable and proper
and upon previous approval of the Department Head,
for the sale of fuel, oil, equipment and other supplies,
furnishing temporary shelter and rendering of any mechanical service or assistance to owners or cperators of
aicraft in cases of emergency ,but only to the extent
that such sale or service is reasonably necessary to enable any aircraft to continue on its course to the nearest regularly established airport where necessary supplies and materials and proper mechanical service and
assistance are available; and the charges fer property
sold or service rendered shall be fixed in accordance
with the provisions of section five hundred and seventytwo of Act Numbered Twenty-seven hundred and eleven,
and all money collected for preperty thus sold or service rendered shall be disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of section five hundred and seventythree
of the same Act.
Sec. 3. The provisiens of Act Numbered Thirtynine hundred and nine, as amended by Act Numbered
Thirty-nine hundred and ninety-six, and any acts or
regulations promulgated thereunder geverning civil
aviation in the Philippine Islands shall apply to the
activities of the Constabulary Aviation Unit as regards
airworthiness of aircraft, qualificatiens of airmen, and
air traffic rules and regulations.
Sec. 4. To effectively carry out the provisions of
this Act, there is hereby appropriated for the first two
years of operation the total sum of five hundred nineteen thousand pesos out of the funds in the Insular
Treasury not otherwise appropriated: Provided, however That the sum of three hundred thousand peses
shall be available during the year nineteen hundred and
thirty-five: And provided, further That no part of the
amount herein appropriated shall be spent for the purchase of airplanes until the Philippine Constabulary
shall have in its service competent pers-nnel to handle
said equipment.
Sec. 5. This Act shall take effect on January first,
nineteen hundred and thirty-five.
Approved, December 8, 1934.


Charlotte Hodgkinson, 22-year-old lass, made
her first solo flight after only 2 hours and 27 minutes of instruction. She practiced imaginary flying
while perched on a chair, with a broomstick as the
'stick” of her plane.


Orders placed with advertisers in
  are assured of prompt
service and square deal, if submitted
thru the Chief, Advertising Department
of  , Oriente Building,
Manila.


brighter feeih


Y


menoy sadal
Get one tube of Colgate’s
Brush
pental Creann.
your teeth with it for
Itwo minutes at least
twice a day until it is
Then look in
qused up.

Ayour mirror, and if you
do not honestly admit
that your teeth are cleaner and brighter than ever
4
luig al ia a
tube to Colgate’s, P
Box 2700, Manila, and
we will refund your
RIA
noney.
A
R


2


...This unique offer has already caught the
imagination of millions. Will you accept ir?
Read every word —then decide! .


DLEASE do not think this
- is just another sensational advertisement. Itisn’'t.
It is an honest, straightfor
ward offer—designed for just
one purpose.
We sincerely want you to
try Colgate’s Dental Cream
—the dentifrice which has
made teeth whiter, smiles
brighter, in 72 countries
throughout the world.
We want you to see how
your teeth sparkle with new
lustre under the gentle action
of Colgate’s grit-free polishing ingredient, the same in
gredient dentists use.
Then, when you have used
one tube of Colgate’s Dental
Cream, see what your mirror
says. If you do not honestly


feel that your teeth look
cleaner, whiter, brighter,
more lustrous—you may
have your money back without question. (See guarantee
above.)
And the twice-daily use
of Colgate’s—morning and
night—will tone up the gums,
help to keep them firm and
healthy Ajoy to use, because
of Colgate’s delicious peppermint flavor, that sweetens
and refreshes the mouth and
perfumes the breath.
You get more dentifrice,
more brushings and more
cleansing for your money
than other leading dentifrices give you. Won t yot.
try one tubeTODAY?


Page 30


KHAKI ANd RED


3
gust,


TAe
Philippine
COMS dDurda,
Academy

A


Lieutenant Colonel ORVILLE M. JOHNSON
Superintendent, Constabulary Academy


The Officers' School now known as the Constabulary
Academy was first established in Manila in 1906. New
officers entering the service, and a number of the elder
officers were put through a course of instruction in this
school and sent out better equipped than formerly for
their work. Some of the officers who attended those
first sessions of the school are still in the service and
have a splendid record of achievement behind them.
SCHOOL MOVED TO BAGUIO
In 1908 the Officers’ School was moved to Baguio
and established on a newly acquired preperty called
Constabulary Hill, now known as Camp Henry T. Allen, named after the first Chief, the late General Henry
T. Allen, organizer of the Constabulary. By 1908 the
original roster had been greatly modified, owing to the
adjustments inevitable to a new organization getting established. Some of the original appointees were not
suited to the service. Some had died in battle, others
by reason of disease, and some had gone to seek wealth
or adventure in other walks of life.
As time went on the standards of the service were
steadily raised, and ipso facto entrance requirements
were higher than formely. One had to prepare himself
for the job and watch his step in order to keep it. It
was realized that the Constabulary offered an interesting and very useful career, and the high command
set about choosing material for officers that was likely
to reflect credit on the organization. This attitude resulted in the building up of a remarkable esprit de


corps, and made the name of Constabulary known and
respected throughout the length and breath of the land.
It was still a pretty early day in the history of American occupation and most of the important positions in
the Constabulary as well as in other departments of
the government were held by Americans. Although occasional appointments were still made here it was the
precedure at this time to bring young men over from
the United States to fill vacancies in the lower grades.
The men brought over were graduates of colleges or
military academies and consequently had excellent educational greundwork so that a few months of intensive
training in special subjects were sufficient to cenvert
them into efficient junior officers. During the time
this plan was followed an average of two classes a year
was breught over and sent to the school in Baguio,
the number in each class depending of course, on the
number of vacancies existing in the grade of third lieutenant.
hr
EARLY CURRICULUM
At this time the curriculum of the school consisted
of the Compiled Acts, Penal Code, Military Map Reading, the Constabulary Manual, Guard Regulations, Infantry Drill, Fencing, Dancing the Rigodon, and a
smattering of Spanish. Students had to stand reveille,
guard-mounting, retreat, and Saturday inspection and
were expected to pass satisfactory examinations in all
the subjects enumerated above, at the end of three
months. They were then assigned to Districts and sent


August, 1935


KHAKI aa RED


Page 31


Maicr IRINEO BUENCONSEJO
Commandant of Cadets and
Instructor


Lieut. FILOMENO VILLALUZ
Captain CALIXTO DUQUE
Instructor and Cadets' Company Assistant Commandant of Cadets,
Commander.
Post Adjutant and Instructor


out to statien where vacancies existed.
The scheol as described above was conducted up
to the first part of 1916, after which time now new appointments were made in the United States. Members
of the classes of 1915 and 1916 were known as special
students, due to the fact that the Academy had been
founded in 1914, and the name of the school changed
to The Constabulary Academy. Special students have
been appointed from time to time since 1916, but their
numbers have been few and no regular classes are provided ifor them.: At the present time appointments asspecial students are rarely made, and can be justified. 
only when the applicant has exceptional qualifications
that make his appointment desirable.
The year 1914 marked a new era in the history of.
the Philippine Islands for at that time the Fil pinos 
were givensa very large participation it had lbeen the.:2
avowed policy of the Amer'can Government to turn
authority over to the Filipines, just as soon as they
were prepared to-handle it preperly. The times now
seemed propitions and the pelicy was put into effect.
A great war was being waged in Europe and the
United States, along with other neutral countries had
A
her hands full in looking after affairs close to home.
Business oppertunities were good and large numbers
of Americans were continually leaving the services toengage in more lucrative employments. The school of
the Islands had been turning products, and there was
a large amount of material that cculd be used in the
government service.


Captain VICENTE J. PUNSALANG
Post Medical Officer and Instructor


GIVEN COLLEGIATE STATUS -
Having in view the present and future needs of the
Constabulary service, the Philippine Legislature, in the
Appropriation Act of 1914 set aside funds for the creation and maintenance of a cadet class in Baguio, under


For PEARL BUTTONS
See us at No. 460 Dasmarinas
MANILABUTTON FACTORY, INC.


KHAKI And RED


LEFT
Lieut. PATRICIO BORROMEO
IInstructor Acting Provost Officer,
Detachment Commander and
Constabulary Mess Officer


RIGHT
Lieut APOLINAR FAJARDO
Instructor and Post Exchange
Offiecr


August, 1935


the name “Constabulary Academy.”
A six months,
course was prescribed, but before receiving their commissions graduates of the Academy were required to
take the three months course in the officers’ school.
The Academy was run in this fashion for two years,
until the passage in 1916 of Act No. 2605 which expanded the institution somewhat and provided for a
nine months’ course under the name "Academy for
Officers of the Philippine Constabulary.” Beginning
with the school year of 1919 a two-year course was pre

scribed. The Academy function under Act 2605 until
December 1928 when Act 3496 was passed. This act
expanded the course to three years, renamed the institution “The Philippine Constabulary Academy", and
gave it a collegiate status. The class of 1928 was the
last class to graduate under the two-year basis.
In recent years there has been an attempt to further enlarge the Academy and raise the standard of
its course of instructien. The tendency is to elevate
the academy course to the standard a University course.


Almost every detail of the 1935 Ford V-8 contributes in some way to the car’s safety. In these
days of crowded roads and fast driving; eight
outstanding Ford V.8 safety features deserve your
particular consideration.


AS 1


S SIBEDA


1. Safety glass all around, at no extra cost.
2. More powerful and positive brakes, operating
with less pedal pressure. 3. A welded-into-one-piece
solid steel body. 4. Ford transverse springs,
without a peer for safety. 5. Better traction with
big air-balloon tires. 6. Much stronger X-type
frame. 7. New weight distribution that gives
better balance and control. 8. Ford quick acceleration that gives instant car command in tight
places.
A telephone call will bring this car to your door
for a try-out.


“After We Sell We Serve”


Manila Trading & Supply Co.
MANILA—ILOILO —CEBU— BACOLOD—BAGUIO—SAN PABLO


ONy IO AUMATEL FON SOING SUNON TPUCIan Te IAnns


August, 1935


KHAKI AN RED


PAGE 32


EXCELLENT
Autobus Service
For Excursionists
We
offer the
safest and most
comfortable means of
transportation at a comparatively low cost and take
you anywhere in
the Provinces
of
RIZAL, CAVITE, BULACAN, LAGUNA,
TAYABAS AND BATANGAS.
PASAY TRANSPORTATION CO., INC.
Manila Office:
Main Office:
55 Alejandro IV
Tambo, Paranaque
Tel. 5-76-64
Tel. 2-26-28
Rizal
Manila


Allanfic, Gulf & Pacific Company
Manila


Engineers
Manufacturers
Contractors


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA


Compliments
veniTal LuZoll saag 60., TRt.
CRYSTAL ARCADE BLDG.
MANILA
ER


Page 34


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


The District Of Northern Luzon


January 1, 1926, saw the rcorganization of the
District of Northern Luzon with headquarters at San
Fernando, La Unien. Formerly it comprised the provinces of Ilocos Nerte, Ilocos Sur, Abra, La Union,
Nueva Vizcaya, Isabela, Cagayan, Batanes, Mountain
Province, Pangasinan, and Nueva Ecija, but the last
two were separated and joined to the Distr'et of
Southern Luzon on December 1, 1927, and April 1,
1926, respectively.
In view of the appointment of Colonel W. E. Dosser, whe actually commands the district, as Provincial
Gevernor of the Mountain Province, the district headquarters was transferred to Bontoc on March 25, 1929.
The district covers an area of 1,353,530 hectares with
ab-ut 1,500,000 inhabitants, of which 190,000 are nonChristians. It has 15 stations and 3 substations, or
8,546 hectares and 2,288 inhabitants per s ldier.
During the first 8 years of reorganization, the
Constabulary in the district handled 6,009 criminal
cases in which convictions were obtained except en 601
cases which were either acquitted or dismissed for lack
of sufficient evidence. Of these cases 278 were for
gambling and 195 fer opum.
In gambling raids 2,663 persons were arrested and
in opium raids 213 persons. For these raids the gov

Colonel WILLIAM E. DOSSER
Commanding, District of Northern Luzon and the
First Regiment of Infantry
ernment’s coffer was made richer by P1,153,781.88 for
fines imposed and money in cash and value of opium
confiscated. The greatest haul of prohibited drug was
made in Lacag on February 26, 1928, when 37 sacks
of prepared oplum and morphine valued at P925,000.00
were recovered from the sea by the 21st Company under the direction of Captain Luis E. Quintero and First
Lieutenant Julian Olivas.
During the same peried, 27,982 patrols, covering
2,715,484 kilometers, crisscrossed the d’strict, or an
average of 3,497-34 patrols and 339,435-14 kilometers
per year. These patrols kept low the commission of
crimes, particularly “robbery,” “theft of large cattle,” and other offenses against property. Also they
were instrumental in the solution of apparently ins lvable crimes.
Aside from duties purely Constabulary, the trocpse.
in the district lent invaluable aid to the Bureau of
Animal Insdutry in the control of rinderpest which
broke cut in the Ilocos previnces from 1926 to 1929,
and the Cagayan Valley and Mountain Province from
1928 to 1931. They also take part in the extermination of locust and rats which peried cally appear in
the dictrict, particularly in the Mointain Province and
the Cagayan Valley.


P. O. Box 1495
Telephone 2-20-42


ROXASyCia.


SUGAR MANUFACTURERS
GENERAL MERCHANTS


G
Sub-Agents For
Fire & Marine Insurance Companies
Manila, P. I.
719 Echague


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 


Capt. ANTONIO N. VILLALOBOS
District Adjutant


Major LEON C. BANEZ
Regimental Surgeon


Major FIDEL SOLIVEN
Dental Surgeon


For rinderpest and locust work in eight years, the
force in this district employed 328,751 days. The Constabulary in the Mountain Pr vince perform duties
which may be termed "miss onary.” When officers
and soldiers are on patrol they de not only gather information but also explain to the people the benefits
of modern civilization such as the use of medern medicaments, the importance of sanitation and education,
etc. They alse have a great deal to do in the construction ef roads, as they are often called upon to
round up road-tax laborers which, in some cases, cannot be done ctherwise.


Notwithstanding the few number of companies in
the district which cover quite an extensive territory,
the peace and crder obtaining are usually excellent.
Perpetrators of crimes are usually brcught to the toils
of the law and punished for their transgression. The
troops have also always proved equal to the problems
of cur special laws such as the "gambling,” "opium,
“explesive,” “traffic,” etc. laws. Communistic societies or agrarian agroupments of socialistic tendencies led by selfish exploiters are conspicuous by their
absence in the district. Some such societies have tried
to organize but they have been nipped in the bud and
died upon birth.


Major LUIS E. QUINTERO
Commanding "A” Battalion and
Assistant to District
Commander


Major LUIS RAMOS
Commanding “B” Battalion and
Assistant to District Commander


Page 36


KHAKI And RED


August, 1935


The District Of Central Luzon


What is now known as the District of Central
Luzon was originally organized as the First District by General Orders, issued on October 14, 1901.
This district at that time comprised all the provinces at present under the jurisdiction of the District of Central Luzon with the exception of the
provinces of Cavite and Laguna. At that time Cavite was under the second district while Laguna
was under the third district.
In 1904, the archipelago was again resubdivided and to the first district, which corresponds to
the present District of Central Luzon, were added
the provinces of Batangas, Cavite and Laguna.
By General Order No. 4, issued January 9, 1909


Lieutenant BERNARDINO JARDELEZA
Assistant District Adjutant


Lieutenant Colonel MIGUEL NICDAO
Commanding, District of Central Luzon and the
Second Regiment of Infantry


the first district was changed to the District of
Central Luzon and comprised the following provinces: Bataan, Batangas, Bulacan, Cavite, Laguna,
Mindoro, Nueva Ecija, Palawan, Pampanga, Pangasinan, Rizal, Tarlac, Tayabas, Subprovince of
Marinduque and Zambales.
In 1917, the District of Northern Luzon, Central Luzon and Visayas were abolished and the
district commanders were designated inspectors of
their respective districts.


----.



---



UNIVERSAL


DRUG STORE


SANTOS OCAMPO INC.


Where you will be served with


Prompt Mail Service and


UTMOST COURTESY


HOME DELIVERY


Under the direct supervision of Eighteen


Open from six o’clock in the morning to


compstent, first class Pharmacist


twelve o’clock at night. 18 hours of con

with long experience.


tinuous service to the public.
*


IMPORTER


6 EXPORTER


Prescription a specialty




Page 37


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Major PACIANO TANGCO
Commanding "A” Battalion and
Assistant to District Commander


Major TELESFORO MARTINEZ
Commanding “B” Battalion
Assistant to District Commander
and Inspector at Large


Captain FELICISIMO TORRES
District Adjutant and Inspector
at Large


In 1925, the Constabulary was again reorganized but the District of Central Luzon was not revived. It was not until General Orders No. 1, is

sued January 2, 1935 that the District of Central
Luzon again came into being. The Distict is now
commanded by Colonel Nicdao.


WE WILL MELP YOU TO SECURE A LICENSE


Buy Your L. C. SMITH Gun
Now At Reduced Prices
L. C. Smith Field Grade ......₱145.00 NOW P90.00
L C. Smith Ideal Grade ..... 175.00 ,, 110.00
CASH OR INSTALLMENTWINGHESTER
AMMUNITIONFRESH—ALWAYS—
Super-Leader Ranger—
Speed Load
COLT REVOLVERS—
Hunting Accessories
Knives, Canteens, Flashlights,
Head Lights, Belts, Holsters,
Game Bags, Etc.
We Also Repair GunsSEND FOR FREE CATALOG
C. ALKAN, INC.
MANILA — CEBU — DAVAO


THE MILITARY WATCH


No. 188
FABULOSA, chromium case; radium figures,
natural size, leather strap .. ₱4.50


No. 4511
FABULOSA, chromium case, radium figures,
natural size, leather strap .. ₱4. 50


(Send P1.00 Deposit with your C.O.D. order)
LEVY & BLUM, INC.
P. O. Box 243
Manila
345 Echague


Page 38


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


The District Of Southern Luzon


On the 14th day of October in the year 1901,
during the incumbency of Captain Henry T. Allen,
Sixth United States Cavalry, as Chief of Philippine
Constabulary, par. 1, Order No. 49, was issued dividing the Archipelago into First, Second and Third
Districts for purposes of Constabulary administration.
The First District, under First Assistant Chief
David J. Baker, Jr., with headquarters at Manila,
embraced among other provinces the following, now
under the Districts of Central and Southern Luzon:
Bataan, Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, Pampanga, Rizal,
Tarlac and Zambales.
The Second District, under Third Assistant
Chief Wallace C. Taylor, with headquarters at Lucena, Tayabas, embraced also among other provinces the following, now under the Districts of Central and Southern Luzon: Albay, Ambos Camarines (now Camarines Norte and Camarines Sur,
Cavite, Marinduque, Masbate, Sorsogon and Tayabas.;
On June 13, 1904, under paragraph 7, G. O. No.
73, the archipelago was resubdivided and into more
districts:—First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth.
The provinces now divided between the Districts
of Central and Southern Luzon were then grouped
as follows:-
A
FIRST DISTRICT! Bataan, Batangas, Bulacan, Cavite, Laguna, Nueva Ecija, Pampanga,
Pangasinan, Rizal, Tarlac, and Zambales.
SECOND DISTRICT: Albay, Camarines (now
Camarines Norte and Camarines Sur), Masbate.
Mindoro, Sorsogon and Tayabas.
THIRD DISTRICT: Paragua (now Palawan).
Only the province of Marinduque which is now
under the District of Southern Luzon was not in

Lieutenant Colonel BENITO B. VALERIANO
Commanding, District of Southern Luzon and the
Third Regiment of Infantry
AD
cluded under any of the above districts as it was.
only made -a separate province for Constabulary
purposes on December 21, 1929, ander par. 2, S.0.
No. 240, H.P.C. However, it previously belonged
to the province of Tayabas which was grouped un
der the Second District.
On January 9, 1909, under paf. 3, G. O. No.
4; the designation and limits of Constabulary dis


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 39


Major ADRIANO T. CRUZ
Regimental Surgeon


Major ALONSO GATUSLAO
Commanding "A" Battalion and
Assistant to District Commander


Major JOSE V. AGDAMAG
Commanding "B” Battalion and
Assistant to District Commander


tricts as it affected the new District of Southern
Luzon were announced as follows, to be effective
January 15th of the same year:
The First District was changed to District of
Central Luzon.
Slecond District to District of Southern Luzon
Third District to District of Visayas, etc.


The province under the District of Southern
Luzon were then grouped under the District of Central Luzon and the then District of Southern Luzon as follows:
DISTRICT OF CENTRAL LUZON
Bataan, Batangas, Bulacan, Cavite, Laguna,
Mindoro, Nueva Ecija, Palawan, Pampanga, Pan

WARNER, BARNES &CO, LTD.
LONDON, MANILA, ILOILO, CEBU &
BACOLOD
MEW YORK AGENTS - LEWARO, BIBBY &. CO., 106 Wall Streel
Importers and Exporters
SHIPPING AGENTS:
Nippon Yusen Kaisha
Cunard-White Star Ltd.
Bibby Line
INSURANCE—Fire, Marine, Workmen’s
Compensation, Automobile and
Miscellaneous
Sugar Machinery, Diesel Engines, Condensing Plants, Shipbuilders and
Engineers.
All Classes of Fertilizer.
Sperry Flour Co.
Sugar Bags
Telegraphic Address: “Warner”
Manila office:Perez-Samanillo Bldg., Escolta


Page 40


KHAKL ANd RED


August, 1935


gasinan, Rizal, Tarlac, Tayabas, Subprovince of
Marinduque and Zambales.
THE THEN DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN
LUZON
Albay, Subprovince of Catanduanes, Ambos Camarines (now Camarines Norte and Camarines
Sur), Sorsogon and Subprovince of Masbate,
As the Appropriation Bill for 1917 abolished the District Headquarters of Northern Luzon, Central Luzon and Visayas, G. O. No. 1, dated
January 4, 1917, during the incumbency of General Herman Hall, as Chief of the Philippine Constabulary, was issued. Automatically, the District
Chiefs of Northern Luzon, Central Luzon and Visayas ceased to be as such and were designated
Inspectors for Northern Luzon, Central Luzon and
Visayas, respectively, and their respective District
Adjutants assigned to provincial duties.
On October 29, 1925, par. 1, G. O. No. 25
into districts by direction of His Excelency, the
Governor General, and in compliance with par. 16,
M.P.C., amended as follows:
“Par. 16. The territory of the Islands is divided into several Constabulary districts, the number and extent of which are announced in orders
by the Chief.
“Each district is commanded by an assistant
chief or by a senior officer of field rank".


BETIER LUEGAGENEANSMORE CONVEMENCE


M-5551
"OXFOR D”
BAO


MADE FROM THE BEST
SELECTED AMERICAN
LEATHER
COLORS:
CORDOVAN. LIGHT 8
DARK BROWN


PIGSKIN
LEGGINGS
Riu's Army Style
and Constabulary
officers' Leggings
Made of genuine
pigskin or cowhide.
Palr
No: 3908 ₱ 8.00
No. 3900 10 00
No. 3000 12.00


BELLOWS TOP
SUIT CASES
Made of genuine pigskin nicely finished
in brown color.
No. 1600
Prizes
Sizes
......... P24.00
3
7.00
.
....... 30.00
30".......... 33 00
“OXFORD" BAGS—
These are conveniently light traveling hand bags made
f brown cowhide
leather with fancy
patent Iocks and
spring clips.
MSSSI
Prices are berp
moderate


SAM BROWNE
BELTS
U. S. Army and PhilIppine Constabulary
Officers.
Prices from
P7.00 to P12.00
Made to pour size.


"KIT" TRAVELING
BAG
Made of cowhide and
smooth pigskin
We have
eather
them in different
sizes.
Prices are verp
moderate.


RIU HERMANOS, INC
(THE NEW SPORT)
623 Escolta—MANILA—P. O. Box 378


INTERISLAND MARITIME SERVICE


ILOILO-SILAY LINE
M. B. "Princess of Negros”
Leaves Iloilo for Silay everyday at 7.00 a.
m. and 12:15 p.m., and from Silay to Iloilo av
9:15 a.m., and 2:15 p.m.
On Sundays it leaves Iloilo at 3:00 a.m.,
and Silay at 11:00 a.m.
From boat to automobile or vice-versa.
The longest wharf in the Orient is open to
the public to avoid inconvenience for passengers and freight.
ILOILO, CEBU VIA SAN CARLOS. GUIHULN
NGAN, BAIS AND DUMAGULTE LINE
M. B. “Marapara"
Sails every Monday for the above mentioned ports. Extraordinary accommodations, spacious cabins, and excellent food.
M. B. "San Carlos”
Sails weekly from the ports of Iloilo, Silay,
Cadiz, Santa Fe, San Carlos, Dumaguete and
Cebu.
For freight and passenger, apply to
NEGROS NAVIGATION CO., INC.
Muelle Loney, Iloilo
Tels. 631-632
P. O. Box 494


 Cun


(LINO DEL ROSARIO, S. en C.)
82-92 Plaridel St.
CEBU, CEBU
—
ENPORTERS
IMPORTERS

We Sell by Wholesale
Textiles of all Kinds from
Europe, America, China and
Japan
at
Prices Cheaper than other
Importers.


HOME DELIVERY SERVICE


Phone 601


P. O. Box 578


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 41


Under this reorganization of Constabulary districts, the District of Southern Luzon at first was
given the following provinces with headquarters
at Manila:
Albay, Bataan, Batangas, Bulacan, Camarines
Norte, Camarines Sur, Cavite, Laguna, Marinduque, Mindoro, Palawan; Pampanga, Rizal, Sorsogon; Tarlac, Tayabas and Zambales.
The province of Masbate then embraced by the
District of Visayas was later transferred to this
District effective August 1, 1927, under G. O. No.
23, dated July 18, 1927, during the incumbency of
Brigadier-General C. E. Nathorst as Chief of Philippine Constabulary.
Colonel L. R. Sweet, then Chief of Staff,
was the first District Commander and was in command from January 1, 1926, to January 18, 1927.
Colonel Jose de los Reyes, now retired am1 Chief
of the Secret Service. Bureau of Customs,
was the second Chief of the district. He had the
command up to October 31, 1928 and was succeeded by Lieutenant Colonel Eustaquio Bactat who was
assigned as Acting District Commander from Nov

ember 1, 1928 to March 31, 1929, Lieutenant Colonel Bactat was relieved by Colonel Reyes who reported back to duty from accrued leave on April
1, 1929. Colonel Reyes again commanded the district until October 15, 1930 as he was retired from
active service the following day, October 16, 1930.
Lieutenant Colonel Eustaqio Bactat again succeeded him as District Commander and was in command.
On April 1, 1929, the post of an Assistant District Commander of Southern Luzon was created.
Lieutenant Colonel Bactat was the first to hold the
mosition and held it until his assignment as Actine
District Commander of Visayas from May 11, 1929
to October 30, 1929. On October 31, 1929 he was
again assigned Assistant Districtt Commander of
Southern Luzon. Lieutenantt Colonel Paulino Santos, now retired and Director of Prisons, held it
next. Then it was held by Lieutenant Colonel
Ochoa now retired.
On January 1, 1933, under the latest reorganization of the Constabulary, the District of Southern Luzon was given jurisdiction over the follow

My dear Sir:—
KATIALIS is an effective cure for ECZEMA. I have proven it on my daughter,
ELIZABETH HERMOGENES, who suffered from ECZEMA on her left cheek for
A


mare than one month and was cured by
ER
KATIALIS within a short time. I applied

KATIALIS on her cheek covered with ECA
ZEMA only every three days in accordance
with the accompanying instruction and it
S

was sufficient to cure her sickness.

The inclosed pictures of ELIZABETH
are proofs that she had been sick and cured
by KATIALIS.
You can do what you please with the
pictures and letter.
Very respectfully,
E

D

E


(S9d.) PURIFICACION PABLO.
I

After using KATIALIS
Before using KATIALIS
This letter is one of the many testimonials we have received which speak of the result of using KATIALIS.
DHOBIE ITCH, SARNA,
KATIALIS has cured many persons of skin diseases such as PRICKLY HEAT,
ECZEMA, BLISTERS, GRAINS OF THE FACE including those which appear after shaving, PIMPLES,
WHITE-SPOTS, FRECKLES, BOILS, ABSCESSES, ANTHRAX, DANDRUFF, CHAFE, all kinds of
WOUNDS, ULCERS, etc., and it will completely relieve you from suffering if you give it a chance.
KATIALIS also cleans and beautifies the face, and it is a quick remedy for “SOBAQUINA”' (bad smell
from the armpits) and mosquito bites, bedbugs, fleas, chicken lice and small insects.
Ask for KATIALIS at your drugstore or use the coupon below.

Dr. LORENZO C. REYES, 405 San Lazaro, Manila.
Enclosed please find ₱ 1.20 ($1.20 in foreion countries) forwhich send me one jar of KATIALIS.
NameAggres


1819 Mangahan, Manila
Dr. LORENZO C. REYES
405 San Lazaro, Manila


Page 42


KHAKI and RED


August, 1935


ing provinces:
Sur, Marinduque, Masbate, Mindoro, Palawan,
Albay, Batangas, Camarines Norte, Camarines Romblon, Sorsogon and Tayabas.
aiE
Following is the organization, strength and dis tribution of the District of Southern Luzon:
DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN LUZON
3RD INFANTRY REGIMENT
HEADQUARTERS: LEGASPI, ALBAY


Sgt. Istaff


Ist.


Cor

Pri

Grand


Co.


STATION


Major Sgt.


Sgt.


Sgt.


poral


vates


Total


Total


HDOTRS. 3rd INF. REGIMENT


Legaspi, Albay .................... . ...


111





2,



2


"A" BATTALION (7 Companies)


Hdatrs.: Lucena, Tayabas ...........


1


1.


Office, P.C., Batangas ..............


a
1


1.


Office, P.C., Marinduque ...........


1


Office, P.C., Mindoro ....................


1


Office, P.C., Palawan ...................


1


A


Office, P.C., Tayabas ..


1


1


8th


Lipa, Batangas ............................


1


4


6


46


57


9th


Paliko, Batangas ........................


1


4


6


46


57


Boac Detachment ......................


IIl


12)


I14l


17l


35th


Calapan, Mindoro ........................


1


4


6


46


57


124th


San Jose, Mindoro ......................


1


3.


4


32


40


55th


Puerto Princesa, Palawan ................


1


4


6


46


57


Balabac Detaciment ..................


II


L2)


I14l


17


7TOth


Lucena, Tayabas ...........................


1


4


6


46


57


71st


Gumaca, Tayabas ........................


1


4


6


46


57


Calabgan Detachment ................


IIl


121


114)


117).


TOTAL—"A" BATTALION ..............


31 3


7


27


40


308


388


388


“B” BATTALION (7 Companies)


Hdatrs.: Legaspi, Albay ..............


Office, P.C., Albay ......................


1





Office, P.C., Camarines Norte ..........


Office, P.C., Camarines Sur ..............


1


Office, P.C., Masbate ...........


Office, P.C., Sorsogon ....................


1!


2nd


Legaspi, Albay .............................


1


4


6


46


57



5th


Daet, Camarines Norte ....................


1


4


6


46


4th


Naga, Camarines Sur ....................


4


6


46


57


34th


Masbate, Masbate ...........



Aolt


1


4


6


46


57


Rio Guinobatan Detachment ..........


III


I2l


141


17)


63rd


Romblon, Romblon .......................
..


1


6


46


57


Odiongan Detachment ..............


EIl


t2l


114)


117)


67th


Sorsogon, Sorsogon........................


1


4


6


46


57


121st


D/S Manila Garrison .................


Eil


Al


I6l


146)


157)


5


6


24


36


276


347


347


9 4


13


51


76


584


737


737


121st


D/S Gen. Serv., Manila Garrison .......


4


6


46


57


57


TOTALS—Srd INF. REGIMENT......


94


14


55


82


630


794


794


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 43


A Tribute To Maharaja


andahla


Maharja Bandahla, Sulu bred was he,
As fine a man as ever walked
And loyal as could be.
His home was built way up on stilts
But not to get the air
An old protective measure, and badly needed
there.
Korungdung was his native town,
Way down on the Sulu sea
Where the dawn struck fast as the moon went
down,
And the days a delight to see.
And the Maharaja loved it,
With a love that was fine to see.
In days gone by, when the law came in
And the outlaws had to flee,
To Tabu Manuk or Borneo or other places free
From Constabulary soldiers, decked out as infantry.
The Maharaja always helped
And he did it cheerfully.
And when ladrones were captured
Before the court went he
And organized, and fostered, his chieftain family;
To form an honest jury and hear testimony.
Sometimes the Koran was "la mode” and Penal
Code not used
But always punishments were just and rights were
not abused.
He really was a grand old man, as grand as he
could be,
Who made his every effort
To help posterity.
He realized he was getting old,
That law was there to stay,
And he did just the best he could, his people
for to sway.
And I often sit and wonder if my old friend has
passed
On to his loved forefathers
From whose image he was cast.
And if he has, I’ll take my oath
And right Pll surely be,
That Bandahala’s spirit is guarding Sulu’s sea.
TENIENTE GUTRI


Save the coupons and exchange
them for splendid gifts.
Nestie & Angio-Swiss Condensed Mile Co.
MANILA — ILOILO — CEBU — ZAMBOANGA


Is Milk! Puemilk oo, ond osny, van
creamy. Joan, a very observant child, was not long
in realising why her mother always insisted on
Molico.
One thing was certain — her cakes and puddings
always tasted better when
S

Molico was used.
 Sound advice trom ene so
young. Anyway, buy a tin
and prove it for yourself.


THE
FULL CREAM
MILK POWDER


Page 44


August, 1935


KHAKI And RED
The District of «isayas


The District of Visayas was organized on Jannary 1, 1926, with Headquarters at Cebu, Cebu.
Col. Aurelio Ramos was the District Commander
from January 1, 1926 to January 28, 1927 and Col.
G. B. Francisco from January 29, 1927 to May 4,
1934 when he was appointed Chief of Staff of the
Constabulary. Lieut. Col. Juan Quimbo who now
commands the District, succeeded Col. Francisco.
At first, the district embraced the provinces
of Antique, Bohol, Capiz, Cebu, Iloilo, Leyte,
Masbate, Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental,
Romblon and Samar but on August 1, 1927, Masbate was transferred to the District of Souhern Luzon.
The District started with 23 companies with authorized strength of 1046 men. With the transfer
of Masbate to the District of Southern Luzon the
strength was reduced to 1004. Forced economy
reduced this to 914 on July 13, 1931, to 789 on
Febuary 9, 1933 and to 760 on January 1, 1934
On account of the last reduction the 20th Company
Bogo, Cebu, 24th Company, Sara, Iloilo and 48th
Company, Dumaguete, Negros Oriental were disbanded.
The district now has an actual strength of
1003 men. A total of 310 municipalities distributed
in 479 islands covering an area of 5,649,308 hectares and inhabited by about 4,000.000 people,
must be patrolled and controlled by the Constabulary force of this district.
The District is systematically covered by patrols both by officers and enlisted men as often as
the depleted enlisted strength permitted. In addition to its other police work the Constabulary has
cooperated with the local authorities in controlling
cholera in Bohol, Cebu; Leyte, Negros Occidental,
Negros Oriental and Samar locust in Bohol; Capiz, Iloilo, Loyte and Samar. There were times
when the locust situation in Negros, Bohol and
Leyte became so bad that general patrolling had to
be suspended so that as many men as possible could
be detailed on locust duty.
While high standard of training and discipline
are exacted of our men, no effort is spared to
make their garrison life as comfortable and enjoyable as possible. They are provided with good reading matters, musical instruments and athletic goods.
There are two stations now with senior bowling
alleys. Cebu has a gymnasium where enlisted men
are trained how to box by professional boxers.
The largest Constabulary Post Exchange in
existence is, undoubtedly, the one in Cebu. First
opened in November, 1931 with P500.00 borrowed


Lieutenant Colonel JUAN C. QUIMBO
Commanding, District of Visayas and the
Fourth Regiment of Infantry


capital, its transactions have grown rapidly and by
December, 1933 the total for that month alone amounted to P2655.40. It does not only handle various
kinds of merchandise but operates also bowling alleys and a barber shop. It is also slaughtering pigs
and cattle and selling the pork and beer to officers
and enlisted men at about 40% cheaper than in the
local market.
The District can boast also of a band that is
second only to the Constabulary Band in Manila.
Organized on October 9, 1931, it was able to make
its debut on Sept. 30, 1931 after an intensive course
of training. It is composed of a conductor and 24
players. Only professional musicians who can proficiently play musical instuments on notes at first
sight were enlisted. As they were enlisted as regular soldiers in the line, they are drilled and given necessary training for regular field duty. The
band gives public concerts in Cebu every Thursday
and Sunday.


Page 45


KHAKI And RED
August, 1935


L.


bag 9.
LEFT
teri."
Major EULALIO TANEDO
Commanding “B” Battalion and
Assistant to District Commander


RIGHT
Lieut, DEOGRACIAS TENAZAS
District Adjutant


The present organization, strength and distribution in the District of Visayas follow:
DISTRICT OF VISAYAS
HEADQUARTERS: CEBU, CEBU
ATH INFANTRY REGIMENT


Co.


STATION


Sgt.
Major


Istaff
Sgt.


1st.
Sgt.


Sgt.


Corporal


Privates


Total


Grand
Total


HDOTRS. 4th INF. REGIMENT


Cebu, Cebu .....................


1


1


i


2


2


"A" BATTALION (9 Companies)


.


Hdatrs.: Iloilo, Iloilo ................


Antique ....................
Office
P.C.
.


1


1


Office, P.C., Capiz ....................


1


Ag





15


-


Iloilo ........................
P.C.,
ice
Off
e,


1


1


.Sebr



g





Negros Occidental .........
P.C
D,
Office,


1


 24


A


Office, P.C., Negros Oriental .......


1


I


 


5th


San Jose, Antique ........................


1.


4


6


46


57i


Sof


14th


Calivo, Capiz .............................


3


4


32


40





15th


Capiz, Capiz ...............................


-1


4


 6-


46.


Og


23rd


Iloilo, Iloilo ................................


4


6


46


57


25th


Calinog. Iloilo ............................





1


4


6


46


57


44th


Cadiz, Negros Occidental .....


1


4


6


46


57


San Carlos Detachment ..............


Til


121


I-EAl


1171


45th


Talisay, Negros Occidental .............


4


6.


46


57


46th


Negros Occidental ................
Isabela.


1


4


6


46


57


47th


Bais, Negros Oriental ..................


1.


4


6


46


57


TOTAL—"A" BATTALION ........


4


3


9-


35


52


400


503


503


"B” BATTALION (9 Companies)


E
Hdatrs.: Cebu, Cebu


ir



Bohol
F
Office
P.C.,



1


"


1


149


 Office, P.C., Cebu ..............


1


1.


ian





₱52


Office, P.C., Leyte...................... 1


HL 


Office, P.C.,
Samar ......................


1





SUDT


10th


E-Tagbilaran, Bohol ........................


1 1


4


6


46


18th


Cebu, Cebu ..........................


ion


4


6


46


57


19th


Cebu, Cebu ...............................


1


4


6.


46.


57


31st


Tacloban, Leyte ...................... . . . .)


1


4


6


46


32nd


Ormoc, Leyte ................. . ... .... . . . ..


1


4


6


46


. 57


33rd


Malitbog. Leyte............................


4


6


46


57


64th


Catarman, Samar........................


4


6


46


57


65th


 Borongan, Samar .............



1


4


6


46


57


66th


Catbalogan, Samar .........................
g
“B”
TOTAL
deBATTALION.


3


12.


.
4. 9


4

1.36-


6
54


: 46
-414


57
"518


518


 -


L TOTALS—Ath INE. REGIMENT.......


8





18


71


106


1814


1023


Page 46


KHAKI ANG RED


August, 1935


District Of Northern Mindanao


For the first time since the Constabulary was
organized have the provinces comprising the Moro
territory been grouped under two different Dis
tricts. Since 1903 when the District of Mindanao
and Sulu was organized the district functioned under one district organization. From 1903 to 1909
this district was known as the Fifth District, Philippine Constabulary, until 1917 it was the District
of Mindanao, until 1922 it was the Department of
Mindanao; until January 1, 1935 it was known as
the District of Mindanao and Sulu.
On January 1, 1935 under the new reorganization of the Constabulary, the District of Minda

nao and Sulu was divided into the Districts of
Northern and Southern Mindanao.
The District of Northern Mindanao is comprised of six provinces with headquarters at Camp
Keithley, Lanao. The provinces comprising the
district are: Agusan, Bukidnon, Lanao, Misamis
Occidental, Misamis Oriental and Surigao.
The District of Northern Mindanao is under
command of Colonel Guy O. Fort, and has an actual strength of 930 men.
Following is the organization, strength and distribution in the District of Northern Mindanao:


HEADQUARTERS: CAMP KEITHLEY, LANAO


Co.


STATION


Sgt. Istaff 1st.
Major Sgt.


Sgt.


Sgt.


enr
poral


PN
vates


Total


Grand
Total


HDOTRS. 5th INF. REGIMENT


Camp Keithley, Lanao .....


I


2


2


“A” BATTALION (8 Companies) ...


Pa


Hdatrs: Cagayan, Misamis Oriental..


Office, P.C., Agusan ......................


2


Office, P.C., Bukidnon ..........


1


Office, P.C., Misamis Oriental ........


111


Office, P.C., Surigao ........


1
1


2


74th


Butuan, Agusan ..........................


1


4.


6


46


75th


Waloe, Agusan ............................


1


4


6


46


57


101st


Camp Mendez, Agusan ......


4


6


46


5


76th


Malaybalay, Bukidnon ....................





1.


4


6


46


57


89th


Maramag, Bukidnon ......................


1
1





6


46


57


102nd


Camp Suarez, Bukidnon ................


1


3


4


32


40


117th


Surigao, Shrigao .......................


6


46


57


60th


Cagayan, Misamis Oriental .......


1





4


32


40


TOTAL "A" BATTALION ........


31 4


8


30


44


340


429


429


“B" BATTALION (9 Companies)





 as8


Hdatrs.: Camp Keithley, Lanao......


Is


Office, P.C., Lanao ......................


1








Office, P.C., Misamis Occidental ......


1


PO M


P P





90th


Tamparan, Lanao ........................


AA


1


4


6


46


91st


Ganassi, Lanao ............................


4


6


46


92nd


Camp Keithley, Lanao ........


1


4


6


 46


Lumbatan Detachment ................


El


121


114)


1i7


95th


Tugaya, Lanao ..........................


1


4


6


46


57


96th


Kolambugan, Lanao ......................


1


4


6


46


57


Misamis Occidental Detachment ..


Iil


12l


114)


1I7I


105th


Malabang, Lanao ..........................


1


4


6


46


57


TOTAL "B” BATTALION.......


21


6


24


36


276


345


345


HEADQUARTERS TROOPS


Attached for duty at:


E


Camp Keithley, Lanao ...................!


1


4


6


46


57


F


Camp Keithley, Lanao........


4


6


46


57


Tty.


Camp Keithley, Lanao...................





I


3


4


 32


40


TOTALS—“B" BAT. & ATTACHED....


21


9


35


52


400


199


TOTALS—Sth INF. REGIMENT........


616


14


 N I


60 I


616


776


TOTALS—DIST. N. MINDANAOI


..6.1.61


17


1 65


 96 1


740.


930.


930


August, 1935


KHAKI And RED


Page 47


District Staff Officers


Colonel GUY O. FORT
Commanding, District of Northern Mindanao and
the Fifth Regiment of Infantry


Captain RAFAEL RAMOS
Commanding “B” Battalion


Lieutenant ANTONIO MARTINEZ
District Adjutant


Page 48


RHAKI And RED


August, 1935


The District Of Southern Mindanao


Colonel Luther Stevens, who commanded the
District of Mindanao and Sulu from January 2,
1929, until the new reorganization on January 1,
1935, now commands the District of Southerr.
Mindanao. This District is comprised of the provinces of Cotabato, Davao, Sulu and Zamboanga.
It is necessary here to give the history of the
District of Mindanao and Sulu in order to understand the background and problems of the two new
districts in the southern part of the archipelago.
The District of Mindanao and Sulu was organized on July 1, 1903 under the designation of
"Fifth District”. Territorially it covered the Moro Province, which contained the Districts (now
Provinces) of Cotabato, Davao, Lanao; Sulu and
Zamboanga; and the Provinces of Surigao and
Misamis, which together included the territory
now embraced in the Provinces of Agusan, Bukidnon, Misamis Occidental, Misamis Oriental
and Surigao. Captain (now Major-General, Retired) J. G. Harbord, U. S. Cavalry, a temporary
Colonel of the United States Army and Assistant
Chief of Constabulary, was assigned to command
the District with Headquarters at Zamboanga.
The Mindanao Constabulary started with an
authorized strength of 34 officers and 1,000 enlisted men which number was soon reduced to 660
enlisted men. There were, at the same time, some
8,500 federal troops within the district composed of
American Infantry, Cavalry and Artillery and se.
veral companies of Philippine Scouts.
To form the newly autherized Constabulary
non-commissioned officers and privates available
for premotion were transferred from the older
districts to make up the non-commissioned
strength and the required number of privates
was obtained by local enlistments from the Moros,
Pagans and others of the district. Almost one
half of the original force were Moros while fully
three-fourths were enlisted within the District.
The island of Mindanao and the islands of the
Sulu groups differed from the northern islands
in that disorders taking place thereon were not
temporary disorders incident to an insurrectin but
were, and for centuries had been, the normal or.
der of things; the lack of government was not due
to a temporary breakdown of an established government but due to the fact that no government
had ever existed.
For uncounted centuries the people, Mohammedan Moros and Pagan hillmen alike, had lived
under the primeval system of "let him take who


Colonel LUTHER R. STEVENS
Commanding, District of Southern Mindanao and
the Sixth Regiment of Infantry
has the power and let him keep who can," and
not only did they put up a strenuous and valiant
fight to maintain this order of things but, due to
their lack of contact with civilization, could actually conceive of no other mode of living. In
Sulu, the power of the Sultan of Sulu had built
up a despotic state under Mohammedan laws,
which were greatly at variance with our ideas of
government, but in Lanao and Cotabato and
among the Pagan tribes in the rest of the district,
the people were constantly engaged in internecine
strife with adjoining tribes or with other families
in their own tribe. Each one protected himself as
best he could, succumed to superior force when
that was his lot, and, with great gusto and enthusiasm, raided, pillaged and killed or enslaved
his neighbor whenever he got a chance.
Prior to the organization of the Mindanao and
Sulu Constabulary no semblace of government,
other than family and petty rival rule had ever
been establised among these people. Spain had
made and precariously maintained a few settlements, penal and military along the coast, had
compelled Sulu to make a vague acknowledgement


August, 1935


KHAKI And RED


Page 49


of her sovereignty and had made a few not always successful expeditions into the interior.
However the Spanish government had made contact with only a very small percentage of the population and her influence was negligible outside
of the range of the guns mounted upon her few
forts. The United States Army had made headway, but up to this time it had been a military
force in a hostile country and had not been able
to exert much influence except by words and bullet.
The problem confronting the government in
1903, was to stop this merry carnival of human
sacrifice, murder slavery, kidnapping, slave
raiding, cattle stealing and other sanguinary outdoor sports of similar nature, and to convert the
assorted reprobages who engaged therein with so
much zest into peaceful, useful, and contented
citizens of a state capable of self-government. As
the Constabulary was the principal punitive arm
of the civil government, it became the most useful and most used force in attaining this end.
The Moro province, at that time, was under a
special form of Government in which the Department Commander of the United States Army
was the Provincial Governor, and the District
Governers were appointed from Army and Constabulary Officers. The Constabulary in the province was by law, placed under the command of
the governor.
The newly organized Mindanao Constabulary
immediately began to put forth every effort to
make itself so useful to the governor as to become
his chief reliance in government activities, law
enforcement and police work. A long line of Governors of that province followed the policy of
using the Constabulary for all work that it was
strong enough to do and regarding the Army
troops of their commands as reserves to be used
only when the Constabulary lacked sufficient
strength tot meet the manifold demands made upon
it.
In furtherance of these policies, as soon as


Major HERBERT C. PAGE
Commanding "A” Battalion and Assistant
to District Commander


the Mindanao and Sulu Constabulary was organized, the Army withdrew entirely from Davao;
from Zamboanga, except the town of Zamboanga;
and frome all of Sulu south of the island of Jolo,
leaving the police of these areas and of Surigao
and Misamis entirely in the hands of the Constabulary. In Cotabato and Lanao, Army and Constabulary troops worked side by side, with the
Constabulary taking over more and more of the
work, as its strength was increased until federal
troops were withdrawn entirely in 1918.
The island of Jolo remained in the hands of
the Army until 1911, except that Constabulary


Electrify And Bedutify Your Home
Learn the Advantages of Electricity
BW
Inspection Cordially Invited
Phone 33 for your Electrical NeedsREASONABLE RATES
PANAY ELECTRIC COMPANY, INC.
Phone 33
J. M. Basa, Iloilo


Page 50


KHAKL ANd RED


August, 1935


troops participated in the Bud Dajo fight in 1906.
From 1911 to 1918 the Army and Constabulary
were in joint control and the Army finally withdrew in 1918. The Army troops in the district
have been reduced until only two companies of
Philippine Scouts and no American troops are on
duty therein and they have not been called upon
for police duty tor many years.
As the Army was withdrawn the Constabulary
has been increased until the actual strength of
the District of Mindanao and Sulu is 128 officers
and 2.411 men, divided into 52 companies occupying 48 stations and 7 sub-stations. More than
forty percent of the Philippine Constabulary is
serving under the District Commander of Mindanao and Sulu.
The Army and Constabulary in Mindanao,
working in closest harmony, tackled their problem without delay and the Mindanao Constabulary got its baptism of fire early. Misamis, now
one of the most peaceful of provinces, was affected with a plague of brigandage and minor rebellions, the inception of which dated back long before it became a part of the Fifth District. No
spectacular fighting took place but the Misamis
Constabulary, reinforced by a few small detachments from other provinces, saw much hard service and had several sharp little skirmishes before
the province was brought under control and peace


Safety First!
—the mere act of leaving valuables unguarded in your home is an open invitation to burglars.
Why run this risk—when the rental of a safe deposit box in our vault is
only a few centavos a day?
Che Bank
nf the Philipprne Islands
MANILA
Iloilo
Zamboanga
Cebu
PEDRO J. CAMPOS
President


Major DIONISIO GUTIERREZ
Commanding “C” Battalion


finally established. In Surigao the Adriano Concepcion Campaign occupied the Constabulary until April of 1904. The Davao and Surigao troops
immediately got busy cleaning up the upper reaches of the Agusan river and the Umayan river
country. In Cotabato our men cooperated with
the Army in the Datu Ali campaign and in Lanao, Sulu and on Basilan island in Zamboanga,
hard service and much fighting soon became the
order of the day.
But the responsible officials including our
own officers realized that sharp fighting, absolutely necessary as a preliminary step in many
cases, was, after all, not only a preliminary step
and that real progress could be made only by
hard, patient and long continued work along educational lines. It was necessary to meet the wild
man on his ground, gain his confidence, and demonstrate to him the advantage of the government over his old wild ways. To his end all government officials, provincial and Constabulary
alike became missicnaries of civilization and exerted every possible effort to get in touch with
the people by paaceful means. Many were so
reached, often at considerable risk to the officer
involved, and listened, with various degrees of
enthusiasm or lack thereof, to explanations of the
new order. A few, at first then later many accepted the new doctrine, abandoned their more barbarous customs, and settled down.
Many of the nomadic tribes were settled into
newly formed towns and became reasonably industrious farmers. Many of the wild chiefs were
taken into the government service and became, in
their turn, apostles of the new order of things
among their less advanced brethren. In this work
the Constabulary and civilian officials cooperated
so closely and their work was so mutually interdependent that no marked distinction can be made
between the work of the provincial authorities and
the Constabulary. To make this relation even closer, many Censtabulary officers were appointed to


August, 1935


Page 51


KHAKI and
positiozs in the provincial governments in addition
to their Constabulary duties. Every province in
Mindanao except Surigao, Zamboanga and the Misamis provinces has, at some time, had a Constabulary officer for governor, and Cotabato still has,
while large numbers of officers have held assignments as District or Provincial Secretaries, Deputy
Governors, Justices of the Peace, District Health
Officers Municipal President, Chiefs of Police, Jail
Wardens and like positions.
Not all of these peoples could be reached by
peaceful means. As was to be expected, a large
majority objected strenuously to the abolishment
of their age old license and refused to desist therefrom until force was used. Not all who tried the
new order remained loyal thereto and some, at
least, finding the habits of generations stronger
than their newly acquired loyalty to the government, reverted to their customs of the past. In
these cases a Khaki and Red patrol got busy and
to the hum of bullets and the crack of rifles, taught
the recalcitrants the error of their ways. Thus
was impressed upon the unruly that any of the
medley of assorted crimes were not merely pleasant outdoor sports but were serious affairs which
an established government was willing and able to
stop and to punish. This part of the work necessitated much hard and dangerous service and un

For 10 o clock Coffee
or
AFTERNOON MERIENDA
everyone gathers at
IOMD
DIXIE KITCHEN
to talk, to discuss, to eat.
“the finest food in iown"
IN THE EVENING
why not visit
TOMS
ORIENTAL GRILL
Entertainment Nightly
Smooth Music — A Smooth Floor
YOU ARE WELCOME


RED


Captain ELIAS DIOQUINO
Commauding “B” Battalion


counted thousands of miles of patrolling was required.
Since its organization in 1993 the Constabulary
of Mindanao and Sulu has quelled more than 26 disturbances of sufficient seriousness to be classified
as “campaigns” and to have the Mindanao and
Sulu Medal awarded therefor. Hundreds of minor
skirmishes, small enough to be important only to
the men involved, have also taken place and helped
make the work successful. The cost in lives of officers and men has been heavy.
A by product of this Constabulary activity that
should not be overlooked is the part played by individuals after they left the Constabulary service.
The young men of the Moro and Pagan tribes who
lived in contact with the government during their
one or more enlis ments acquired a respect for and
understanding of the government that made them
peculiarly sympathetic to the new order. In their
daily life they had lived, worked, and shared everv
hardship and danger with men of strange tribes
and young Christians from the north and lost much
of their suspicion of and hostility to strangers.


For PEARL BUTTONS
See us at No. 460 Dasmarinas
MANILA BUTTON FACTORY, INC.


Page 52


KHAKI And RED


August, 1935


Temporary details around the bigger towns of the
listrict and even into the provinces of the Visayas
and Luzon broadened their horizons and gave them
increased standards of living.
All these new ideas they carried back to their
tribes upon discharge and helped to disseminate
among their people. Also the young men from the
north, through association in the service, acquired
a knowledge of and sympathy for the Moro and
Pagan which made them very valuable to the government after discharge. Many positions in all
grades of government service in Mindanao from
Provincial Governor to policemen are filled by former Constabulary men.
To direct and control the Mindanao Constabulary has always been a task of the first magnitude.
The forces engaged have been dispered over large
areas, with transportation and communication facilities almost non-existent. To command under
such conditions has required men of vision, energy
and tact. The district has been particularly fortunate in having had commanders of this type and
in the list of men who have commanded it are
many who gone on to greater tasks and some who
have been promoted to positions of world wide importance and have gained enduring fame. A full


list of these commanders includes:
Colonel J. G. Harbord, USA., July 1903 to October 1905; Colonel W. S. Scott, USA., October 23,
1905 to December 1906; Captain Herman Hall,
USA., December 1906 to June 1, 1907; Major Peter Borseth, PC., June 2; 1907 to August 19, 1907;
Colonel W. C. Taylor, PC., August 20, 1907 to
December 23, 1907; Lieutenant Colonel E. W. C.
Griffith, PC., December 24, 1907 to November 10,
1909; Colonel Mark L. Hersey, USA., November
11, 1909 to April 10, 1912; Captain J. W. Craig,
USA., April 11, 1912 to May 6, 1912; Colonel W.
C. Rivers, USA., May 7, 1912 to November 26,
1912; Colonel Mark Hersey, USA., November 27;
1912 to August 12, 1914; Captain James C. Rhea,
USA., August 13, 1914 to October 20, 1914; Colonef
Peter E. Treub, USA., October 21, 1914 to March
14, 1917; Colonel J. W. Craig, USA., March 15,
1917 to May 19, 1917; Colonel Ole Waloe, PC., May
10, 1917 to March 13, 1924; Lieutenant ColonelLuther R. Stevens, PC., March 13, 1924 to July
12, 1927; Lieutenant Colonel C. E. Livingston, PC.,
July 13, 1927 to January 1, 1927; Lieutenant Colonel Luther R. Stevens, PC., January 2, 1929 to
January 2, 1935.
(Continued on page siaty-seven)


Wherever you go at night carry your Eveready Flashlight. With it, you have light instantly—at the press of a
button. Eveready Flashlights are most dependable—sturdily built and handsomely finished. They last for
years. Look for the name “Eveready” stamped on
the case. Your dealer has several styles to choose
from, both focusing and non-focusing types.


FLASHLIGHTS & BATTERIES
AT ALL DEALERS


Avoid Dangers That Dark
ness May Hide


Page 53


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


General
Kiibourne
Awarded
. C.
Campaign
Medal


When Brigadier-General Charles E. Kilbourne, U.S.A., was decorated
with the Mindanao and Sulu Campaign Medal. Brigadier-General Basilio Valdes, Chief of Constabulary is shown as he is making the presentation to Brigadier-General Kilbourne.


The Mindanao-Sulu Campaign Medal was awarded
to Brigadier-General Charles E. Kilbourne, present
commander of Ceast Defenses of Manila and Subic
Bays, on July 13, for service rendered in disposing of
a band of Moro pirates in 1910 while he was a captain
in the Constabulary. Because of rain the ceremonies
which were held in connection with the presentation of
the deccration was held in the barracks at Manila Garrison. All officers at Headquarters were in attendance
and a review was held in honor of General Kilbourne.
Brigadier General Basilio Valdes, Chief of Constabulary, personally made the presentation to General
Kilbourne. In making the presentation, General Valdes said:
“LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:—
“We have here with us today a distinguished soldier, a man whose record in the United States Army
and in the pther organizations with which he has been
connected, is full of brilliant deeds. One June 11, 1909,
Brigadier-General Charles E. Kilbourne, then Captain,
in an order from the War Department, was detailed
as Inspector for the Philippine Constabulary and continued in that position until he sailed for San Francisco on April 14, 1911.
“His work as Inspecter of the Constabulary brought
him in contact with various units in the provinces.
His duties included, not only the inspection of the force
with regard to drill, discipline and efficiency, but also
the study of the peace conditions in the various localities which he visited. General Kilbourne was later
made Superintendent of the Constabulary Schoal at Baguio.
“The then Chief of Constabulary necded a man,
not only industrious, but of tact and good judgment


to supervise the instruction of the new Constabulary
officers and he picked General Kilbourne. The young
officers who graduated under his supervisien went forth
fully equipped for. their difficult duties in spite of
the limited time allotted for their instructien. His work
as Superintendent was perforformed in such a highly
efficient and satisfactory manner that the loss of his
services was keenly felt.
“General Kilbourne’s service in disposing of a
band pf Moro pirates which attacked and lcoted a village in Celebes, Dutch East Indies, in March 1910, are
highly commendable. He happened to be at Bongao at
that time inspecting the Constabulary when a Dutch
warship arrived with a report of the raid and asked
assistance in capturing the offenders. General Kilbourne, then. Captain Kilbourne, immediately organized
a force of Constabulary and volunteers, took them go
the islands where the pirates had been located and by
his wise disposition of his force and his energy in pro¬
secuting the cperations, aided greatly in the capture or
death of the entire band within a few days.
“For such exceptional services, I have the honor
and the pleasure of pinning in your breast the MINDANAO-SULU CAMPAIGN MEDAL.”


CHOCOLATE CUPS
Biggest value for
I centavo
on the market
Made bp:
ROCKWOOD & CO.
V S.A.


Page 54


KHAKIaN RED


August; 1935


a PMg T  


jor Zablan Given Impressive Military Funeral


BHOL


Impressive ceremonies were held on July 27,
when Major Porfirio Zablan was laid to final rest
at the Constabulary plot, Cementerio del Norte.
Major Zablan was killed in an airplane accident
while at Kelly Field, Texas.
The body arrived from the United States on
Vuly 25 on the SS President Wilson. It was received at the pier by officers of the Constabulary.
Besides Constabulary officers at Headquarters
and those stationed near Manila, the funeral was
attended by United States Army officers, including
Major General Frank Parker, Commanding General of the Philippine Department.
—The services were held at the Funeraria Nacional. From the funeral parlor the body was escorted to Cementerio del Norte where a last volley was
fired and “Taps” was sounded as the remains were
put to rest.


An Irish scientist, Dr. James Drumm, has perfected an electric storage battery that will run a
train at 35 miles an hour. The battery can be rapidly charged by a generator on the train.


a?
BONDS
smh
FIREARM,
el
AMMUNITION,

JUDICIAL,
Mz:
CONTRACTS,
Rent, Compensation, Accident,
CUSTOMS,
Automobile,
INTERNAL REVENUE,
ad aN
FidELITY,
"niz
a
VARIOUS
Plate Glass and Flood.
13
MLg
Call or write for Particulars.
FIDELITY AND SURETY COMPANY OF
a Rua maaTHE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS


INSURANCE
Fire, Marine, Earthquake,
Typhoon,


GEO. C. DANKWERTH
President
P. M. POBLETE
 Secretury-Treasurer


si
 E. B. FORD
 Vice-President..
SIMEON REYES
Asst. Secretary-Treasurer


".


Monte de Piedad Bldg.
Tel 2-12-55
Plaza Goiti



Manila, P. I.





August, 1935


KHAKI And RED


Page 55


Promotion Systems In Vogue In
 
Various Armies
MI


In view of recent attempts to improve and
standardize the method of promotions in the Philippine Constabulary, Khaki and Red herewith publishes the systems of promotions in vogue in the
armies of various countries, with the end in view
of aiding in effecting the proposed changed. These
excerpts are from a General Staff Document No.
17 of the United States Army, published for the
information of the Regular Army and the Organized Militia of the United States.
The excerpts follow:
FRANCE
Promotion of Officers
Second lieutenants are promoted to first lieutenants after two years. Lieutenants are promoted
to captains by arm as vacancies occur, two-thirds
by seniority, one-third by selection.
 Captains are promoted majors as vacancies occur, one-half by seniority, one-half by selection. All
promotions above majors are made by selection.
GERMANY
Promotion of Officers
No law regulates promotion nor limits age.
The Emperor promotes officers conforming to certain traditions. Practically, officers deemed fit for
a higher grade are promoted by seniority. Those
that are passed over are warned to apply for retirement.
Promotions take place as follows: To first
lieutenant from the arm; captain, by corps in the
infantry, cavalry and artillery, by arm in the chasseurs, pioneers and train; to major, from the arm,
except in the infantry, where it is by regiment.
AUSTRIA-HUNGARY
Promotion of Officers
Principally by seniority, exceptionally by selection. The number of promotions by selection must
not exceed one-fifth of the vacancies. Officers can
not be proposed for selection when they are in the
last quarter of the seniority list. Promotion from
the grade of colonel is exclusively by seniority, but
officers thus promoted must have been found efficient.
ENGLAND
Promotion of Officers
By seniority in the corps up to and including


the grade of major; by selection above the grade
of major.
ITALY
Promotion of Officers
By selection and seniority. Second lieutenants
are promoted after three years of service to first
lieutenantcies. From first lieutenant to captain,
one-fourth by selection, three-fourths by seniority,
all subject to examination. Lieutenants are promoted to captaincies, even if there are no vacancies in
that grade, after 15 years’ service as officers, Promotion to the grades of major and lieutenant colonel by seniority exclusively. From the grade of
colonel exclusively by selection.
JAPAN
Promotion of Officers
Partly by selection, partly by seniority, with
no fixed proportion between the two methods.


Compliments
OF
Franktin BakerCo.
OF THE PHILIPPINES


Central Office
Pureza, Santa Mesa


We Purchase Coconuts
San, Pablo Laguna


FACTORY
Pureza Street, Santa Mesa,
Manila


Page 56


KHAKI And RED


August, 1935


Has The Insular Police Fulfilled The Purposes
For Which It Was Organized?
(Continued from page seventeen)
KID SA PILIPINAS", and the Proletariat Labor
Congress, known as the "KALIPUNAN ANAK
PAWIS SA PILIPINAS” The Executive Committee of the "KALIPUNANG PAMBANSA NG MGA
MAGBUBUKID SA PILIPINAS” is composed of
nine members who are in charge of the propaganda
work among tenants in the different provinces.
They have organized communist sections called
balangays in the different barrios of the provinces of Central Luzon. Each section is campaigning intensively to gain additional followers.
Communist leaflets and newspapers, such as the
Sinag, Titis, Kislap, Liuanag and Ang Bayang Api;
and other Red literature are mimeographed or
printed in Manila, and distributed among tenants
for the purpose of feeding their minds on Soviet
ideas and principles. In their propaganda, to foster class hatred, they inject into the mind of the
masses Red Serum which impresses upon them the
belief that their poverty and misery are traceable
to the greed of rich landowners, capitalists, and injustices of the government. In short, they tell the
rank and filthat the wealth of the landlords is
the fruit of the sweat of their labor of which they
are robbed without mercy.


They spread communism in the different factories, establishments and industrial firms in the
Islands for the purpose of converting laborers to
soviet principles. Once in every so ofiten a census
is taken or a complete check-up of followers is
made to ascertain their membership. To test their
strength and influence among the masses, walkou's and strikes are ordered in factories and in
haciendas as a sort of rehearsal to ascertain the
temper of the laboring element that the leaders
may decide, whether they are prepared for a social
or political upheaval.
The flapping wings of Sovietism are now being exiended to the very camps of the enlisted
personnel of the Philippine armed forces. Leaflets,
especially prepared for the purpose, are introduced
into the ranks of these forces in an attempt to
break their morale, weaken their discipline, convert them into outright Reds, and thus facilitate
the overthrow of the government.
The advent of the Sakdalistas, Palihan ng Bayan, Tangulan and other radical organizations are,
by and large, the danger signs of the times
It is part of the duty of the Insular Police to
assist the constituted authorities in undersaking
an intensive educational campaign for the enlightenment of these masses, to supervise and urge community assembles in the different towns and bar

Proteot Your
Properties With
OO
A
Paints of Superior Quality
MADE OF OIL
Prepared or Paste
These points are:

I. MORE DURABLE
2. MORE ELASTIC
3. MORE ECONOMICAL
A Variety of Shades to Choose From
YCO is a Filipino Product—Patronize it
Manufactured by
ELIZALDE &
co.
Formerly
43
YNCHAUSTI & CO.
Managers
Iloilo
J. M. Basa


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 57


rios to further enlighten the ignorant taos of the
march of events
A movement similar in character to that of the
Facists in Italy and the Nazis in Germany, without the Hitler dictatorial form, should be planned
and put into execution. It must be remembered
that the reawakening and the reconstruction of
Italy and Germany under the banner of Facists
and Nazis, respectively, have so far saved the
lands of Garibaldi and Bismarck from being swept
into the on rushing tide of communism. No effort
should be spared to encourage the resurgence of
the true Filipino spirit and the fortification of the
national soul. Let the good element throughout
the nation be told forceably and in no mistakeable
words that only by working together and giving
the best that is in them can the security of the
nation and the tranquility of the home be maintained.
When the average intelligent Filipino with his
natural love of home peace and quiet, realizes
that his very future and that of his children depends upon the conservation and not upon the destruction of the best qualities of the present social
system, he will give the radical agitators a cold
reception. It is then and not until then will Bolshivism, the terror of the Romanoffs, disappear
from these shores.
The foregoing is part of the duty cut out for
the Insular Police force to perform and when it
takes its place as the guardian of the peace in the
“New Deal” for the Philippines. To profunctory
enforce the law, maintain peace and preserve order, only, is not sufficient—it is necessary for the
law enforcing machinery to inform the unlawful
abiding element of society, the evil doers and racketeers why it is necessary that laws must be enforced, peace must be maintained and order must
be preserved at any cost.
The Chief of Constabulary in his anmual report
for the year ended December 31, 1934, made the
following recommendation to curb and eradicate
communistic evils:
'xx public welfare demands that proper
steps be taken to curb and eradicate communis.
tic evils. To this end, it is recommended that
steps be taken by the proper authorities for the
creation of a committee in the House of Representatives to investigate the activities of communism in he Philippines that proper laws for
reforms may be enacted. These reforms are
absolutely necessary owing to the fact that the
executive departments of our government do not
have ample authority to handle the revolutionary
activities of communism.


The one-million peso Quirino Colonization Act
when carried into effect will no doubt relieve the
unemployment situation in Manila and in the larger neighboring towns. The enactment fof the
proposed measures recommended by the Governor-General tending to uplift the downtrodden taos
will likewise help ameliorate the grievance of the
masses. Upon the inception of the Commonwealth
government it is also hoped that the provision of
the Constitution limiting and regulating big land
holdings will be put into full effect The large
haciendas have long been the source of much
agrarian trouble and their speedy dissolution and
sale in small parcels to tenants will most certainly
reduce discontent among the masses. In the Ilocos
provinces where land holdings are small and pretty
well equally divided, trouble between land owners
and tenants are practically unknown.


Condors do not nest every year, and lay only one
egg when they do.


For PEARL BUTTONS
See us at No. 460 Dasmarinas
MANILA BUTTON FACTORY, INC.


Of
ESS
SERVIOS
M
In the home, on the street, at the
 office—in fact anywhere you may feel
the necessity of striking a match, youmay be sure that our Philippine made
Matches will give you the service you
have a right to expect.
“SUNSET'
“GUITAR'
Try.
"LIWAYWAY"
RIZAL'


WE MAKE 'EM TO SATISFY


Philippine Mateh Company, Lid.
625 P. Paterno Manila Tel. 2-85-02


Page 58


KHAKI and RED


August, 1935


DO Lrcaytng 0 THe PIHISn
By F. GUERRERO GARMA
Secretary, P. C. Women's Club


“That will do madam, we are using it", said
a young Captain to the wife of a General while
they were in former’s home.
“But that is not the proper thing to use for the
purpose", retorted the First Lady of the Constabulary.
“That’s all we have at present and we are using
it,” repeated the officer. But the lady was persistent and replied, "I am going to send the orderly to buy one it costs only seventy centavos.”
This incident indicates frankness on the part
of the officer but at the same time it demonstrated
a tendency to resort to old “routine" methods The
lady, on the othter hand may be exacting. She may
be right or she may be wrong, in my opinion she
was right.
It is worth while to be exacting if you use
things that are out of time and place for your education, character and reputation may be at stake
due to carelessness. Every one, young and old,
should be taught that there is a great reward, a
feeling of satisfaction and contentment associated
with everything that is completely finished Exactness is a trait that is uplifting. Anybod; whose
eyes are focused on his personal good racher than
on his act whether this refers to money, office or
fame, does not stand high among his fellow men.
That a person who knowingly does a poor job when
receiving pay to do it with is a thief like an abstracting money from somebody else’s pocket bool
Work is measured by the amount of accomplishment. Work that is not finished is not work
at all; it is merely on abortion. Let us not be like
children, who are enthusiasts at the start but when
difficulties arise their enthusiasm wavers and they
lose interest and leave everything unfinished.
Being young they seldom do as great men do:
push on, forge on and march onward to some define
end. Obey the great saying of Emerson, “The sun
will shine after every storm; there is a solution for
every problem and the soul’s highest duty is to be
of good cheer.”
It takes the nerve of a Napoleon to go against
the current. You leaders beware that what you do
is not based on selfishness, on mere self-aggran

dizment. Do not attempt to conquer the world and
cry if there is no more worlds to conquer.
One great defect of the age is the lack of thoroughness, How many are willing to spend a lift time
to perfect one’s career, We must be able to distinguished the important from the unimportant and
our time must not be swallowed up in indefinite
painstaking effort on unimpotant matters.
The use of common sense is always the bestguide. There is a great difference between doing
important things well and that unfortunate habit
of "perpetual fussiness" about the manner of doing every little unimportant thing.
Whatever we try to do in life, we must try
with all our hearts to do it well. Shall we build
slow and be sure? That is real life and not a
mushroom existence.


LO Curorlal
BOOKS AND STATIONERY
Printing, lining and book-binding; Musical instruments for
band and orchestra; Gentlemen’s shoes; Sporting Goods.
LARGE STOCK OF ARMS AND
AMMUNITION OF ALL
KINDS.
Prices always economical.


J. M. Basa 5, Iloilo
P. O. Box 16


Telephone 144


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 59


1934


Banner


Year For Insuler Life,
manager Mcwlicking Reports


With an increase of nearly P2,0000,000.00 in
the amount of insurance in force over that of the
previous year, making a total insurance in force of
P34,382,708 for 1934; the Insular Life Assurance
Company now celebrating its Silver Jubilee in commemoration of its twenty-fifth year of service, has
achieved remarkable and unprecedented progress
in all its departments as shown not only by its
great increase in new business, assets and reserves
but also by its introduction of new, modern and
progressive perfect protection policies according to
the report of the general manager of the company.
The report was submitted at the annual meeting
of the stockholders held on April 23, 1935 at the
offices of the company, Insular Life building.
The manager reported to the stockholders that
for the year 1934, the Insular Life wrote 3,803
policies as compared to 3,255 for 1933; that the
amount of new life insurance written for 1934 was
P8,067,565.00, as compared to P6 649,015.00 in
1933, representing a total increase of P1,318,550.00
of new business written.
With this increase of new business written, the
total amount of life insurance in force with the
Insular Life is P34,382,708.00, on December 31,
1934, representing an increase of P1,995,931.00
over the total of P32,386,377.00 of life insurance in
force on December 31, 1933.
As a further indication of the stability and
progress of the company, the manager also report

Mr. JOSE MCMICKING
General Manager Insular Life Assurance Co., Ltd.
ed an increase of P342,844.00 in the assets of the
company making a total of P9,941,358.00 of assets
for 1934. The amount of legal reserves was also
increased to P591,389.00, making a total of P5,678,
817.00, while the reserves for dividends have been
increased to P1,086,405.00 thus assuring great stability for the company and security for the policyholders, considering that such reserves cannot be
used by the company except that for which it has
been created and maintained, in accordance with
insurance laws and the by-laws of the company.
The stockholders present at the annual meet

for children and adulis


Protect pourself against
dangerous infections


For Sale At All Drug Stores and Also At
The Constabulary Post Exchange.


The
GERMICIDAL SOAP


FARMACIA CENTRAL, INC.
MANILA
248 Rosario
Tel. 4-96-94


Page 60


KHAKI AN RED


August, 1935


ing showed great interest in the new Silver Jubilee
Perfect Protection Policies, introduced in 1934 in
commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the company. These policies have been found to be
very popular and attractive because they combine
all the advantages, and privileges of the regular
blue seal policies of the company, besides giving
the advantages of a regular family income and a
retirement pension for the insured.
Giving an idea of the services rendered by the
company to the Filipino people, the manager reported that for the year 1934 alone the Insular
Life distributed throughout different parts of the
Islands a total of P1,154,689.12 as follows:


Matured Policies ................ P269,430.79
Dividends for Policy Holders .... 198,317.44
Cash Surrender Values .......... 436,144.95
6,705.90
Disability Payments ..
Death Claim Payments .......... 245,090.00


As evidence of the liberal policy followed by
the company, towards its policy-holders, the rate
of interest charged to policy loans has been voluntarily reduced from 8 per cent to 6 per cent despite
the fact that the policies as already issued did not
call for such reduction.
Great progress in the amount of business written by the Hawaii agency of the Insular Life during its first year of existence was also reported by
the manager. He stated that for the year 1934, the
Hawaii agency secured a total amount of 615 policies amounting to P1,106,000.00.
The following officials and directors were elected or appointed for this year: President, Vicente
Encarnacion; Vice-President, Vicente Arias; Manager, Jose MeMicking; Treasurer, Alfonso Zobel;
Assistant Manager and Secretary, Geronimo Abella; Assistant to the Manager, Antonio F. Gonzalez; Actuary, Dr. Emeterio Roa; Medical Director,
Dr. Ignacio R. Ortigas; Assistant Medical Director,
Dr. Enrique Lopez; Accountant, Esteban Munarriz.


The following continue to be the officials of
the general policy of the Insular Life, C. S. Salmon,
general agent; E. W. Schedler, assistant general
agent; Isaac Barza, national supervisor; Dominador
B. Ambrosio, second assistant general agent; and
Earl Carroll, manager, Hawaii agency.
An idea of the tremendous growth and progress
of the Insular Life during its first twenty-four
years of existence may be gathered from the following table:


Insurance


Capital


in


and


Force


Assets


Surplus


1911


₱ 3,018,000


₱ 123,573


₱ 29,167


1915


5,322,096


693,785


211,017


1920


10,602,483


2,839,718


659,331


1925


16,909,622


4,861,026


1,082 419


1930


28,694,758


8,187,281


2,233,570


1934


34,382,708


9,941,358


2,707,990


The hamadryad, a large snake of


the cobra fa

mily, eats nothing but other snakes.


CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Authorized Capital ... P10,000,000.00
Paid-up Capital, Surplus and
Undivided Profits, over.... ₱ 7,900,000.00
We are prepared to transact every phase of
modern, foreign and domestic banking busihess.
Current Accounts opened in Pesos and Savings and Time Deposits may be opened in Pesos as well as in foreign currencies at favorable rates of interest.
Further information furnished on application.
Branches:
Correspondents in all the
Shanghai & Amoy, China. 	Principal Cities of the World.


o
bIdiliid cedlll Lallidil
DRY CLEANING AND DYEING


65 1-653 Magdalena, Trozo


Telephone 4-96-89


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 61


Organization Of The
Thirty-Seventh Company


It was about the year 1903 when the Second Mountain, now 37th Company, was organized and established
in Lubuagan for the sub-province of Kalinga. The first
officer was Lieutenant Harry Miller, U. S. A. and the
enlisted men were recruited in Bontec from lowlanders
and natives.
The Constabulary Reservation was where it is now,
it occupies a little more than a hectare in the heart
of the community. The first buildings were the barracks built like a stable and ene officer’s quarters built
in the type of a native house—all made of poor materials and constructed with crdue workmanship. The
residence of the Senior Inspector, now Provincial Commander, was at Bontoc because Lubuagan was then a
part of Bontoc.
With the division of the Meuntain Province into
sub-provinces, Lubuagan became the capital of the subprovince of Kalinga and the company ceased to be under the contrel of the Senior Inspecter of Bontoc. Since
then this company has been a separate and complete
unit.
In the old days, the company had great difficulty
in bringing in its necessary supplies and equipments
for lack of road except a horse trial which was hardly
passable. They had to be transported at a distance of
70 kilometers from Bontoc to Lubuagan by means of
native cargadores and pack-horses, which took about
five days to travel. The cargadores had got to be guarded from head-hunters; pack-horses and properties to
be watched over from being stolen; and the hardest of
all was to build camping shelters at every stopping
place along the way. The old day having gone by, the
company no wenjoys geed transportation facilities with
almost a first class automobile line connecting Lubuagan with the outside world.
The company has an actual strength of 39 men,
enesisting of 34 husky native Kalingas and 5 Ilocanos,
officered by Second Lieutenant G. Balbeena as Company Commander, and Ist Lieutenant R. S. Nogtalon as
acting Provincial Commander. The first Sergeant of
the company is a Kalinga. Almost all the enlisted men
speak English, fcur of whom having secondary education and the rest, elementary.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND ACTIVITIES.
Since the birth of the Company up to the present
time, it has always upheld and maintained its honor
tnd prestige as an effective government agency for
maintaining peace and order. In the old days when


government control was unknown at all among the different warring tribes, the company was charged with
the responsability of establishing civil government by
crganizing rancherias and settlements and of bringing
hostile tribes together through “canaos” or fiestas so as
to build up friendly relations among themselves. That
the Constabulary in the Mcuntain Province paved the
way for the establishment of an effective civil control
on the warlike native tribes is an achievement worthy
to be remembered and which cur Philippine Government can not ignore.
STATION IMPROVEMENTS
Improvements in station during recent years are
conspicuous.
The barracks has been extended by nine meters.
Under this extension are the new spacious office of the
Provincial Commander, the Post Exchange and the Station Bodega. The dining hallwhich was a separate


COMPLIMENTS
of
ACME FILMS, INC.
2519 Azcarraga—P. O. Box 1034, Manila


DISTRIBUTORS of
RKO—RADIO IND
GAUMONT PICTURES


SOLE AGENTS for
Simplex Projectors
and Spare Parts
Columbia Carbons
Peerless Arcs
Globe Tickets
and other
Theatre Supplies


RKO


Page 62


KHAKI ANd RED.


August, 1935


building before is now connected at one end of the barracks in parallel line with the opposite wing in whichthe office of the company commander is located. The
company kitchen has a newly constructed oven of Mayon Type. A company Post Exchange has been established. It relieves officers and men of commedities
with prohibitive prices in lecal stores.
Constabulary policy of “They shall not Pass” is
carried on. The barracks is now impregnable. It is
surrcunded by barbed-wire fence. No one could enter
the barracks and the guard-house witheut passing at
the point of sentinel’s bayonet. All officers’ quarters
are also defended by barbed-wires. The invincibility
of the Constabulary stations of Lubuagan will certainly discourage c-krums and communists in Kalinga.
No more columns of soldiers carrying water frem
an unsafe spring to the barracks! A water system was
installed by the Bureau of Public Works. The
station new enjoys and pure clean water for drinking.
ATHLETIC AND SOCIAL ACTIVITIES
The Constabulary station is located at the center
of the locality. The drill ground serves as a plaza and
athletic gnound at the same time for the two private
high schoels of Lubuagan. There is an indoor baseball
diamond and three courts, namely, volley-ball, basketball, and tennis with its famous kiosko where ice-cream
is served every afternoon during the dry season.
The 37th Company is the hest during the athletic
and secial seasons. It has an indoor-baseball squad,
a basket-ball squad, a volley-ball team andtennis play

er.s These athletic squads entertain all outside teams
that come to play. Besides athletics, the Company has
a band, composed of 12 enlisted men and is ready to
furnish music to all.


DIO
FOR YOUR
Auto-Cars
Windshields and
Doors
USE
SAFETY GLASS
SEE
Squires Bingham Co.
Sportsmen's Headquarters
15 Plaza Geiti
Phone 2-13-01


THE
UIPPINE CUARANTY CO, INC.


ESTABLISHED IN 1917


SURETY BONDS—we execute Bonds of various kinds specialy
FIREARMS BONDS.


FIRE INSURANCE


-in the Philippine Islands.


LOANS—Secured by first mortgage on improved properties in the City of
Manila.


INSULAR LIFE BLDG.
2nd Floor


P. O. Box 128
MANILA


Phone 2-41-11


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 63


Activities Of The
Fortieth Company


The Forty Company, Philippine Constabulary
is stationed at Mayoyo, Ifugao, a municipality
about 44 kilometers from Banaue, the capital.
The company patrols, the district covering 16,-
759 kilometers or an average. These patrols visit all the sitios and barrios in the district and
their contacts with the mass has considerably lessened the commission of crimes particularly cattle
rustling, offenses against person and Violation of
the hunting law.
Aside from purely Constabulary work this
command lent invaluable cooperation to the bureau
of animal industry by maintaining quarantine
posts near and along the jurisdictional lines between the provinces of Isabela and Ifugao. Animals such as carabaos; cows; horses; goats; pigs;
dogs and sheeps, when crossing the quarantined
for 5 days before they were allowed to pass
through. With this, was partly attributed the suppression of animals diseases in this district.
The Constabulary in this station perform duties similar to that of "missionary'. While out of
the station officers and enlisted men, aside from
their patrol work, invariably explain to the natives
the advantages of advance civilization such as the
building of well-ventilated houses, the utility of modern medicaments, the essentials of sanitation and
the impotance of education.
The soldiers likewise have a great deal to do
in the construction and keeping up of trails, as
they are often called upon the round up road-tax
laborers.
The Station Commander, has the confidence of
the people; to him they invariably go when they
have any trouble. In this way he is able to adjust
local misunderstanding and differences among
themselves thus preventing commission of crimes.
No communistic societies or agrarian agroupments of socialistic tendencies is known to exist in
this district.


Canada and New Zealand have more motor
vehicles per capita than any other country except
the United States.


NOTICE
Comgahla mal liniia
CEBU
Wish to announce the following changes
in schedules of arrivals and sailing of
their vessels at Cebu.
S.S. PANAY will now sail for Dumaguete, Misamis and Iligan, sailing from Cebu
every Saturday at 5:00 p.m. and will
sail for Manila every Tuesday, at 7:30
a.m.
S.S. BOHOL and S.S. MACTAN—One of these
vessels will leave Manila every Wednesday at 10:00 p.m. arriving Cebu Friday
6:00 a.m. and sails same day at 1:00 p.m.
for Maribojoc, Zamboanga, Davao, Talomo and Daliao. Returns to Cebu the
following Saturday morning and sails
same day at 8:00 p.m. for Manila arriving
Manila 6:00 a. m. Monday morning.
(weekly).
S
S.S. CEBU and S.S. I. FILIPINAS—One of
these vessels will leave Manila every
Monday at 6:00 p.m. Arriving Cebu Wednesday mnorning at 7:00 a.m. sails same
day at 5:00 p.m. for Dumaguete, Dipolog, Zamboanga, Cotabato and Jolo. Returns to Cebu the following Thursday
morning and sails same day for Manila
at 5:00 p.m. arriving Manila Saturday
morning 7:00 a m. (weekly).
S.S. LUZON—No change in schedule and will
leave as usual.
S.S. CORREGIDOR leaves Manila every Tuesday afternoon at 3:00 p.m, and arrives
Iloilo 8:00 a. m. Wednesday morning.
Leaves Iloilo for Cebu same day at 6:30
p.m. arriving Cebu Thursday morning
8:00 a.m. leaves Cebu for Iloilo Friday
at 6:30 p.m. arriving Iloilo same day
at 3:00 p.m. for Manila, arriving Sunday morning 8:00 a m. at Manila.
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Tel. 41
Agents for S.S. Panay, S.S. Bohol, S.S. Mactan,
S.S. Cebu and S.S. Islas Filipinas
PASTRANO UNCHUAN CO.—Tel. 48
Agents for S.S. LUZON
COMPANIA MARITIMA, CEBU—Tel. 572
Agents for S.S. CORREGIDOR


Page 64


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


rao bIaDle SI.
Automobiles
LIWY
Trucks
Taxicabs
City and Probincial
PHONES
2-35-23
2-35-21


Use
RIZALEECEMENI
“The Builders Choice
and you will never
make a mistakeHIGH QUALITY
ECONOMICAL
O
MADRIGAL & CO.
MANILA
Tel. 2-19-62
P. O. Box 254


History Of The
Ninety-First Company
The Company and Station of the 91st Co., in
Ganassi, Lanao, were first organized by Major M.
L. Stephen, P. C. then a third lieutenant. The first
contingent of said Company, numbering 25 men
under Lt. Stephen, arrived at Ganassi, on September 22; 1913; from Dansalan, Lanao, relieving a
detachment of Philippine Scouts.
The Company was quartered in an already di
lapidated house of cogon and bamboo and immediate repairs had to be made. Through the tireless
efforts, however, of Lieut. M. L. Stephen; new and
more decent quarters for officers and enlisted men
were soon constructed. Since then the Constabulary of Ganassi has been in charged of the Peace
and Order of the many Municipal Districts under
this station.
A new 1100-ampere fuse, designed to protect
delicate electrical equipment, contain platinum wire
30 times finer than human hair. It would take 13,300
strands of this wire, laid side by side, to fill a oneinch space.


We Carry In Stock
EVERYTHING
IA
19
YOU NEED
IN
Toilet Sundries,
Perfumes, Lotions,
Patent Medicines,
Drugs and Chemicals
Special Prices to
Post Exchanges
YUCUANSER DRUG CO, Inc.
436 Dasmarinas
Manila, P. I.


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


Page 65


History Of The
Ninety-Eighth Company
The present Ninety-Eighth Company was origi
nally the l0th Company, 3rd General Service Battalion stationed at Ludlow Barracks, Parang, Cotabato On March 16, 1919 the company and station at Lebak, Cotabato was established by the
transfer of the 10th Company, 3rd General Service
Battalion from Parang, Cotabato to Lebak, Cotabato. Captain Patricio Guerrero (then 1st Lt.)
brought the company and established this station.
On January 1, 1920 the designations of the 10th
Co., 3rd Gen. Service Battalion was changed to 6th
Mindanao Co. by Gen. Order No. 5 dated February 28, 1920. Three years later (January 1, 1923)
this designation was changed to its present name,
98th Company by virtue of General Order No. 2
dated February 6, 1923.
The Officers who have been assigned to this
company and station since its establishment are:
Capt. Patricio Guerrero (then 1st Lt.), Ist Lt. P.
Orlino (resigned), 1st Lieut. J. N. Esquejo, Capt.
T. N. Naidas (then 1st Lieutenant), 1st B. S. Sanchez (now deceased), 1st Lieut. Arturo A. Reyes,
2nd Lieuts. Felix Villasenor, L. Balolong, A. M.
Bautista (resigned); Leon Tayag and Isabelo Carlos.
The 98th Company counts with several ablebodied men not only good in the line of its activity
as Constabulary soldiers but also in athletics. Any
team who desires to measure strength in athletics
with the 98th Company will be welcomed provided
order that proper accommodatoin can be arranged
order that proper accomodation can be arranged
here.


Lewis Carroll was the pen name of Charles Lutwidge Dogson, who wrote "Alice in Wonderland”.


BARTON'S
DYAN
er
NE
uaton
DOUBLS SERVICE SHOE POLSI
Wonder Shoe Polish
RESTORES COLOR
 PRESERVES LEATTER
CONCEALS SCUFFS
Makes Old Shoes Look New


Per bottle
₱0.80
Colors:
Cordovan brown
blacle
white kid
light tan
nut brown
oxblood


Per dozen
P6.80


HAMILTON-BRONN
Shoe Store and Haberdashery
109—111 Escolta, Manila
Sole Agents


Per gross
P60.00
Coors:
Cordovan Brown
black
white kid
light tan
nut brown
oxblood


THE MOST FAVORABLY
KNOWN SHOE PASTE


Fuenaie & Streif, Ine.


SOLE IMPORTERS


-i0a Iiin company,
Incorporated


94-96 Morga Street
Cebu, Cebu, P. I.


PHONES:
Shipyard Dept. 14-J
Main Office 508
Hdw. Dept. 216
Cebu. Mach. Shop 165


IMPORTERS, WHOLESALERS AND RETAILERS
MARINE HARDWARE BUILDING
MATERIALS PLUMBING SUPPLIES


OWNERS OF:
SHIPYARD WITH FOUR MARINE
SLIPWAYS
TOTAL CAPACITY 3000 TONS
SHIPBUILDERS AND REPAIRERS


AGENTS OF:
"KERMATH" ENGINES AND PARTS
M. S. DAVAO
ASSOCIATED OIL COMPANY
M. L. TOMMY


Pago 66


KHAKI ANd RED


August, 1935


Constabulary Commended For
Fourth Of July Appearance


HEADQUARTERS PHILIPPINE DEPARTMENT
Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff, G--1.


Manila, P. I.
July 15th, 1935.
Brig. Gencral Basilio J. Valdes,
Chief of Constabulary,
Manila, P. I.
My dear General Valdes:—
The Grand Marshall, Fourth of July Panade has
asked me to transmit the following letter to yau:
“The appearance of the massed Constabulary unit
was mere than creditable—it was impressive and as a
former Inspector for Constanbulary I was much gratified.
There were many other units that did very well.
There were cthers whese presence in itself was a fine
demonstration of patriotism and the friendly union of
the American and Filipino peoples. To mention some
and not all weuld be an injustice so I have confined
myself to praising those who gave greatest evidence
of immediate readiness for service in battle.
Sincerely yours,
(Sgd.) C. E. KILBOURNE
Brigadier General, U. S. Army,
Grand Marshal, 1935 Fourth of July Parade."
Very sincerely,
(Sgd.) C. H. GERHARDT
Majer, General Staff Corps,
Chairman, General Committee, 4th of
July Parade.


PAMPANGA BUS COMPANY, INC.
(Pambusco)
San Fernando, Pampanga


July 14th, 1935.
Basilio Valdes, Brig. General
Philippine Constabulary
Manla, P. I.
My dear General Valdes:
I was in the Reviewing Stand on July 4th and had
occasion to observe the troops which passed in review
and I must say I was very agreeably surprised and
pleased at the wenderful shewing the Philipp’ne Constabulary soldiers made in that review.
The more remarkable is it, because I happened to
know that marching element was composed of different units from different provincial companies which
has been assembled for that Parade, and witheut extensive training as one body they made a wenderful
showing. You and the officers of your command are
surely to be complimented by the remarkable demenstration and showing they made.
Very Sincerely,
(Sgd.) H. R. ANDREAS
Cok nel, O. R. C.


Orders placed with advertisers in
  are assured of prompt
service and square deal, if submitted
thru the Chief, Advertising Department
of  , Oriente Building,
Manila.


HEALTH
The corner-stone of
Success!
Build it into
your children
by giving them
OSSIN
the GERMAN Codliver oil and
Yolk of Egg Emulsion
with the good taste.
Obtainable at all drug stores.
Agents: INHELDER, WALCH Co., Ltd. Manila


August, 1935


KHAKI And RED


Page 67


The District of Southern Mindanao (Continued from page fifty-two)
Following is the organization, strength and distribution in the District of Southern Mindanao:
DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN MINDANAO
Gth INFANTRY REGIMENT
HEADQUARTERS: ZAMBOANGA, ZAMBOANGA


Co.


STATION


Sgt.
Major


Istaff
Sgt.


1st.


Sgt.! Sgt.


Corporal


PN
vates


Total


Grand
Total


HDOTRS. 6th INF. REGIMENT


Zamboanga, Zamboanga ..............


1


1


2


2

—


“A" BATTALION (9 Companies)


Hdatrs.: Zamboanga, Mindanao .....


Office, PIC., Davao ...................


1


1


2


Office, P.C., Zamboanga ..................


1


83rd


Davao, Davao ........................





4


6


46


84th


Camp Victa, Davao ......................!


1


4


6


46


57


85th


Malalag, Davao ............................


1


4


6


46


57


86th


Mati, Davao ......................... . . . ..


1


4


6


46


57


87th


Camp Kalaw, Davao .....................


1


4


32


40


97th


Lamitan, Zamboanga .....................


4


6


46


57


107th


Camp LaRoche, Zamboanga .....


4


6


46


57


119th


Labangan, Zamboanga .................


3


4


32


40


120th


Zamboanga, Zamboanga .................


1


4


6


46


57


(G
TOTAL "A" BATTALION ..........


2


1


9


34


50


386


482


482


“B” BATTALION (10 Companies)


Hdatrs.: Jolo, Sulu ......................


Office, P.C., Sulu ..........................


1


1


2


Office, P.C., Tawitawi ...................


1





100th


Jolo, Sulu ............................... . . .


1


4


6


46



2


110th


Taglibi, Sulu ..............................


1


4


6


46


IIIth


Seit Lake, Sulu .............................


1


4


6


46


57


112th


Romandier. Sulu .........................


1


4


6


46


57


113th


Camp Andres, Sulu .....................


1


4


6
6


46


57


114th


Siasi, Sulu ................................


1


4


46


.57


115th


Bongao, Tawitawi .......................


4


6


46


57


116th


Jolo, Sulu ..................................


1 P


4


6


46


57


TOTAL ............... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...


2


1


8


32


48


368


459


ATTACHED FOR DUTY—


Headquarters Troops:


G


Jolo, Sulu........................... . ... ..!


1


4


6


46


57


H


Jolo, Sulu..................................


1


4


6


46


57


114


TOTAL “B" BATTALION ..........


2


1


10


40


60


460


573


“C" BATTALION (9 Companies)


Hdatrs.: Cotabato, Cotabato ......


Office, P.C., Cotabato ....................


1


2


Office, P.C.. Sarangani ..................


1


78th


Buluan. Cotabato ..........................


1


4


6


46


17
5


79th


Fort Pikit, Cotabato ......................


4


 6


46


57


81st


Cotabato, Cotabato .......................


4


6


46


57


82nd


Parang, Cotabato .......................


1


3


4


32


40


93rd


Maganoy, Cotabato .....................


1


4


6


46


57


94th


Upi. Cotabato ..............................


3


4


32


40


98th


Lebak, Cotabato .........................



1


6


46


57


103rd


Camp Ward, Cotabato ....................


3


4


32


40


80th


Glan. Sarangani ..........................


6


46


57


Kiamba Detachment ..................


d


L2l


1141


₱i7l!


TOTAL—“C" BATTALION .......


1


2


9


33


48


372


465


465


TOTAL—Gth INF. REGIMENT ........


6


5


28


107


146 


1126


11408


TOTALS—DIST. SO MINDANAO....


 6


L.5.


128


IN 1


11581


1218.


11522


11522


Page 68


KHAKI and RED

August, 1935


A Personal Messape To Alf Constabularg Crficer:
From The District Manager
Of
Asia Life Insurance Company
TE


Gentlemen:


August 1, 1935


Three years ago our company
secured permission from the Insular Auditor to install a plan whereby through monthly deductions from your pay warrants remitted direct to cur office from Headquarters your life insurance premiums might be
paid for you.
Thus the Asia Life Insurance
Company has made it possible for hundreds
of officers throughout the Islands, even at
the most remote and inaccessible points, to
secure life insurance protection for their
families and savings plans for themselves
without the trouble of purchasing money
erders or mailing remittances. Now there
is no possible chance of your losing your
protection should vou be sent on active service far from pest-office facilities. This is
taken care of for you here in Manila.


That you appreciate our efforts in
your behalf has been amply demonstrated
the past several years by the ever-increasing number of officers entering the plan.
Indeed, some officers have even taken policies for their wives and older children to be paid through these monthly deductions also!


Mr. W. F. SAVALE
District Manager, Asia Life


Now that our plan has been so successfully installed we are glad to see other
life insurance companies taking advantage of it and welcome their participation.
After all, the main object is for us to bring these facilities to you so that in
the future no Constabulary Officer’s family will be without adequate protection.
Cordiaily and sincerely yours,


39
District Manager
ASIA LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY
(INCORPORATED U. S. A.)


August, 1935


KHAKI ANd RED


PENTA
QUTBORRD MOTOR
Efficient
Economical


SKANDIA CRUDE OIL ENGINES
MARINE AND STATIONARY
RELIABLE—ECONOMICAL
“The Standard of the Philippines”
Prices and descriptive catalogs on request.
KOPPEL (PHILIPPINES) INCORPORATED
75 Dasmarinas, Manila
Muelle Loney, Iloilo





ESLPSDDES
L


IIG. V. G. PAT. Of!


Dynamite and Accessories
Largest stocks in the Philippines
for immediate delivery
MACONDRAY & CO,INC.


ILOILO


J.RICE
Baguio


MANILA
U. BANEZ
Bangued, Abra


CEBU
J.R. REED
Paracale, Cam. Norte


L.


E


CORNER AZCARRAGA AND SANTO CRISTO


FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, CALL UP 4-99-82 or 4-86-94


TO0T YOUR HORN CLEARLY, WE WILL GET OVER'


Main Offices and Shops at San Fernando, Pampanga


LEO


CEUEUDI


PAMPANGA BUS COMPANY, INC.
Safe—Courteous—Efficient—Regular
MANILA-RIZAL—BULACAN—PAMPANGA
TARLAC-NUEVA ECIA-BATAAN


A Bus leaves Our Manila Siation every
10 minutes for Poinis Norih


