FEBRUARY, 192


“Ancestor Worshipers”—A Description
of a Weird Seance with Primitive Native
Mystics: Their Fire Dance.—More
Franciscan Missions.—Expert Reviews
of Leading Philippine Industries: Statistical Supplement Giving an Instant
Grasp of Insular Overseas Commerce.¬
Special Articles of General Interest


Goodrich
Highflex
Belting
T Cane
A
ray
Serpice
on
Difficult
Drives


Goodrich
SUNERIOWNS
acine 4


LEN S ENEEENN TEN ENTEA  MEEN NAO N IN 


TABACALERA


The word "TABACALERA"
on a cigar is just as significant
as the word "Sterling" on silver


Your tobacconist
will gladly
supply you


SPREADING YOUR RISKS—


The keen businessman diversifies his investments both geographically and by types, not alone to avoid
possible adverse conditions in some single industry or section of the world, but also to share more widely
in those favorable developments which strengthen investment holding and make them more valuable.
WE SUGGESTPittsburgh Hotels Corporation—
5145 Sinking Fund Gold Bonds, due March 1, 1948, yielding approximately................ 5342
Chile Copper Co.—
20-Year Gold Debentures, due 1947, yielding approximately........ 51425
Cities Service, Power and Light Company—
51325 Gold Debentures, due November 1, 1952, yielding approximately................... 5.652
German Central Bank for Agriculture Farm Loan—
Secured 65 Sinking Fund Bonds, due October 15, 1960, yielding approximately............ 61425
Columbia Steel Corporation—
First Mortgage Sinking Fund Gold Bonds 5145 yielding approximately....................
SMP
Norwegian Hydro-Electric Corporation—
Gold Bonds—Series A—5145, due 1957, to yield approximately ....... 6.125
Commonwealth of Australia External Loan—
30-Year 55 Gold Bonds, due September 1, 1957, yielding approximately . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5.125
General Electric Co., Germany—
Wo
20-Year 65 Gold Sinking Fund Debentures, due May 1, 1948, yielding approximately.......
The average yield on the above list is approximately 65
Full Details On Request
INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION


FRANK G. HAUGHWOUT
Biological Laboratory
915 M. H. del Pilar
Manila, P. I.
Stool, Blood and Urine Examination;
Special Sunday and Holiday Hours for
Business Men: 8 to 9 a. m.; 3 to 5 p.m.
Week-days: 7:30 a.m. to 12 m.; 1:30 to 5 p.m.


Manila Wine Merchants, Ltd.
Manila, P. I.
174 Juan Luna
P. O. Box 403
Phones: 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


Recommended By Leading Doctors
Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake
TEL. 5.73.06
Nature's Best Mineral Waterl


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. T.


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to bel) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


VAEN NO NO T  ON NN


Beauty in
The LOw
Priced Field


Dodge Brothers Standard Six
proves that a low priced car can
be really beautiful.
As soon as you see it you will
agree that beauty is by no
means limited to the high priced
field.
You expect so smart a car to


perform smartly — and Dodge
Brothers Standard Six does.
Low in first cost, low in upkeep
cost—yet ranking high in those
qualities that make owners
proud and keep them so, the
Standard’s popularity is a logical
and well deserved tribute to
Dodge Brothers engineers.


Dodge Brothers complete line of passenger vehicles includes
the Standard Six, the Victory Six and the Senior Six.


Sole Distributors:
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, Inc.
536-568 Gandara
Iloilo — MANILA —
Cebu
DODGE BROTHERS
PAADS


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  
February, 1929


Announcing Operation of Additional Trains
Between
Manila and Bauang, Union


Important to Baguio Travelers


DAILY SERVICE


TWO NORTHBOUND TRAINS
With connection at Damortis for Baguio
Baguio Express No. 10 leaves Manila 8:00 a. m.


Thru Train No. 2 leaves Manila 10:00 a. m.


Arrives


Arrives


Damortis.......2:00 p. m.
Bauang, Union.. 2:58 p. m.
Damortis.......5:43 p. m.
Bauang, Union..7:02 p. m.


AUTOBUS CONNECTION FROM DAMORTIS WITH EXPRESS TRAIN No. 10


First class passengers arrive Baguio...................... .4:00 p. m.
Third class passengers arrive Baguio............. .. ... .. . . 5:15 p. m.


AUTOBUS CONNECTION FROM DAMORTIS WITH THRU TRAIN No. 2


First class passengers arrive Baguio....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8:00 p. m.
Third class passengers arrive Baguio............ .. . .. .....9:00 p. m.


THREE MANILA BOUND TRAINS
Two with connection at Damortis for passengers from Baguio
Thru Train No. 1 leaves Bauang, Union, 6:34 a. m. Arrives Manila 1:30 p. m.
(No connection at Damortis)
Baguio Express No. 9 leaves Bauang, Union 10:47 a. m. ) Arrives Manila 5:45 p. m.
Damortis
11:45 a. m.
Thru Train No. 7 leaves Bauang, Union 12:56 p. m. ) Arrives Manila 8:25 p. m.
Damortis
2:02 p. m.
AUTOBUS CONNECTION WITH BAGUIO EXPRESS No. 9


First class passengers leave Baguio........................ 9:30 a. m.
Third class passengers leave Baguio.... 8:30 a. m.
AUTOBUS CONNECTION WITH THRU TRAIN No. 7
First class passengers leave Baguio........ .. .. . . . .. .. ... . . 11:30 a. m.
Third class passengers leave Baguio....................... 11:00 a. m.


BAGUIO NIGHT SPECIAL
Leaves Manila every Friday, 11:00 p. m.
Return trip, leaves Bauang, Union, 9:00 p. m. Damortis 10:00 p. m. the next Sunday to arrive Manila, 5:10 Monday
morning.
AUTOBUS CONNECTION FOR ILOCOS PROVINCES
Baguio Night Special makes connection with Northern Luzon Transportation at Bauang, Union, where it arrives at 7:22 a. m.,
enabling travelers to Ilocos Provinces to reach destination on the same day.


LOW PASSENGER RATES


Manila-Baguio


First Class Third Class


One way...........................


.......₱14.33


P6. 39


Round trip, 120 days...............


..... 23.32


11.78


Manila-Bauang, Union, one way.........


....... 10.24


4.55


Manila-Damortis, one way..............


..... 8.88


3.89


Manila—Vigan, one way.............. . ..


*


5.73


Manila-Laoag, one way................


 


7.74


All thru trains make connections at Bauang, Union, with the Northern Luzon Transportation for Ilocos Provinces.
RATE ON AUTOMOBILES BY FREIGHT TRAIN FROM MANILA TO DAMORTIS
One automobile, 5 passengers............................. ₱43.28
Two automobiles, 5 passengers.................... 64. 92
NOTE:—Automobiles billed Thursday afternoon arrive Damortis Friday evening.


MANILA RAILROAD COMPANY



10 ALVERTISEME.
LL WELTION   OURI


  


February, 192


Simplicity
and Sturdiness


Willamette logging engines are leaders
in the forest throughout the world
All parts are built oversize
Sturdy Construction: to provide ample safety
margin for the hardest work. This is responsible for the low
maintenance cost and remarkably long life of Willamette Yarders.
WILLAMETTE


Offices and Bodegas in Manila
and Zamboanga


Address inquiries to Manila
or Zamboanga


Spare parts carried in stock in Manila and Zamboanga by
MEYER-MUZZALL COMPANY
na Pana Baning, Mnala


134 San Marcelino


(MERALCO)


Manila, P. I.


Hire a Meralco Bus


Travel pleasantly, comfortably with
your own congenial crowd. Hire your
own Bus for that trip to the baseball
game, picnic, excursion or special tour.
Meralco is prepared to furnish you
an up-to-date Bus. You have no
worry, no cares. Your mind is free to
enjoy the scenery and the pleasures of
the day.
For complete information regarding
rates, etc., call our Transportation
Department, Telephone 2-19-11.


MANILA ELECTRIC COMPANY


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigareite Mig. Co.


31 Tayuman


Manila, P. I.


IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLED!


N AECRRG N AETEAERN HEAN EEIAT TE MENCAN GLANRE G AIMANGE AIA


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
The American Chamber of Commerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS


DIRECTORS AND
OFFICERS
P. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, Vice-President
B. A. Green, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
V. L. Applegate
f C. Rockwell


(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United' States) Kenneth B. Day
Alf Welhaven


ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS


J. L. Headington
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.
A. B. Cresap”
Local Subscription: ₱4.00 per year
Frank W. Butler
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year Wm. H. Rennolds
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
Tohn R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsal
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


COMMITTEES
The President has named and submits for confirmation the following Committees:


EXECUTIVE
. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
H. L. Heath
RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Ohairman
Carl Hess.
John Gordon
MANUFACTURING
Meyer, Chairman
P.
Ae
elhaven
E A sadenipianer
LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersol
J. R. Wison


FINANCE
LL.Headineton, Chairman.
Wm. H. Rennoids
E VLAN
FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond. Chairman
L. Speliman
M. M. Saleeby
PUBLICATIONS
A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Bennett
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, Chatrman
W. J. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTEKTAINME
l. La Heainson, O
man
V. Butler
Y K WACA
HOUSE
B. A. Green, Chairman
J. R. Wilson
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
G. P. Bradford
L. E. I
AA
STMENTS
. A Md. Chapman
H. M. Cavender
B. A. Green


Ancestor Worshipers


Go out into the country of an evening? Of
course! For where in all the world could the
joy of it be more exquisite? If anyone would
resist the spell of the tropics, let him avoid the
witchery of the night. But we would not resist
it, having long been in its thrall: so, invited,
we drove along Rizal avenue far out, until it
became a moonlit country road and the rows of
lights along its urban section were far behind.
Invited into the country, go. The brooding
tranquillity, the undulating sward, the bamboobordered river, the faintest murmurs of the
purling stream are only certain attributes of a.
bucolic munificence that wraps you round:
there are the placid skies, in their tropic seemingproximity, a moon that through the huge umbraceousness of mango, santol and acacia casts
great pools of shadow on the lanes where little
groups of people stroll along with the purpose,
evidently, of going somewhere but with no
particular anxiety urging them to forego the
pleasure of atuning their mood to the mysterious
night and its pagan enchantments.
We went, then, to San Francisco del Monte,
where the ancestor worshipers were to exorcise
the ancient demons, work the weird sorcery
oftheir incantations and defy the laws of physics;
this when their ecstasy and divination of the
counsel of the blessed, and their revered ancestors, should move them to do so. They
were to prove, just as Sir Oliver Lodge might
endeavor to prove, the soul’s transcendency
over the flesh. Yet they were the poorest and
commonest of taos; they were just three bowlegged, sprawl-toed old men from an obscure
village of Cavite, whom you glance at once and
swear were witless.


We were early, but they were already at their
altar. One by one the groups of strollers came
down into the yard where the altar, candlelighted, was in place under a mango tree. A
canopy had been erected for it. The canopy,
of canvas and fiber matting, was like a camp tent
with the flaps open; and we all gathered round
in front as if it were a stage on which we were
watching a mystery play.
There was a fitting air of quietude. Voices
were not in the least pent with awe, for the
men at the altar made no effort to induce such
mental receptiveness; but we spoke in low voices
to each other, though gayly enough, because we
craned our necks, looked over one another’s
shoulders and harkened intently in order to
catch the words of the worshipers. Two plaintive guitars tinkled softly now and then, and a
fiddlebow scraped in subdued harmony with
them. Back of us, in the midst of the yard,
was a brisk bonfire. It had been started with
brush and branches, but then it was enlarged
with cordwood and whole tree stumps. Dry
bamboo was put on to provoke more heat and
make a brilliant blaze for better light.
All the while the men kept kneeling at the
altar. They were chanting constantly, sometimes in unison, sometimes one man alone, the
others joining in with the equivalent of amens
and so’s-let-it-be; but their persistent supplications were very low, half-audible murmurs.
What they said was made up of the several
religions which are known to have influenced
Filipino character; first of all, his own nature
worship, then Hinduism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism and a great deal of orthodox and
heterodox Christianity and old-testament legend.


Appeals were made to the court of the saints,
to the heavenly hosts that vanquished Lucifer
(who was taunted and defied), to the twelve
apostles, to Him who sits on the right hand of
God, to Our Lady, and many more; and a spiritual journey was taken through the seventh
heaven of the disciples of Mohamed. The
altar was heaped with food and wine, for the
indigenous gods and for the ancestors who were
invoked.
We have brought you wine and suman,
We have made you good maruya,
We have roasted whole the pullet


JACOB LEVY
PHILIPPINE HATS


Buntals
Bamboos
Calasiaos
Balibuntals


Correspondence Solicited
227 Calle David
Manila, P. I.
Cable Address: “TEXTILES”


THE NEW FORD TUDOR SEDAN
A great car for the family. Built to accommodate 5 persons without crowding
Price— ₱1,925.00 Cash
(Ex. Manila Bodega)


BEAUTY





You will admire the beauty of the new FORD Cars.
Yet greater even than this beauty is the mechanical reliability upon
which motor car performance so greatly depends.
BUY WISELY—BUY A NEW


Easy Terms if Desired
“After We Sell We Serve”
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY CO.
MANILA
BACOLOD
CEBU
ILOILO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PIFASE MENTION   


  
COMMERCE JOURNAL
OF


February


And have baked you fresh bibinka;
lome you to the feast we offer,
Share our rice and quaff our bino,
Ye who made the fields we labor,
Ye who know our earthly sorrows,
Who have gone along before us
Up the tortuous path of patience
To a world beyond the starlight
Whence you now look down upon us.
Take us there, if but in spirit,
Tust a moment, and in spirit,
That we may discern what truth is
And may understand the yearning
n our hearts to wander thither
Any time the Master hails us
With the gesture men call death, which
Shall bring us, we, your children,
To the place where you are dwelling,
To the land of the undying.
A great deal along this line, the chants were;
I when, one by one, the worshipers could not
ke a dagger, their talisman, stand upright
its hilt on a porcelain saucer, they would
vently chant some more—until it not only
od unsupported on its two-pronged hilt, but
falling fell toward the medicine-maker, which


'Esther, this is an affair between gentlemen,
1 here and myself. You are not concerned
it, you are not to interfere; but, since it conns you, you are to stay and see it out. See
ut! Do you understand? Do you?”
And
held her frightened miserable eyes until they
nowledged comprehension, and acquiescence.
en he turned back to Bell, still standing
pectfully erect.
‘You have told me the truth?” he demanded.
‘The truth.”
'All?”
'All.”
‘It is enough. We shall settle it here, by the
grito law. Do you know what it is?”
'I do, certainly."
What?”
'A single arrow shot. You may make it at
enty paces.”
'Right. Are you game for it?” leaning
r the table and menacing Bell’s courage.
I did not flinch.
t was in the sala principal of the Constabuy quarters at Iba, Zambales, back in the
pire days—an affair of honor between
ptain Charles Bosworth, senior inspector of
frontier province, and Lieutenant Jimmie
I, second in command, and, heretofore,
ptain Bosworth’s trusted comrade and bosom
nd. To Bell Captain Bosworth had reled his love for Esther Duboise and his
agement to her. But ever since she had
ived at the post, to marry Captain Bosworth
a fortnight, her fiance had noted a gradual
ing of his stock and the girl’s growing adation for his junior, Jimmie Bell. So, and
y gallantly, Bosworth had thrown the two
ether for a long outing up Mount Mariveles


was a symbol that he had finally communed with
omnipotence and the answer was favorable.
Resinous incense was passed over the altar in
the process of the medicine-making, and the
dagger was quite liberally smoked in it; so that
it is probable that a tendency to stick to the
saucer was momentarily imparted to the horn hilt.
Nevertheless, it seemed a hard trick to master;
and probably the worshipers who make this
medicine are unaware that the incense gives a
physical aid to the spirit. All devils were of
course cursed away, he who would malevolently
blight a field, he who would send swarms of
locusts to devour green crops. There was even
a journey over the water. The boat was symbolized by a sarong held at the gathered-up
ends by two girls, and the food stowed in its
silken belly. Around this the three worshipers
danced, gracefully, without a hint of suggestiveness or failing of decorous restraint. Yet they
were symbolizing the heights of ecstasy; they
were indicating to us the transports of joy they
felt from their intimate communion with heaven.
Yea, they were walking on Galilee!
The ceremony, progressing, as it did, in the
(Please turn to page 21)


and back, and then had had no lingering doubts:
Esther and Jimmie, no longer Esther and Bosworth, were sweethearts.
Bell, of course, just as he had expected, had
come to him at once and made a clean breast
of things after the Mariveles trip from which
the pair had just returned. All along they had
fallen into Bosworth’s trap. Now he was staging
a little drama of his own devising.
“Are you game for it?” he challenged Bell
again.
“Certainly!”
“Then pace this room. I’ve already done so,
aiming in my archery practice. You know
damned well, Bell, I’m a good shot, and I’ll get
you. But I want you to be satisfied.”
Bell paced the room, one, two, three . . . exactly twenty paces! Then he took his stand at the
farther end of it. Bosworth stepped to the door,
unlocked it, stuck his head through the opening
and yelled to Nibo. When Nibo, Bosworth’s
trusted Negrito guide, came a-running, he said,
“Quickly! Your bow and arrows. Fetch them
here at once!”
Nibo brought them. Taking them from his
hand, Bosworth slammed and locked the door
again.
With the weapons in his hands, weapons in
the use of which he had long skilled himself,
thus utilizing idle hours at quarters, his manner
seemed to cool. He instantly regained selfpossession; and he laid out a number of arrows
on the serving table, examining each one carefully, as if to make a sure selection among them.
This over, and beginning to fit an arrow to the
bow string, a smile on his lips, he consulted his
victim.
“Bell, do I use a poisoned arrow?” He was
proving his rival worthy of his steel. Bell stood
the test.


“No, sir. The unwritten law of the N * s
is a clean arrow, except for deer. The al
shot,—this shot, sir—is made with a ciean
arrow. But ... I leave you your choice.”
“Thanks. I’ll take a clean arrow. Ready?”
Setting his feet, he prepared to flex the bow.
“Ready?” he asked again.
Bell drew his eyes away from the tortured girl,
stood erect, his head high against the wall, his
uniform blouse laid aside, his breast a fair target.
“Ready!” he called.
The girl could withhold admiration from
neither of them.
Bosworth prepared to aim, but the bow seemed
hardly to bend in his grasp. Bell continued
standing steadily, breathing steadily. Bosworth, fumbling the bow, looked over toward the
girl.
“Remember your position here, Esther,”
he warned her. “You’re a second to both of us.
It was dark when you two returned. No one
saw, no one knows but Nibo and myself, and
you. The story, of course, is, that lurking
juramentados ‘got’ Bell on the homeward
trail, and that you and Nibo brought him back
dead. That’s the sportsmanship of it. Isn’t
it, Bell?”
It flamed over the girl. An outrage, she
thought. She sprang from her chair, vibrant
and pale with futile anger.
“But . . .!”
“Esther,” it was Bell’s voice this time. Bell
went to her, took hold of her, and gently, but
with firmness equal to Bosworth’s, forced her into
her chair again. “Esther, Captain Bosworth is
entirely right. No word of the truth about this
must be breathed—ever. The service will never
question the story that they ‘got’ me on the
trail. Do you promise, Esther? You know I
told you Bosworth and I should have this out
between us.”
The poor girl was silent, beaten. Belli returned
to his place at the wall. Bosworth raised the
bow. Try as he seemed to try, he could not
fiex it.
“Damn!” He said, grinding his teeth. , “I
might have known I could do nothing with
Nibo’s bow!” He looked, almost inquiringly
at Bell. Few are the Occidentals who can flex
a Negrito bow; they are of palma brava, strong
bows, and the knack is acquired only by practice
from childhood up.
“Captain Bosworth,” said Bell, steadily.
“Nibo is in on this anyway. Bring him in, he
can shoot for you.”
But Bosworth had had his triumph, he had
tried the mettle of both of them, as he had
planned for what now seemed many, many days.
Now he looked at Bell, then at the girl—still
terrified, still woefully perplexed and helpless.
He laid down the bow, walked swiftly to her
caught her up in his mighty arms and strode


By Negrito Law


Retail
Wholesale
oine American Drug
Importers
Agents

Co.
BOTICA BOIL
MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
We have been selling drugs for 98 years

RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNA


February, 1929


ANE
nI
  


5


down the long length Wl the sala to where Bell
stood, equally perplexed, equally nonplussed.
“Bell,” he said huskily. “Bell, old man, God
bless you! No bne shall make the shot! We
shall all have 4 drink! Health, wealth and
happiness Captaiai And he bowved very ioo
very ceremoniously, with the dignity of the true
soldier.
The girl was now fairly bewildered, Bell too.
They stood before him like guilty children.
“Captain?” Bell repeated.
“Oh, yes!” Bosworth seemed to remember
himself, and laughed aloud, breaking the tension
of emotion. “I hadn’t told you, had 1? The
mail is in from Manila. You’re promoted!
And you stay here, taking charge of the province.
I’m promoted too, you should address me as
major—"he threw his chest out pompously—
"and I go to Mindanao. I’m off day after
tomorrow for Manila and my new station—day
after tomorrow.”
His eyes were waggish now. He could laugh
over their incomprehension, but there was a ring
in his laughter that was not all merriment.
After all, he was much their senior; after all, they
were only ... well, kids, you might say, two
happy kids. Good it was that he had found out,
it was good that he had steeled himself to the
test, had accepted the inevitable. He knew,
too, that Esther would have gone with him,
but he also knew that her young heart would
have remained behind with Bell. After all,
youth to youth. He began to caper and mimic,
cutting a ludicrous figure in the dying moments
of the melodrama he had staged so capitally.
He sang the old highland ballad, "What can a
young lassie do wi' an auld mon?” And he
returned to the serving table and began shaking
up some cocktails.
“Here you!” he called back to them. "Lend
a hand. Cut a lemon, pull a cork. Make


yourselves useful! We’re drinking "Happy
He continued capering round the
days!”
table.
At last they joined him, and the girl managed
 get hold of a busy arm and hug it tightiy.
to
‘You’re a lovable old rogue, Charlie Bosworth,” she gurgled, "a lovable and adorable
old rogue. I’d, I’d almost go with you yet!”
He left off with the cocktails, bent her slim
lithe body low in his arms, kissed her as one
would kiss a child—or as one would kiss his
mother—shook her, gently and tenderly, and left
her free again. Then he sprawled in a huge
siesta chair to mix the cocktails, and looked up
at them both. It was his renunciation.
“You’re not going,” he said decisively. “Your
place is with Bell, and the wedding bells ring
tomorrow, at the little mission, chapel just the
same. But it’s nice to hear you say you would
go; and though I don’t ask it and won’t permit
it, I know you would.”
“But she must make her own choice,” Bell
said, looking squarely at her, then at Bosworth.
Bosworth shook his head, as if Bell’s hopeless
density was too much for him; and he rose
dejectedly and began pouring the cocktails.
This done, he leaned upon the table and grinned
at them through the soft lamp-glow. “She’s
made her choice, Bell; I know, she made it days
ago.” The girl’s head drooped in mute and
guilty corroboration. Bosworth held out their
glasses to them. He took up his own, held it
out toward theirs; they all clinked together.
"Happy days, many of them
"Happy days!”
Bell, though still much in the dark, began to
see things more clearly when he heard Bosworth’s words. "She made her choice days ago."
“How did the case go today?” he asked,
searching Bosworth’s face.
For the moment, Bosworth had almost forgot

ten his case. He looked queerly at Bell, seemed
puzzled to understand.
“Case?” he inquired, “Case?”
“Yes, that reported raid.” This had been a
part of the plan to get Bell and Esther off to
Mariveles together.
A great light dawned on Bosworth.
“Oh. I recall now. Why, why it .. . went
back to its barrio!”
It was Bell’s turn to be mystified: a brazen
case of robbery-in-band taking legs and walking
back to its barrio!
“Went back to its barrio?” he repeated, “I
don’t understand.
Bosworth winked at the girl.
‘There’s a lot, Bell, you don’t understand,”
he said, "or you wouldn’t have made it so hard
for me to throw you two truants together today.
That case was a ruse. There isn’t any case,
I’m leaving you a clearprovince. But between
Nibo and me we managed to trump up a kind
of case, until we got you started off to Mariveles.
The ‘complainants’ have now withdrawn the
“complaint'. Their carabaos are all back in their
corrals.”
“Well, I’ll be damned!” Bell ejaculated,
ringing Bosworth’s hand. “I’ll de damned!”
"No you won’t,” said Bosworth, returning
Bell’s hearty grip in a way to assure him that
their comradeship was not at an end. “No
you won’t be damned. You’ll be married!
Vou'll be married tomorrow morning, or there’ll
be a disappointed Protestante in our midst.”
And that is the way it turned out. It was
just a little nipa-thatch chapel on the edge of the
wild mountains and near the pounding sea, but
the missionary’s wife made a capable matron
of honor, Esther Duboise a very lovely bride,
Bell a very happy but thoroughly confused
groom, and Bosworth as handsome a best man
as was ever seen in the islands.


Five Tables of Bridge


My dear Frances:
Next Thursday, three days from now, I’m
having five tables of bridge. Three days of
agony lie before me.... Do I hear your silver
laughter across the wide, wide Pacific? Five
tables of bridge for you hold no terror. When
you decide to give a bridge-party, you go to the
Palace or the Grand; and on the day appointed
you receive your guests with the cool superiority
born of perfect ease of mind. You want to know
how we entertain at bridge; if we do such a thing,
you said... Let me teil you.
Remember that we live seven and a half
degrees north of the Equator.
On Monday morning from the front porch of
our gardenhugged home I watch Sebastian,
the gardener-houseboy, he of mixed ChineseFilipino ancestry, busily snipping the hibiscus
hedge fronting the house. Between him and
Mariana, the washwoman and incidentally
his lawful wife, I shuttle back and forth.
They bear watching, these two helpers of
mine. She, entrusted with the task of getting
the linens ready for my party, is possessed of the
idea that my early education in the art of laundering was built on mistakes; and, unless carefully


watched, she will starch my sheerest linen napkins and press my daintiest doilies on the right
side which, for doilies, is admittedly the wrong
side. If a linen napkin is not as stiff as a bit of
lechon crackling, Mariana considers her time
and her labor lost. I have tried to make her
see my side of the question. Twelve months
have passed in the attempt and Mariana still
holds to her own opinion.
As to Sebastian, curly-headed, almond-eyed
Sebastian, his is the obsession that to be beautiful, hedges, even carefully tended, eight-yearold hibiscus hedges, need not be rectilinearly
perfect and, unless curbed in time, his esthetic
sense will permit him to snip and snip into the
glorious mass of scarlet and green with a very
pronounced freedom of expression and with
equally pronounced effects to the hedge.
You perceive, Frances dear, don’t you, what
anxieties are mine?
With Sebastian and Mariana slightly under
control, I begin conversations with Francisco,
the cook. His menu, for the last four years, has
not perceptibly changed. Once in a while,
driven to despair, I’il say, "Francisco, for goodness sake! Do get something else for dinner


tonight! Why, we had curried chicken last
week!”
“Yes! si, Senora,” he will admit, eagerly
"Si, Senora, we did. But not yet
nodding. "
this week.” He is a Bisayan.
I shrug patient shoulders. Francisco has his
good points, as have the others. After fifte
years of housekeeping in the tropics, I always
look for their good points. Their bad ones are
evident enough.
At last the conciliabula with cook have netted
the following result: pineapple punch, tea,
coffee; chicken salad, cucumber sandwiches;
coconut cookies, pili nuts, chocolate fudge.
"And, Francisco, it will be ready and on the
table at 3:45, on Thursday,” I say, looking my
severest.
He nods, once, twice, in rapid succession.
“Si, Senora, si? Wednesday afternoon. Si,
Senora.”
Francisco has his good points, as I said before.
He has been with me for the last four years.
Do I hear you say, thousands of miles away,
that this is indeed a point in his favor? He
is clean, he is not always late, his grandmother’s
one exit from life has been real, and, last, but
indeed not least, Francisco can cook! He is
Epicure, Vatel, Brillant-Savarin, Marian Garland,
all rolled in one. He lacks variety, true, but


The result of over
sixty y ears of
refining experience


At Service Stations and Dealers’ Stores


Standard Oil Company of New York


MANILA


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


6



  


February, 1929


so does the nature around him. But his roasts!
His pastries! His salads! Still, among his good
points you would look in vain for reliability.
If I want to have a party next Thursday, three
days from now, I alone of my household will be
excited. Not the severest look from the angriest
of eyes will spur Francisco out of his case. When
I ask if this or that has been attended to, he will
“This
smile out of dull-brown eyes and say,
afternoon, or tomorrow. Manana, Senora.
Plenty time, Senora, plenty time.”
I say
nothing. Behind his newspaper, husband is
heard to chuckle.
Early Tuesday morning I go to town to order
the groceries. I make the round of the stores.
Sugar, flour, evaporated cream, nuts, baking
powder, canned goods. The young chinese is
very polite.
“Shall we send the things right away?”
“Right away," I say. "Right away.” Experience has taught me that. The sun is ready
to go to bed in the Sulu sea when the packages
arrive.
I inquire of the messenger the reason for the
delay. He looks at me, uncomprehending.
"Manager say to bring them right away.
bring them right away."
Francisco begins work on Wednesday with
the cookies. I interest Sebastian in the silver.
Then, later, "Francisco, be careful with the
cookies! Put them in the tin or they’ll be soft
by tomorrow."
"Si, Senora. Sure.”
Later in the evening, Francisco, dinner over,
has gone home. Sebastian and Mariana, audibly
satisfied with life, are at the gramophone in
their quarters below. I make my nightly
round of house and kitchen. All seems well.
Fire in stove banked, faucets closed. All seems
well. But look, the cookies! Sweet, dainty
things, gems from the hand of an artist, here
they are, carefully stacked up in their tin. But
where, oh where, is the lid? Where is the
protector of their charm, more fragile than the
reputation of a woman? It’s somewhere no
doubt, but certainly not where it ought to be.
The poor tid-bits have already felt the blight
of untimely exposure. Gone is their crisp
attraction. I shove the tin into the oven and
hope the best for the morrow.
All night I toss restlessly. Through the
mosquito-wire of the sleeping porch the moon
pours her sickly radiance. On the floor the
bougainvilla plants reflect themselves in fantastic patterns. I distinctly see teacups, silver
spoons, Francisco, the ace of spades!
At dawn I rise. The day is come! But
where is Sebastian? Still asleep, most unconcernedly asleep. And so is Mariana.
Call them? Wake them? As well try to
wake the dead!
By this time, or perhaps a little later, the
family, by contagion, have caught my fever.
Husband takes his shower and dresses, alleging
great press of business, before 6 a. m. Perhaps,
he mutters, one could go without breakfast
for once. Give the stomach a rest. Will
possibly be detained at lunch time. He knows
from experience what comfort is his on the day
I have five tables of bridge.
As to the children, they go their way quietly.
With an intuition beyond their age, they feel
the heavy pressure of the air. No need to urge
them on this morning. They will not be late to
school. Showers are taken, ten-year-old even
washes his ears. One after another, subdued,
they arrive at the breakfast table. But where
is breakfast? Francisco has not yet come!
Did his grandmother depart this life again, just
on this day of all days? My eyes roam down
the avenue of swaying coconut trees behind which,
in a maze of nipa shacks, nestles his home.
Finally, after what seems to me a young eternity,
he appears, smiling, debonair, in fresh, clean,
stiff clothes and not at all in a hurry.
Breakfast over somehow, the family having
diverted themselves into their usual channels
with unusual celerity. I stand before the chinacloset in the dining-room taking stock. Have
I enough spoons? I count teacups, coffeecups,
plates, spoons, forks. Yes, I am well supplied.
But what’s that, all of a sudden? An odor
of burning from the kitchen. Headlong, I
rush out. The cookies! I had forgotten all


about them. My cookies are burnt to cinders!
Francisco, calm as Fate herself, retrieves the
tin from the roaring oven. I am speechless
with horror and remorse.
But not so Francisco.
I make new cookies, Senora,” he says,
reaching for the mixing-bowl. No vanilla
essence, he finds. I telephone for some. To
my amazement, it arrives before noon and new
cookies are created.
Sebastian has not killed himself with work
while I was detained in the kitchen. Chairs,
tables, desk, piano are covered with dust. The
china-closet, of red narra, fairly screams for a
little attention. The Venetian mirror in the
sala gives back a dim and foggy reflection. I
point to all these imperfections and Sebastian
takes up broom and duster with renewed vigor.
Mariana, specially commandeered for the day
to help with the floors, dances up and down
them to the tune of Valencia.
At the stroke of twelve, everything automatically stops. Sebastian drops the duster onto the


Moro brass tray; Mariana ceases her devotion:
to Terpsichore, forgetting, however, to stol
the phonograph. Francisco removes his apron
and they settle down to their cooked rice ano
fishstew, as perfectly at ease as though ther.
were no such thing as bridge.
No siesta for me. But one for Francisco, on
for Sebastian, one for Mariana. For over at
hour, not a sound in the whole house.
One more round of house and garden. Afte
that I must dress.
Francisco is busily engaged watching th.
afternoon crowd on their way to market an
church. He leans out of the window in an uimistakably happy frame of mind, but ceaso;
whistling at once as my voice reaches his ear
'Everything ready, Francisco?”
"Everything, Senora. Yes.” He nodia
dreamily.
I take in the punch bowl, ready with its cub:.
of pineapple and papaya flecked with scarl.-
Maraschino cherries, and block of ice meltir.,
slowly under the onslaught of purple grapa


—IRESTONE Gum-Dipped Cords stand the
test of economy. Gum-dipping, an exclusive Firestone process which insulates
every fiber in the casing with rubber to prevent
internal friction, gives insurance against blowouts. The result is greater mileage —lower cost
per mile of service.
“Most Miles Per Peso'

Call on your Firestone dealer. He will
save you money and serve you better
Pacific Commercial Company
Distributors


E
IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISENENTS FUBASE NENTION TNE ANERICAN GRANBER


February, 1929


  


7


juice. The salad, throned in the icebox in
solitary grandeur, pickles spread fanwise across
parallelograms outlined by asparagus; pilinuts,
deliciously oily. All is well, apparently; but
where are the sandwiches?
I slam icebox doors, I search frantically in
kitchen safes. No sign of sandwiches!
“Francisco, Francisco! The sandwiches!” He
spins around, looks at me, perplexed, hand lost
in the wilderness of his cuiy, black hair. Great
Scott! He has forgotten all about the sandwiches!
One more rush to the telephone. What will
the grocer think of me and my language? I do
not care. Renewed, feverish activity in the
kitchen. A swearword in time, believe me,
saves more than nine. The groceries arrive
posthaste. Slices of bread fly from Francisco’s
sharp knife. And now it is after three. It is
3:30, soon 3:40. Mariana has not yet bro ght
me the pale-blue organdi dress, embroidey i in
faint pink, that I have decided to wear. ' send
Sebastian for it and he does not return—as I might
have known. A hurried look through curtained
windows. Do I hear acar? Do I see somebody
alight from a carromata? No, not yet, not
yet, thank goodness! My clock marks 3:50.
As this moment Francisco raps at my door.


“Sandwiches are on table, Senora.”
breathe a sigh of relief. Then I hear Mariana
approaching. Her slippers slur, slur; she is in
no hurry. Slowly, from the pale blue flutteriness,
her brown arms emerge and she retires—slippers
slurring once more. I slip into the dress. It is
four sharp. In a minute or so the enemy will
storm the citadel.
The rumbling of a car, my first guest. Another
car drives up, and another. I take my
point of vantage at the top of the stairs. A
glimpse at my dress first. Does it look all right?
And I behold, to my infinite delight, that for
once Mariana’s sense of beauty and mine have
blended in one glorious achievement. The
filmy stuff looks like spun glass, the embroidered
tendrils and flowers and leaves and butterflies
stand out in lovely relief.
At the table in the dining room stands Sebastian, in immaculate white, and I know that
out in the kitchen Francisco waits, ready to do
his best. Brave soldiers at their posts, all of
them.
So you see, Frances, how I entertain at bridge.
But I might as well use the plural pronoun and
say, this is how we entertain at bridge in Zamboanga.
Yours triumphantly,
ANNA.


Palupo: A Native Philippine Tea


In January last year, before leaving Washington for Manila, P. J. Wester of the agriculture
bureau called on Dr. Geo. T. Mitchell, the tea
expert of the U. S. Department of Agriculture,
who brewed and served tea made by him from
a Florida-grown Philippine bush called Ehretia
microphylla, of wide distribution in this Archipelago. As made by Dr. Mitchell the tea was
of fine quality, scarcely distinguishable if at all
from genuine tea. It occurred to Wester that
this Philippine tea might have a commercial
future as a non-stimulating tea, on par with
postum and similar non-stimulating beverages,
and after his arrival in Manila during a trip
through the Mountain Province he procured
and mailed tea samples of Ehretia microphylla
to Dr. Mitchell who writes him under date of
June 15th as follows:
“I have your letter of May 5 in regard to the
samples of leaves of Ehretia microphylla,
and I have also received the sample. While
the sample has a pleasant taste, it lacks body
and also the characteristic tea flavor that it would
have had if it had been properly cured. I would
suggest that you handle the leaves in the following manner, doing the work at the time the
branches or leaves are gathered. The leaves or
branches cannot be gathered and transported
any distance if they are to be successfully manufactured, as after the leaves are dry they
cannot be properly worked.
“Green Forest Tea.—The leaves should be
harvested by pruning off the small branches,
then when these sma, branches reach the factory
they should be strip, ' off by hand. I find
that all of the leaves on a branch can be stripped
off by one movement from the base of the shoot
to the apex. The leaves should then be placed
in a receptacle containing a copper or bamboo
screen with small enough meshes so that the
leaves do not fall through. This should be
placed over a pan of hot water and the leaves
steamed for five or ten minutes. This can also
be done by placing the leaves on trays in a large
box and turning in live steam from a boiler.
“This treatment destroys the oxidizing properties or oxidizing enzymes in the leaf and at the
same time renders the leaves soft and flaccid.
These leaves should then be rolled either by
machinery or by hand.
The rolling of tea is similar to the kneading
of dough. As many leaves as can be held between
the two hands should be kneaded back and forth,
gently, until they begin to take on a twist, and
as the individual leaves begin to twist more
pressure should be applied. It takes about 40
to 60 minutes to make a roll by hand. The
leaves should then be dried out on trays in a
receptacle through which hot air free from smoke
and sparks passes until the leaves are thoroughly
2
-ied. It is better to dry these leaves at a
mperature of 190 to 200"F. The leaves can


then be passed through different size sieves which
separates them into different grades. The
larger grades can be cut or broken in a milling
machine until the product resembles tea.
“Instead of using a rolling process, I have
found that by passing the steamed leaves through
a large meat chopper the leaves will be cut up
into small pieces and the pressure exerted by the
worm-gear presses the leaves through the small
opening in the disc breaking the cells and giving
somewhat the same effect as rolling. The leaves
are then dried as suggested above.
“Semi-Black or Semi-Fermented Forest
Tea.—In this case, after the leaves have been
stripped from the branches, spread them out in
the sun until they become flaccid. Then the
leaves should be placed in a large basket or other
receptacle in a layer about 6 inches deep, and
stirred for about half an hour. At the end of
this time the leaves should be either stirred in hot
pans or treated with live steam, as in the case
of the green Forest tea. This is to destroy the
oxidizing enzymes at this point. The leaves
should then be rolled and dried and equalized
and sorted, as in the case of the green tea.
“Black or Fully Fermented Forest Tea.¬
The leaves should be spread out on clean floors
or thatches until they wither and become soft
and flaccid. If this is done in the sun it requires
only half an hour, if the sun is very hot, or a


longer period of time according to the intensity
of the sun. After this withering the leaves
should be rolled either by hand or by passing
them through a meat chopper. Then they
should be spread out in a cool room, either on
tables or on the floor, about 2 inches thick and
covered with a moist cloth or covered by supporting moist cloths on a frame work above the
tea so as to keep the temperature down. The
rolled leaves will take anywhere from an hour
to three or four hours to oxidize or ferment.
The proper time to stop this fermentation
by drying is reached when the leaves give off a
very fruity odor. This point can only be discerned by experience and I would suggest that
you have several batches, letting some remain
longer than others, so as to familiarize yourself
with the proper fruity odor. This part of the
curing is very important since, if it is overfermented the liquor will be thin and lack character, if it is under-fermented the liquor will be
too pungent and herbish, whereas if it is properly
fermented it will have the proper flavor and
body. After fermenting the leaves should be
immediately dried, as in the case of other two
kinds of Forest tea.
“The methods I have given you above are
meant to be used simply for experimental purposes. If the tea is to be made commercially
the rolling would naturally be done by machinery
in a regular tea rolling machine and the drying
should be done in standard tea drying machines.
“If there are any questions you desire to ask
about the manufacture of this product from time
to time I will be very glad to answer these questions for you, and I will also be very much interested in seeing some of the cured product you
turn out. As I told you when you were here in
Washington, I believe that since the Filipinos
use this Forest tea, it should be commercialized
and manufactured into a palatable product lik
the sample I showed you here in Washington.
In fact, I see no reason why it should not be
manufactured on a large scale by machinery
for consumption by the natives.”


“I have your letter of September 27 in reply
to my request for information.. I look forward
to seeing with interest and profit the pamphlet
of the Philippine Sugar Association dealing with
the restriction of sugar imports from the Philippines to this country.
“I may say that to me it is inconceivable that
the proposed restriction should be adopted by
Congress unless and until the United States
decides to withdraw completely from the Philippines and to treat them as a foreign country.
Such action appears to be remote.
“Thanking you for your attention to my request, I am,”
—THOMAS WALTER PAGE, (Institute of Economics, Washington,
D. Co


We Have


The Largest and Most Complete Stock
of Drygoods in the Philippines
If you need silks, linens, cottons, or
notions you can serve yourself best
by choosing from our large stocks
We also carry haberdashery, and
make men’s suits and shirts
Manuel Pellicer y Co., Inc.


44 Escolta, Manila


Phone 2-11-06


N RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


THE AMERICAN UHAMBER OF COMMEROL JOURNAL


February, 1929


5


Fade-Out of a Fine Career
By H. F. HORNBOSTEL


Extracts of a news item: “Lieutenant Colonel
—, a distinguished officer of the
Earl H. EUnited States marine corps, has been 'accidentally killed’ in the Caroline islands. ... Colonel
— was on an extended leave of absence,
E—
with permission to go outside the continental
limits of the United States.... The Japanese
government has discouraged foreign visits in
the Caroline and Marshall islands ever since
they came under its control. ... The American
government took the position that a mandate
did not confer absolute authority or proprietorship, but that the holding nation was in the
position of a legal guardian.
“Colonel Ewas 43 years old, a
bachelor and a native of Kansas. He had been
in the marine corps for more than 20 years,
coming up from the ranks, and had served a
great deal in the orient. He was one of the few
men in either the army or navy that spoke
Japanese fluently. He had a distinguished war
record with the second division and was decorated with the croix de guerre, the French legion
of honor medal, the naval cross, and had been
recommended for a D. S. C. for heroism in
action with the fourth brigade of marines.”
That is enough, though the skillful fabrication—of facts alone, reaching however an erroneous conclusion, from too much conjecturing—
goes on at some length more.
A true interpretation of the headline, "Government Investigates Death of Marine Corps
Officer,” is here recorded by the author, who
knew him, and loved him exceedingly.
He was a first-class soldier-man who knew
the game and played it to the limit. Until the
game sickened his soul, and it came to pass....
But let us commence with a few of Kipling’s
words:


of school and college; of military service in Cuba,
the Philippines, China. Now he was marching
through tropical jungle, damp with the dampness
of many rains. Now he was in a skirmish line
out in the cogon, a pitiless sun overhead and the
ground parched with drouth. Now on the
deck of a cruiser rushing to the relief of many
white men, women and children cut off from the
world and in peril of death in a walled city


from some mysterious authority far back of the
danger zone.
Here, amid artillery, barrages, gas attacks,
hand grenades, air raids, tanks, liquid fire and
sniping, the romance of his calling left him;
he returned home to America condemning his
profession in his inmost heart.
His whole dream of the romance of the service
shattered, vaguely he sought for something that
would bring it back again. The war had left
much to be desired in the goodwill shown each’
other by the allied nations who had crushed the


“There are no leaders to lead us to battle,
And yet without leaders we sally;
Each man reporting for duty alone,
Out of sight, out of reach of his fellow.
There are no bugles to call the battalions,
And yet without bugles we rally;
From the ends of the earth to the ends of the
earth.”
He had passed the stage, "and yet without
bugles we rally.” He was lying, half naked,
in a miserable native hut on a coral atoll. Only
a native boy stood by, watching his fitful breathing, mingled with incoherent mumblings which
the boy could not understand. As the sun rose
higher, his delirium heightened. Shortly his
speech became quite rational, but there was no
one there who understood his language.
The native boy felt easier in his mind now;
he concluded, in his primitive way, that his
master was not sound asleep anymore, but that
his soul had returned to his body from its
absence during the hours of sleep. Such was
the belief of his people. Still he feared to awaken
altogether this serious white man, his master,
who had come to his atoll in scanty, unkempt
attire, but with gold in his pockets. He feared
that if he awakened him, the soul would be
offended and leave the body for good and all.
Then what would become of his job as packcarrier, liquor-procurer and general factotum?
If the boy might have understood what this
gaunt, dying man was saying, possibly he would
have reported it to the local commissioner who
represented a government which had established
itself on his atoll and all the islands lying to the
east and to the west for many hundreds of miles.
For his master’s subconscious brain was transmitting to his voice the disconnected story of his
life. None stood by to hear and understand,
none to shed a tear or throttle down a comrade’s
grief.
But what a story the silent uncomprehending Caroline islander heard!
The man told of his childhood on the farm—
back home; of his apple and cherry trees; of
fishing for catfish in the Great Bend, rolling its
way through the Kansas prairies quite near his
boyhood home; of trapping in the winter; of
sleigh rides; of girls he had loved in his boyhood;


entirely surrounded by Boxers ready to slaughter
and to torture all the foreign devils whom they
thought the cause of their troubles.
Now he was speaking of camps in peace times;
of his professional joys and tribulations; of
women, single and married; of hands he had
held in poker; of scotch highballs and wild
carouses; of technical problems; of maneuvers
and gear and equipment and what not.
At length his delirium brought him back again
to the Great war. Here his ravings were exceedingly bitter. For here, on the bloody
limestone fields of France, in lousy trenches,
his men covered with mud and vermin, he was
unable to go forward without explicit orders


common enemy at a staggering cost in lives,
money and culture. So they closely watched
each other.
"Ah! thought this man, now passing from
life. “Here is romance, something new under
the sun once more. I will hie me away and do
service far from all reminders of things 'over
there'. Think of the color and romance shown
in history; the clear clever thinking, the intrigue
and plotting necessary to succeed in this phase
of the game!”
His ego aroused once more, he had stepped
forward. But in reality it was stepping backward, for it seemed he had been a good fellow.
He was a man who loved his fellowmen and could


Atantit duli ant ratinie Co.
OF MANILA
ENGINEERS
MANUFACTURERS
CONTRACTORS
71-77 Muelle de la I.idustria
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNAl


February, 1929


  


not grow used to their absence. He was sent
to far-off islands, isles of glistening white coral
sand and palm trees. Here he found nothing
to report, nothing in the least dramatic. He lost
interest in the game, for he had no men for his
chessboard.
Gruesome memories of France, and disillusion, returned to his brain like the bat to his
cave in the morning. He drank more and more,
to escape from reality, but found it impossible.
So, with suffering from old shrapnel wounds,
and gas, he drank as no man should in those
islands.
Now he lay dying, remote—so hopelessly
remote!—from home, his brothers in arms, his


loved ones. He had sought high adventure to
forget his disillusionment, only to plunge deeper
into the mire of greater despair. Thus passed
a good soldier, a soldier with a conscience, who
could fight for the right with a heart beating
freely. But the War of Nations. What a
climax to wither the world after years of advancement in the arts and peace and culture! He
passed away with the setting of the sun behind
the palm-fringed surface of the vast Pacific. The
booming surf took up the rhythm of his heart
beat. He has gone to his last camp—a camp
where he has found the forgetfulness he sought,
Nirvana.


Touring Islands by Lighthouse Tender
By GERTRUDE BINDER


On board the cutter Polillo, April 26, 1928.—
The Polillo is a government boat which is used
for coast guard service in the Philippines. On
this trip its crew is inspecting and carrying supplies to lighthouses on the islands of the central
part of the archipelago. It is a small craft,
rocking and pitching on the slightest pretext,
in order, no doubt, to give its passengers the
illusion of being far out at sea. It can carry
eight passengers; on this voyage it has half that
number, all women.
We sailed from Manila last night at midnight.
The steward accommodatingly arranged coto fa
us on the scanty deck space at the stern. After
having been in use for four hours, the cots were
spirited away while their ex-occupants admired
the sunrise. Finding ourselves at anchor, we
climbed into the captain’s launch and went
ashore for a swim. Besides the lighthouse, the
island off which we swam showed no signs of
habitation. The water was crystal clear and full
of stinging jellyfish. The bottom was covered
with beautiful and viciously sharp coral. In the
midst of these deceptive allurements we amused
ourselves until breakfast time, when we returned
to the Polillo, where we have spent the rest of
the day nursing our lacerated feet.
Lighthouse Is Mansion.
April 27.—Today we did not make a stop
until the sun was very high. We saw the lighthouse from a distance. It was a mansion with
a tower above for displaying the light. The
beach at the foot of the hill on which the imposing edifice stood proved marvelously smooth
and the water delightfully clear. We swam
gaily about for a while, then sat down in a little
cave to examine the coral and shells on the
ground. The coral was easy enough to capture,
its occupants having been long dead, but whenever any one started to pick up what she believed
to be the deserted habitation of a snail, it would
move briskly away. Soon the cave was filled
with mysteriously perambulating shells; and we
poor tenderfoots, feeling no certainty about the
attitude of hermit crabs toward barelegged girls,
took our departure before they could mass their
forces for an attack.
April 28.—This morning we were awakened
at dawn by the captain in person who pointed
out that we had come to a lighthouse situated
on the top of a high hill and reached by a flight
of steep stone stairs which we had plenty of time
to climb before breakfast. Accordingly, we
donned our bathing suits and went ashore. The
hill on which the lighthouse stands is heavily
wooded. A cottage, just beside the light, houses
the keeper and his family, who, in the intervals
of light tending, raise a few chickens, catch a
few fish and wait for the visits of such boats as
the Polillo to bring them other cornmodities and
news of the outer world.
Having fulfilled our -acial obligations by calling on the lighthouse ke-, r, we braved coral and
jellyfish by swimming off the coast. When we
again boarded the ship, the sailors announced,
with evident relish in imparting the information,
that they had seen sharks very near to us as we
swam.
Dock to Take on Coal.
April 29.—Very early this morning we docked
at Liguan to take on coal. Liguan is less a town
than a mining settlement. It consists of a


winding stairs, dus Great Northern Electrifies Cascade Route


smattering of houses along the waterfront and,
a small, mucky coal mine. Miners turned Overloaded and top-heavy. Exactly the same
coolies while the fuel, already piled on the wharf,
in pairs. Two men would seize shovels, fill a crew. Her lower deck was jammed with cargo.
large basket, slip a carrying pole under its handle,
returning in a very few minutes to begin the opcaptain’s children, were in his cabin.
eration anew.
Like a Toy Vessel.
we lay in a bay before a rugged, green island with Ahead of that she would catch the waves from the
a tall lighthouse on its topmost point. About 5 open sea to the South.
o'clock we went
ashore. A flight of
out of the earth, led
uptNe adc ot NeIni
to the cottage of the
light keeper. Carefully cultivated pineapple plants grew on
either side of the path.
A vegetable garden
flourished at the side
of the neat little house.
Beyond, a path shad

ed by banana trees
led still higher to the
lighthouse itself.
From avantage point
halfway up a ladder to
the light I could look
eastward and westward far out to the
sea. To the east, sea
and sky blended in a
soft, gradually deepA
ening gray. Along
TA
E
the reefs and at the
base of the rocky
coast breakers shone
out, white and lacy.
In the western sky
the sunset glowed and
was reflected on the
smooth water. The
Polillo stood like a
toy ship, motionless
and tiny. A host of
bancas moved about
in circles, like water
beetles, rippling the
surface of the bay.
As we descended the
hill, moonlight began
to throw the shadow
of the palms on the
sand. A group of
natives stood silhouetted against an open
fire on the beach. We Electric locomotives go into serpassed them, sprang vice on 85 miles of main line between Wenatchee and Skykomish,


of the lower deck, captured a baby shark. The
poor little creature, barely ten inches long, was
toothless and harmless as a day-old kitten; yet
he inspired a whole series of tales of dismembered
swimmers, nautical disasters and shipwrecked
persons devoured by hungry sea monsters. The
captain reminded us of the many ships lost in
these waters, crowded with tiny islands and
hidden reefs, when, during the time of the Spaniards, they were practically uncharted. Inevitably, talk turned to a ship lost less than a year
ago, with captain, cargo and nearly a hundred
passengers, in the very seas through which we are
now sailing.
“I was only thirty-four miles away when she
went down,” said the captain. “But she had no
radio. I did not know. A few hours later we
passed near the place. Perhaps some of the
victims were afloat there then, but it was quite
dark. We saw nothing.
“No, it was no typhoon, not even a storm,
at about twenty minutes’ walk into the interior, just an ordinary heavy sea in which she sank.
size as the Polillo, she had perhaps a hundred
was being loaded on the Poliilo. They worked and eighty persons on board, passengers and
“It was just before the beginning of the school
raise the carrying pole to their shoulders and year. Many of the passengers were young folks,
disappear at a trot into the depths of the ship, students bound for Manila. Two boys, the
“They had left Romblon that day, headed
northward. For a few hours, until she reached
the pass between the islands of Banton and
April 30.—All through the hot part of the day Sinara, the steamer was in sheltered water.
(Please turn to page 12)


into the water and
swam long in its
caressing coolness.
May 1.—While we
were anchored off
Canimo at dinner
time, some sailors,
fishing over the rail


hauling whole trains over mountain
summit. Steam power will be disoontinued altogether on this division upon completion of the new


Cascade tunnel, 8 miles in length.
shortly after the first of the year.
The new tunnel lowers the summal:
clevation more than 500 feet, eliminates curvature equivalent to six
compicte cirios and shortens mie
distance s miles.


Letters received announce the completion
guration of the new service.—Ed.


of this tunnel and the inau

IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


THE AMERICANN UHAMDER OT COMMEROL JOURIAL


repruary, 1929


I0


Vol. IX
No. 2


February
1929


George H. Fairchild retired from
the directorate of the
Chamber of Commerce upon the expiration
of his term, and at
the annual meeting
the last Friday in January J. C. Rockwell
of the Manila Electric
Company was electec
for one year to complete the unexpired
term of Fred A. Leas,
deceased, while Kenneth B. Day, H. M.
Cavender, and Alf
Welhaven were elected
directors for threey ear terms. Mr.
Fairchild’s service on
the directorate had
been long and excellent;
he is a leading figure
in the sugar industry,
now under unjust fire
in Washington, and his
duties as secretarytreasurer of the sugar
association, as managing director of the
Hawaiian - Philippine
company with its very
large central at Silay, and as manager of his own firm, Welch, Fairchild,
Ltd., absorb his attention. He continues his monthly reviews of the sugar
industry in the Journal; they are always first rate and carefully prepared
critiques of the current situation in that very important industry.
Mr. Rockwell of the Manila Electric company
is the responsible head of what is believed to be
the largest single American investment in the
islands, which is constantly growing larger. The
company enjoys the street-car, light and power
franchise in Manila, where it is living up to its
obligations in every way, and it is now acquiring
electriclight and power properties in the provinces
and extending to provincial towns and capitals
the excellence of its service. Its auto-bus lines
in Manila and Manila’s vicinity supplement its
street-car service most advantageously; when you
can catch a bus in front of science bureau and
4
ride downtown to Goiti plaza for six centavos,
three cents gold, things are not bad in the
J. C. Rockwell
transportation line.
Mr. Day is managing the Philippine Refining
Co., Inc., and is therefore spokesman on the
directorate of the copra and coconut oil industries. The company has large crushing plants
in Manila and Cebu.
Mr. Cavender, reelected to succeed himself, is the general agent
A
in the Philippines of the
Robert Dollar company,
the importance of which
in this territory is famila bncolcise to . MAAU
At present the company
K. B. Day
is building a fleet of
ships for the interisland trade, a service likely
to be inaugurated this year.
H. M. Cavender


THE NINE


Paul A. Meyer


Mr. Welhaven is manager of the Insular Lumber company, which operates at Fabrica, Occidental Negros, on its valuable timber concession, the
largest hardwood sawmill in the world. The
company’s offices are in Manila. This is also a
large American industrial investment in the
islands and one of the earliest. No American
here will forget the brilliant New Yorker who
made the Insular Lumber a great enterprise,
J. Sloat Fassett. Mr. Welhaven was associated
with him for many years.
V
When the directors met Monday, January
28, and organized the board, former Vice President Paul A. Meyer was chosen president and
Alf Welhaven
Director H. M. Cavender vice president. Judge
John W. Haussermann was again elected a vice president; as one of
the executives of the Benguet Consolidated Mining company he represents very wealthy interests in the field of gold mining and hydroelectric
power. The story of Benguet Consolidated is one of the gripping
romances of modern industrialism; written at length by H. F. Wilkins,
it appears fully illustrated in the current anniversary edition of the Manila
Daily Bulletin.
Director B. A. Green was reelected treasurer of the Chamber of Commerce, a post to which he has long given devoted and efficient attention.
Recapitulating, the directors are: Paul A. Meyer, president; H. M.
Cavender, vice-president; John W. Haussermann, vice president; B. A.
Green, treasurer; H. L. Heath, W. L. Applegate, J. C. Rockwell, Kenneth
B. Day and Alf Welhaven. Alternate directors elected at the annual
meeting for terms of one year are: J. L. Headington, A. B. Cresap, Frank
W. Butler and Wm. H. Rennolds.
President Meyer has already announced his committees. John
R. Wilson was reelected secretary of the Chamber of Cormerce at the
directors’ organization meeting; all selections of officers were by unanimous
vote. Mr. Wilson enters upon his fourth year as secretary this year; his
duties were peculiarly onerous last year, after the untimel death of
President Robert E. Murphy.
A word about President Meyer, one of the most unassuming of
men, but always aggressive in behalf of the welfare of the Philippines.
He came to the islands from San Francisco in 1901 and associated himself
with the import-export firm of Kuenzle and Streiff, of which he has been
the president since 1912. He is likewise president of the Alhambra Cigar
and Cigarette company and La Flor de Intal, and a member of the Philippine Government Tobacco board. He is a director and the treasurer of
the Tondo Development company; he is also a director of the Philippine
Trust company and has a considerable interest in the Basilan Lumber
company. He is a charter active member of the Chamber of Commerce
and has been a director for more than six years, during all that time givirthe affairs of the organization his conscientious attention. Prior to tha
he was for many years a director and vice president of the Manila Me
chants association. A mere statement of his interests shows him to be orof the islands’ leading business men. More than this, he finds great plea
ure in the society of his fellowmen; socially he is a capital man and easil
at home in any good company. He is a polyglot, with a fluent knowledg
of half a dozen languages. His home in Santa Mesa Heights is largi
sumptuous and inviting.
His recent extended visit in the United States brings him abreast o
what is contemplated there concerning the islands. During his stay i
America he made an extensive study of the Philippine tobacco and ciga
situation in his capacity as a member of the tobacco board. We understan
that he has brought back with him some very constructive ideas to elevat
the standard of our tobacco products and place thein at last on a soune
footing in the American market.
LUMBERING ALONG
One branch of trade which has been thriving well with the Unitec
States is lumber. In the calendar year just closed the islands exportec.
86 million board feet of hardwood lumber, the customs declarations totalling P6,258,819. Of this, the United States bought nearly 42 million feet
Japan nearly twenty, China just over welve, the United Kingdom nearly
seven, Australia nearly four and Hongkong just over one. The islands
manufactured 450 million board feet of hardwood lumber, and domestic
consumption was therefore 364 million. In view of both local and overseas demands, there’s an assured future for this industry. Fourteen
countries are our lumber customers.


February, 1929


  


11


CREDIT BALANCES
We feel that this month we are discussing the gravest question which
has ever engaged our attention, trade relations with the United States.
The law says free trade is not our right (as it would be were we an organized
territory!). Is it, then, morally our privilege? It is said that the sugarduty bloc obtained its propaganda from a page of our 1918 census which
said that twice the present number of sugar mills could function here, that
we could grow as much sugar as Cuba, etc., etc. As to that, we stand with
La Vanguardia. There are many errors in the census; this may be one
of degree, but it can’t be more than that. Production of Philippine sugar
is not rapidly increasing nor will it increase rapidly, but so many millions
of acres here are suitable for its production that the potentialities cannot
be denied and ought not to be concealed. The sugar association, indeed,
is pursuing a policy of candor and will gain by doing so.
But if we sell every ton, now and henceforth, to the United States, we
will take our pay in her manufactures and give employment to her ships.
Say that this year we sell her 600,000 tons. At 5.000 tons per cargo, here
are cargoes for 120 ships. This is a tangible cred s balance. If she could
but be induced to make a ledger account of al, her transactions with us
and all ours with her, talk about keeping our products out of her markets
would be silenced. Does she get half our hers.p? If so, it fills with homeward cargoes seventeen ships a year. Coconut oil and copra fill more than
thirty.
In a trade that has attained such proportions, perhaps after all there
cannot be an about-face. While there is trade, there’s hope. Let us feel
assured that this trade will have powerful defenders.


SOME NEIGHBORS OF OURS
Nine of our neighbors in Manila are being collectively talked about
in the press a good deal these days--collectively because they are the
members of the supreme court and it might be injudicious to single thein
out. But even this has been done in one instance, one paper has invited
a justice to resign. And now another imparts the somewhat startling news
that the public has lost confidence in the court. Well, in the first.
place, the expression is somewhat emotional; and in the second place, if
high courts were changed every time the public wavered in its confidence
they would not be high courts nor hold the place they actually do hold
under American constitutional forms. The American Constitution was
written, and the several States forced to adopt it, by a little: nd of squarejawed conservatives who had but slight use for the public and even less
for its opinion. The public had put the nation on the rocks, and these
conservatives were saving the nation and the public from the latter’s own
follies. They therefore set the supreme court apart from the mob power
of the public (this for its good), gave the justices life tenure and made it
mighty hard to impeach them. By the time John Marshall got through
construing the Constitution, the court was safe; and therefore the public
was secure in its hands.
Our high court is similarly organized, set apart and made aloof from
the public. A year or so ago it handed down some important decisions
which were very disappointing to us (that is, to the editor personally).
The manner of conducting the 1926 bar examinations was equally disappointing, and the question is now sub judice. We find it much easier to
differ with the court than to forfeit confidence in it, and we surmise this is
the general experience of the public. That questions are being pretty
closely examined seems manifest enough in the frequency of divisions in
the court, many cases come down with majority opinions supplemented
by quite as determined dissents. If venality or ineptitude were rife in
the court, the only reasonable causes we think of for want of confidence,
there would surely be more consistent agreement. So, analysis disperses
the implication. It was provoked by the court’s oral examination of an
applicant for the bar who had barely failed in the written test. The applicant was admitted. Two justices dissented; it would seem quite easy
to send this case to Washington. Is anyone interested?


Four Best Manila Newspapers January Editorials


DIVERSIFICATION
Diversification is being preached in the Philippines on several counts. Diversification of
farming. Diversification of eating. Diversification of investing.
The experiences of the sugar industry preach
diversification. The experiences of the people
in the storm area to the south preach diversification. Most of the practical experiences of
industry generally, of the people everywhere,
preach diversification. In an age of specialization we are in the midst of arguments for diversification.
Dependence upon one crop, or a closely limited
number of crops, is dangerous. The point is
proved in Cuba, where specialization in sugar
cane culture has resulted in such an overproduction that the world markets are flooded. Hence
the difficult situation which affects the Philippines and threatens even worse injury. The
same application fits in the Philippines in lesser
degree.
Diversified farming in the Philippines has
inade extremely little progress. Farmers usually
know but one crop, frequently failing even to
provide the garden products for the family table.
Therefore when conditions of the market are
adverse for the one crop, or when storms or
other forces stop or materially reduce production
of the single crop immediate adversity follows.
Reasonable diversification would relieve the
situation.
To a material degree diversification is difficult
in the Philippines. That is especially true in
the case of coconuts, although there is absolutely
nothing to prevent more gardening and more
spare-time attention to minor crops. The
same might be said of sugar cane and rice to a
considerable extent due to the long growing
period in one case e— he arrangement of the
fields in the other. Dut again there is nothing
to prevent the growing of minor crops for the
family table and sale at the markets. That is
diversification from the individual point of view.
But the diversification most needed should
come through the encouragement -of products
now neglected, such, for instance, as coffee, tea,
camphor, rubber, pineapples, and so on. Many
products for which the markets exist can be
grown here and should be, must be if Philippine
commerce is to have permanent health. That
is diversification from the national point of view.
A move is afoot now to encourage a corn diet,
to supplement the rice diet, to substitute for it
to a degree. The move is excellent. Variation


in foods is needed as a matter of proper feeding
and also as a matter of producing a food supply.
In the matter of investments diversification
is peculiarly needed as a force in industrialization.
Relatively little progress has been made in
teaching the lesson of investment. Economic
development will come closer home to the people
when the opportunities for investment begin
to be understood, when the people begin putting
savings, large and small, into stocks and bonds
and begin to earn incomes from them, when the
partnership between big business and small
money owners begins to be worked out.—Bulletin, January 5.


EDITORIAL SELECTIONS FOR
JANUARY
Bulletin, Jan. 5.—Diversification. Selected by Professor V. M. Hilario.
Herald, Jan. 24.—Irrespective of Religion. Selected by Professor Verne
Dyson.
Tribune, Jan. 22.—The Johnson Bill.
Selected by Professor C. V. Jamias.
Times, Jan. 16.—American Capital.
Selected by Mr. Jesus Valenzuela.
Certified: G. P. Shannon.
Selection of the best editorials each
month in the four Manila newspapers
published in English is made by an informal committee in the English department of the University of the Philippines under the supervision of Dr. G. P.
Shannon.—Ed.


IRRESPECTIVE OF RELIGION
The non-Christian population of the Philippines would have their voice heard in the Legislature. A petition to this effect has been
forwarded to Senate President Quezon so that
he may intercede for them.
Such a movement is a sign of progress. The
fact that the non-Christians would not cheerfully
accept a situation in the making of which their
voice has not been heard shows a growing consciousness of their rights. And such rights
cannot long be overlooked.
The Moro delegation composed of ranking
datus, and other Moro notables will request a
Moro representative for Lanao. They claim
there are among them men capable to discharge


the duties of a legislator, and it seems strange
that their district should be represented by a
man who is a total stranger in Lanao.
In our opinion, all other positions in the
government besides the Legislature should be
open to non-Christians. In the non-Christian
provinces, natives should be given equal chance
to enter the government service. We should
pride in having the non-Christians taking interest
in the government. And our leaders should
encourage their desire to participate in the
administration of their affairs.
There is one general policy of administratioir
in these Islands which guides the workings of
all local governments. Even if all the nonChristian provinces were to be in the hands of
non-Christians, we do not see how such autonomy
would affect the essentials of the policy of the
Philippine government. So long as there is a
decent respect for the law and the non-Christian
officials discharge their duties in consonance
with established customs and within the limitations imposed by social usages and by the law,
we believe that a government run by nonChristians would be as efficient as any Christian
province. Religion does not decide the capacity
of individuals to hold a government position.
The only enlightened policy that can be
countenanced by the government in connection
with the non-Christian population is to grant
them an ever increasing measure of autonomy
by giving them more and more active participation in the government.
The difference in religion between Christians
and Pagans in this country is a mere incident,
which should have no bearing upon their political
life. Religion has no quarrel with country.
We are all striving here for oneness. And one
way to attain it is the granting of equal opportunities to all in the public service and out
of it, irrespective of religious creeds.—Herald,
January 24.
THE JOHNSON BILL
The Johnson bill denying to the Filipinos the
right to become citizens of the United States,
is simply the culmination of a tendency long
apparent. Some American courts have denied
to the Filipinos the right to marry American
girls. Other courts have denied them the right
to acquire land in the United States. Still other
courts have ruled that they are not entitled to
what the Johnson bill declares they are not
entitled, namely, the privilege to become naturalized citizens of the United States. The proposed
measure would even withhold from the Filipinos
who have served honorably in the American
(Please lurn to page 22)


12


 AMEREAN
EAN
  


February, 1929


TOURING ISLANDS BY LIGHTHOUSE TENDER
(Concluded from page 9)


“It was 4 o’clock in the afternoon, dark a
squall blowing up. I do not know why—maybe
he knew his ship couldn’t face the rough weather
with such a heavy load—anyway, the captain
gave the order for the vessel to he turned back.
Then he left the bridge. One of his boys was
crying in the cabin.
The ship was turning sharply. She leaned
far over before a wave, righted herself, was
caught by a second wave and overturned. In
less than three minutes she disappeared.
“"Se salva quien puede,’ were the captain’s
last words. He and his two boys went down
with the ship.
"Fifty hours later, seventy men on overloaded
life rafts drifted ashore near an isolated village
on the head of Bondoc peninsula, thirty five
miles away. The rest were never heard of. Ik
is believed they were eaten by sharks.
“Of course, there is a law to prevent the overloading of ships. But the steamship company
says the captain alone was responsible. Its
agents were not en hand to interfere. The
captain does not defend himself. He is dead.”
May 2.—This evening we were on Tailon, the
kind of an island on which people in romances
are marooned. Its lighthouse is automatic and,
except for the semiannual visits of government
boats, tends itself. The tower is made almost
inaccessible by the surrounding vegetation. It,
and the traces of a fisherman’s campfire, were the
only visible reminders of the existence of mankind. One end of the little oval of land is a
rocky promontory; the center is a patch of scrubby green trees and ground vines; all the rest is
wide, smooth, white beach. A little way back
from the water line the sand appears to be alive
and shifting. Shell animals of every dreamed of
shape, size and color tumble over each other
and move to and fro with a nimbleness that belies
the tradition of the snail’s slowness. They
seemed even more reluctant to encounter us
than we them, so we courageously remained on
their island until the daylight was gone.
May 3.—This morning we attained thenorthernmost point of our voyage, Polillo, on the island


of Polillo, for which our ship was named. It is
a poor but pretty little hamlet which does a
not-very-flourishing business in copra. All of
its two or three hundred inhabitants were ranged
on the shore to witness our landing as we were
rowed in from the cutter. While under the
guidance of the captain, the four of us wandered
about the streets, the Polillans followed at a
diffadent but interested distance. When, however, two of our party plunged into the water
for a swim, all of Polillo was transfixed with
amazement and unhospitably allowed its three
remaining guests to continue their sightseeing
entirely unattended. After twenty uneventful
minutes a burst of laughter drew attention from
the swimmers to the beach. There came a
"water nymph” flitting oceanward in perfect
musical comedy style. Draped in an inverted
brown sack and crowned by a battered and
drooping felt hat, the sylph skipped lightly to the
water’s edge, flung herself (or was it himself?) down
in a shallow spot and performed a most remarkable, expiring fish “take off" on the crawl stroke.
Inspect Coal Mine.
May 4.—We stopped at Liguan for another
load of coal this afternoon. While there we
were shown through the little mine by one of its
owners who came to the ship to greet us.
We left Liguan at 6:30, and an hour later were
in Legaspi, the scene of our memnorable descent
to the Verac. When we were here before the
captain charitably delayed our departure in
order to give the crew an opportunity to dance in
the town’s cabarets, of which, in spite of the
smallness of the place, there are two. At dinner
this evening, having learned that we should not
sail until morning, we determined to conduct a
personal investigation of night life in a tropical
seaport. Accordingly, we braved the now somewhat diminished horrors of landing and arrived
on the scene of gaiety just a few minutes ahead
of our shipmates, officers and men.
May 6.—Late yesterday morning the Polillo
was rising and falling rhythmically on an even
swell that caused her passengers to remark to


one another that once more they were in the
open Pacific. Toward the middle of the afternoon the waves began to grow larger and rougher.
Clouds dimmed the glare of the sun. My companions lay on their cots on the deck, groaning
in the agonies of seasickness. Suddenly, with a
sharp, hissing sound, fine rain swept down upon
us splashing the deck, crinkling the surface of
the water and wiping out the line between sea and
sky. By this time the Polillo was turning first
her port side then her starboard heavenward.
She seemed to stand upright on her stern, pause
a moment, then plunge over the summit of a
wave and bury her bow in the water beyond.
The ship’s three officers stood on the bridge,
peering anxiously through binoculars into the
obscurity ahead. The rain stopped; the sun
set, leaving a dull, angry glow behind him; a
round, full moon struggled through the storm
clouds and shone in a fantastic, writhing path of
pale gold across the turbulency beneath. Gradually the tossing of the ship grew less violent, the
waves became smaller and smaller until at last
we seemed to stand on the surface of a mirror.
Splash! Down went the anchor.
May 8.—For three days we lay at anchor in
San Ramon bay, watching the drifting clouds,
gray sea and pounding surf. Every book on
board was put to use and even the ship’s crew
took to swimming for amusement. Finally, this
morning, the barometer rose, and we set sailona
still restless ocean.
May 9.—Today, the last day of our cruise,
we were given an opportunity to examine a light
placed by the Spaniards in 1890. We reached
it by climbing a narrow, winding stairway to the
top of a stone tower. Kerosene furnishes the
fuel. The light itself is inclosed in concentric
arcs of glass, two inches wide. The diameter of
the outer circle formed by the arcs is 4 feet. On
one side the circle is divided in half. The whole
revolves slowly, throwing out to sea at regular intervals one long red flash and two short white ones.
After a final swim in the surf, we again boarded the Polillo under a sky completely flooded
with brilliant sunset colors, as though a grand
finale had been deliberately arranged to mark the
end of our two wel .s adventuring.


New Shipments of


Albums


Tablets


Blank Books


Numbering Machines


Time Books


Paper Plates


Memo Books


Pins


Clips


Stamp Pads and Rubber


Paper Fasteners


Stamp Ink


Thumb Tacks


Liquid and Rubber Erassers


Waterman’s Inks


Acco Fasteners and Folders


Carters Inks and Paste


Photo Engravers Glue


Diamond Inks and Paste


Mucilage


Signet Inks and Paste


Hydraulic Fountain Moisteners


Higgins Inks


Boston Pencil Sharpeners


Envelopes


Desk Glasses


Papeteries


Special Waterman’s Fountain


Inkstands


Pens


Penpoints


Work Organizers and Distri

Pen Trays


butors


Ticonderoga Pencils


Rulers


Colored Pencils


Philippine Education Co., Inc.


101-103 Escolta


Manila, P. I.


Wholesale and Retail Departments. . . . . . . . . . . . . Tel. 2-21-31


Stacionery Department......


. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tel. 2-35-37


If there is anything you need in the way of Artists,


Surveyors, School, Office,


or Printers’ Supplies, give us


a ring.
--


Puaiae Galara


Comfort and Quality
Our Models for Men are unusually
fine this year but there is a full
line for every member of the family.
Quality and Comfort in every pair.
HIKE SHOE FACTORY
Sty le Creators
286 San Marcelino
Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


February, 1929


  


13


Universally Popular!
laniia Sigdio

C
E


“MANILA CIGARS,” which are HAND-MADE LONG FILLER, are a product
which both the wholesaler and the retailer can depend upon for profit.
To the wholesaler, "MANILA CIGARS" offer quick turnovers.
To the retailer, this product is a repeater.
Such results are made possible by the combination of good qualities of Philippine
leaf tobacco seldom found in other tobacco. A pleasing taste, delicate aroma, and even
burn are inherent in the selected tobacco used, grown in the Cagayan Valley which is
annually fertilized by Nature by the overflowing of the Cagayan River.
The more one smokes “MANILA CIGARS,” the surer he is of this product’s unexcelled qualities.
There are “MANILA CIGARS” of all shapes and classes which offer wonderful values.
List of Distributors Furnished on Request
Addr ess:
CHARLES A. BOND
Philippine Tobacco Agent
15 William Street; New York City, U. S. A.
Or
THE COLLECTOR OF INTERNAL REVENUE
Manila, P. I.


N ANSCITEN LTAEE TEN MAEA IA MEREAN AREN A CAEANIO


14


  


February, 1929


"A Hundred Years From Now”: La Vanguardia Editorial


According to a telegram of the Associated
Press, the Chinese have celebrated with great
rejoicing in their principal cities the conquest
they have just achieved in the advent of tariff
autonomy in their country, after having been
deprived of the right for nearly eighty years
by virtue of the Nanking treaty imposed by
England. The Chinese have striven valiantly
for restoration of this right, they have reason
to rejoice in a triumph that marks a new era in
their national life. With autonomy in tariff
matters, their political independence is more


standing in i alf of free trade and the open
door, and reduce the dimensions of the artificial
walls of protective tariffs—knowing positively
that under a reg ne of free trade the chances
of their triumphing in commercial competition
are about 80 in 100 in their favor because of the
low cost of their manufactures. Our statesmen
must concentrate all the force of their imagination and arm themselvek with a penetrating
vision to read beyond the immediate future and
make then elves masters of the very difficult
role that t e Philippines must play in this great


VICTOR CLARK COMING
Nang aag a SaMaNg g Ia Ng P9a
instead of packing my trunk for San Francisco
and the Far West and East. I have been called
here to make an economic survey of the Island,
and shall be busy with the job until the end of
the winter or later. Porto Rico is an old stamping ground of mine, as I was here in the days of
the military government nearly 30 years ago.
The changes are very remarkable and gratifying,


IN MANILA'S CHINATOWN
Left to right: Native Chinese boys, Chinese cart-driver, Chinese boy making store deliveries, grandfather treats the children, a cargador waits for a delivery
job. Manila’s Chinese population is estimated at 50,000. Everything from hoofing treadmills to international banking engages their energies.


real and effective, domestic condition will become more stable, and the ties of union among
the different provinces will be better reinforced,
if China succeeds in purifying her administrative
organization and ridding it of venality. The
great enemy of China is her bureaucracy, which
is woefully corrupt.
China, because of her magnitude, the great
Atent of her territory, and the way in which she
is progressing in modern industrialism, may well
become in time the United States of Asia. This
possibility does not want probability. China is
nearer North America than she is to Europe;
her ideas of government have more affinity
with those predominating in the United States
than with those of the old world. Japan, another
Asiatic nation, is entering, or has now fully
entered, upon the highway of modern industrialism, in many instances her merchant princes are
taking example from the United States. The
great danger, the tremendous economic rivalry
of the future, will come when these Asiatic
countries which are rapidly adopting the modes
of the occident, familiarizing themselves with
the secrets of its technique, are converted into
centers of enormous factory production with
their great supplies of relatively cheap labor,
and seek outlets for their products in the markets
of the world.
We Filipinos can gain an idea of the industrial
advancement in these countries by noticing the
manufactures they are exhibiting in their modest
pavilions at the carnival. China manufactures
liquors, electrical utensils, aluminum wares,
cloths, the finest of luxuries, printing presses,
shoes, etc., and the Japanese, barbed wire, zinc
sheeting, galvanized iron, screens, chemical
products, surgical instruments and an infinite
variety of other things, consumption of which,
in view of necessities created by the progress of
civilization, is inevitable. These countries, once
they are industrially strong, will necessarily
pursue the same course pursued by Europe and
the United States. They will fervently speak
of peace, and construct powerful squadrons,
and deploy well-equipped troops, in the event
it becomes necessary to enforce their demands and
claims upon the world with such incontestable
force.
These two countries will unite eventually for
economic reasons, and come to a formal under

rivalry which is destined to ensue when China,
under tariff autonomy, reaches the same level
of development that Japan has now reached
after having obtained the same privilege from
the western powers. A hundred years hence, to
vary a little the title of a celebrated article by
Rizal, which came to be a prophecy, what may
not occur in Asia in this region called the Pacific?
If we Filipinos were free, we should learn by
experience the dangers in store.


The above is a translation in full of Pedro Aunario's
leaderin La Vancuardiaof February a. Hie isan ebveg:
ant and tclerant man; in tramiatione hon timne to time.
neither agreeing or disagreeing with him, unless editorial
commnent la made tne Veural may ty to fustar ie
readers some of his outstanding editorials.—ED.


in spite of the distress caused in some sections
by the recent hurricane.
“At dinner at Catalina Palace (Government
House) the other night I met Doctor and Mrs.
MCKinley who have just arrived from Manila and
who knowyou. They both spoke very pleasantiy
of the acquaintance. Doctor MCKinley takes
charge of the School of Tropical Medicine here.
“My trip to the Philippines has merely been
deferred, so far as I can stretch my eyes into the
future just now. I want to get out to the transpacific countries as soon as possible.
“It seems good to me to be back in the tropics”.
—VICTOR S. CLARK, (Formerly
the Editor of The Living Age).


Philippine Trust Company


COMMERCIAL AND SAVINGS BANK

Offers every Banking and Trust convenience./ Genuinely
conservative Banking is our aim, and we emphasize the
Business -Building Service we extend to our Depositors.
Frequently we are able to put our customers in possession
of facts that bring them prefit or save them loss.
4)% per Annum on Savings Accounts
Interest on Fixed Deposits upon Request
We would be glad to meet you personally and talk over
your banking requirements.



E
Financial Agents Transfe Agents
Recei:ers
Attorneys-in-fact
Registrars Administrators
Depository for Securities
Rendering a specialized service in the 
management and settlement of estates, etc. 4


Trustees
Guardians Executors


Wm. T. Nolting, Pres.
Monte de Piedad Building
Plaza Goiti—Manila
P. O. Box 150
-fTel. X11455


O


RLEO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENIS FLEASE MENTION THE AMES

IC


CAN CHAMBER Ol


S
A


RNAL


AR


S


February, 1929


I
THE AERICAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


More Franciscan


Last month we left off with the Franciscans
at Camalig, to begin with them again this month
at Polangui. The Franciscan records show
that this town was founded either in 1583 or
1584, by Fr. Baltasar de Magdalena, “the same
The first
who was in Camarines in 1583.”
site was unsuitable, and the town wa removed
to a hillside, "but it was evidently ir ved again,
because now it is found in a beautiful valley.”
Stone bridges on the roads connecting the town
with Oas and Libon are the work of Fr. Jose
Arnau, 1832. Fr. Alonso de San Juan built
the church of brick and stone in 1654, having
secured the permission of the central government in Manila (as was required in such matters)
todoso. Fr. Juan Bautista Marsa completed the
church in 1664. Two earlier structures, of timber,
had burned down. A church all of stone has
replaced the one built by Arnau and Marsa.
Good timber abounds and when Huerta wrote
in 1865 the town had 230 houses of timber
"and about 1,000 of nipa,” the palm universally
used in the islands for peasants’ houses. But
at the same period the casa real, or government house, in Polangui was a stone building.
There was a good limestone quarry, rich pastures surrounding the town, and valuable forests.
San Pedro Apostol is the patron saint.
Oas.—“Twelve principales from various
rancherias, baptized the same day by the Reverend Father Fr. Baltasar de los Reyes y Miranda,
or de la Magdalena, were the foundation stones
of this town. They must have been baptized
in 1585 or not later than 1587, as Father Baltasar arrived in the islands in 1583. The next
year we find him establishing Polangui, and a
baptism by Fr. Geronimo de Aguilar appears.
in the parish registry of Oas under date of September 13, 1587. Father Geronimo displayed
such zeal in the conversion of the people that
between September 13, 1587, and October 8,
1588, he baptized 451 persons between the ages
of infancy and 19 years.
The church is under the advocacy of the
archangel St. Michael and dates from 1586.
In 1695 Fr. Francisco de la Anunciacion built
a stone church; this burned down and a new
one was built in 1816 by Fr. Francisco Argoneses
which was repaired and improved by Fr. Manuel
Brihuega in 1848. Here too timber is abundant,
so that Huerta found 200 wooden houses in the
town. It is a rich farming region.
Cagsaua.—“The first person in this town
who had the blessed fortune of being reborn in
the waters of holy baptism was a boy twelve
years old who was given the name of Pedro
Tabao, his father being Calipig Tabao and his
mother Nolmog (both Malayan names). This
child was baptized March 26, 1587, and it is
probable it was by the hand of the sainted
thartyr San Pedro Bautista (later a Franciscan
martyr in Japan and known as the apostle of the
Province of St. Gregory the Great, as the Franciscans designate the Philippines), because he
was given the name of Pedro, though no document exists by which this may be verified.”
Fr. Domingo Santiago organized the town
in 1595 and administered it as a barrio of Camalig until 1605, when it acquired the status of
a pueblo and parish under Fr. Alonso de Jadraque. “The Dutch assaulted and burned the
town in 1636, advancing up the Albay river and
attacking on July 25, the very day when the
town was joyously celebrating a fiesta in honor
of its patron saint, St. James the Apostle (Santiago). The church was burned by the Dutch
and in 1675 Fr. Acacio de la Concepcion built
one of stone, which was torn down and rebuilt
with a convento in 1724 by Fr. Francisco
Blanco. In 1851 Fr. Vicente Lillo extended the
elevation of the tower and provided the tile roof.
Father Huerta speaks of the mountains, Oag, Camalig and Lignion, between Cagsaua and Albay,
being planted to Manila hemp in great part
with some fields of rice on terraced ground."
Here is a curiosity:
"Among the various springs of remarkable
water abounding along the border, is worthy
of mention particularly one which flows from
the base of the volcano (Mayon) at the site of
Budiao, a town destroyed by an eruption. This
spring throws out a stream about a cubic foot
in dimension, which is bad-tasting when fresh


but potable after it has evaporated for a while.
Of a morning, until about 9 o’clock, the water
comes out very hot and throwing off a great
deal of steam; but as the atmospheric temperature
increases, that of the spring water falls; by


Below is a summary of the governmental and other public duties
performed by parish priests in the
Philippines during Spanish times,
as reported to the Taft commission
by the provincial of the Franciscans, the order whose missions are
being noted in the current series
of articles:
Certify the correctness of the cedulas (the poll tax).
President of the statistics board.
President of the municipal census. Every man has a character
certificate. Arrestedin another town
than his own, his antecedents were
called for; but the courts would not
accept themwithout the priest'svise.
Certify the ability of men to serve
in the military. From the parish
books would be made up each year
a list of young men 20 years old
the names were placed inan urn and
then drawn out, every fifth man
being chosen, so it was called the
quintas.
Supervise municipal elections.
Censor municipal budgets.
President of the local prison board
and inspector of prison rations.
In the provincial capital, member
of the provincial board; there were
also two curates on this board.
Public works and allied matters
came before this board.
Member of the board for partitioning crown lands. After the
land was allotted, when a parcel
came up for sale the board passed
upon the ownership and right to
sell.
In some instances parish priests
in provincial capitals acted as auditors. (Many of the duties were
assigned to the priests by the Maura
municipal act).
Counselor of the municipal council.
Supervisor of the election of the
police force. This also had to be
submitted to the provincial governor.
Examiner of pupils in grades I and
II of the public schools.
Censor of plays in the language
of the parish, deciding whether they
were against public peace or public
morals. These plays weregiven in
connection with parish fiestas.
"Besides the above, there were
other small things which devolved
upon the priests."
It may be added that there was
no provincial press, but that in
Manila was censored by ecclesiastical authority.


noon the spring water comes out cool and continues flowing cool until midnight. The water
was analyzed about the year 1850 by an Englishman by the name of Henry Roberts, who said
it was useful in curing rheumatism and cutaneous diseases; and instances of such cures have
really been observed. The analysis made by
this pharmacist is as follows: sodium chlorate
0.579; sulphate of lime, 0.403; carbonate of
lime, 0.314; hydrogen sulphate, 0.283; water,
998.421; total, 1,000.”
The medicinal springs found widely scattered
in the Philippines, and abundantly in the Bikol
region being described, will be, some of them,
famous resorts when the islands have a larger
population and better transportation and hotel
facilities.
Ligao.—“The name of this town derives from
a tree thus called which formerly abounded in


Sampongan, Mabao and Hocoman, gt
named reigning in Babasi, which was
a village of the town. These chiefer
discord concerning who should be inre
command, and a Spanish captain m
in pacifying them under the learobo
s ne
Pagquilatan, who submitted to thialf;
of Spain soon afterward together w
rancherias.” The conversion of thue
began in 1606 and the first baptism tot
August 24, 1608, under the hand of E
of Polangui. Ligao was first attachelangui, later to Oas, and was made
parish in 1665, with Fr. Pedro
the parish priest. The first pat
Esteban. A wooden church wa’
but Fr. Francisco Vicente built one
stone in 1676 and dedicated it tol
nora la Virgen. This church was!
another of like materials in 1709
fonso San Buenaventura, which ch
ably the one still in service, since
1865. Fr. Manuel Royo built t
fagade in 1812, and Fr. Tomas
repaired the whole structure in 1846
These old formalists, how sturdily
what a simple recipe they had for lif
people gladly accepted. But nothi
abiding in this world than change,
the age of commerce and science :
which supplanted the age of faith
present age—an age in which men a.
xious to believe than merely to kno
into all secrets, even those of the in?
friars themselves at last lived not
sacrifice life and die in faith; the heroisi
pioneers became a revered memory, an
to be a banner set on high.
Guinobatan.—“The name Guinob.
nifies conquered, deriving from the verl
which means to conquer.” Separht
Camalig in 1688, with Fr. A
the first parish priest. The o
on the right bank of the river (o
but was obliterated in the ert
in 1814 and the new town wa.ll of
called Mauraro. Not satisfied hers
moved the town to Panganiran, al,
to the original site where the eruh
and many others have disturbed the
induced them to abandon their ano
The Bridge of Isabel II over the Bic:
in this jurisdiction. It has two widf
is 1,500 feet long and 54 feet wide.
of the largest bridges the Spaniardi
instead of the expense falling upon
government, as it would now, it eanlv
by the towns of Oas, Ligagd
Camalig; the work was begpec
completion was blessed, witharac
ceremonies, August 7, 1853.s of
The stone church is und uni'
N. S. de la Asuncion. It muhe Jew
ly built one, say within thiolatry
Huerta does not give the daental d
Bulabulad are the Bikol ned as tl
of this town. The lattejeity apl
Waters; the former, Pool their va.
Waterfall. It would be prof,f truth an
to list all the place names e fathers,
school those of its particumprudent
the correct spelling and mostics. Acl
Out of this philological datepugnant
able, should come a great teason, tl
native character and apprierable bi
beauty. The terms seem ch they
their meaning is made kna of the M
seen to be nicely chosen.
Pilar.—Made up o'in March)
Nino, Putiao, Sapa,-
Palatoan by order
in 1861. Most of
selves: Sapa, creInang, mother;
The town wahave a perm
house, and
built. Orwill be
del P
for
Spa
est


February, 1929


MBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL
THE AMERICAN C


solicited for their own practice. The ruin of
the temple, of the city, and of the public religion
of the Jews, was severely felt by the Nazarenes;
as in their manners, though not in their faith,
they maintained so intimate a connection with
their impious countrymen, whose misfortunes
were attributed by the Pagans to the contempt,
and more justly ascribed by the Christians to the
wrath, of the Supreme Deity. The Nazarenes
retired from the ruins of Jerusalem to the little
town of Pella beyond the Jordan, where that
ancient church languished above sixty years in
solitude and obscurity. They still enjoyed the
comfort of making frequent and devout visits to
the Holy City, and the hope of being one day
restored to those seats whic’, both nature and
religion taught them to love is well as to revere.
Pnt at length, under the r ign of Hadrian, the
Sesperate fanaticism of the Jews filled up the
asure of their calamities; and the Romans,
sperated by their repeated rebellions, exer
ci ed the rights of victory with unusual rigor.
Tae emperor founded, under the name of AClia
(apitolina, a new city on Mount Sion, to which
 gave the privileges of a colony; and denounc
ing the severest penalties against any of the
Jewish people who should dare to approach its
precincts, he fixed a vigilant garrison of a Roman
cohort to enforce the execution of his orders.
The Nazarenes had only one way left to escape
the common proscription, and the force of truth
was on this occasion assisted by the influence of
temporal advantages. They elected Marcus
for their bishop, a prelate of the race of the
Gentiles, and most probably a native either of
Italy or of some of the Latin provinces. At his
persuasion the most considerable part of the
congregation renounced the Mosaic law, in the
practice of which they had persevered above a
century. By this sacrifice of their habits and
prejudices they purchased a free admission into
the colony of Hadrian, and more firmly cemented
their union with the Catholic church.
When the name and honors of the church of
Jerusalem had been restored to Mount Sion,
the crimes of heresy and schism were imputed to
the obscure remnant of the Nazarenes which
refused to accompany their Latin bishop. They
still preserved their former habitation of Pella,
spread themselves into the villages adjacent to
Damascus, and formed an inconsiderable church
in the city of Beroea, or, as it is now called, of
Aleppo, in Syria. The name of Nazarenes was
deemed too honorable for those Christian Jews,
and they soon received, from the supposed pov.
erty of their understanding, as well as of their
condition, the contemptuous epithet of Ebionites. In a few years after the return of the
church of Jerusalem, it became a matter of doubt
and controversy, whether a man who sincerely
acknowledged Jesus as the Messiah, but who still
continued to observe the law of Moses, could
possibly hope for salvation. The humane temper
-of Justin Martyr inclined him to answer this
question in the affirmative; and though he expressed himself with the most guarded diffidence,
he ventured to determine in favor of such an
imperfect Christian, if he were content to prac

INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBERETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: "YPIL,” Cebu.


tise the Mosaic cercinonies, without pretending
to assert their general use or necessity. But
when Justin was pressed to declare the sentiment
of the church, he confessed that there were very
many among the orthodox Christians, who not
only excluded their Judaizing brethren from the
hope of salvation, but who declined any intercourse with them in the common offices of friendship, hospitality, and social life. The more
rigorous opinion prevailed, as it was natural to
expect, over the milder; and an eternal bar of
separation was fixed between the disciples of
Moses and those of Christ. The unfortunate
Ebionites, rejected from one religion as apostates, and from the other as heretics, found themselves compelled to assume a more decided character; and although some traces of that obsolete
sect may be discovered as late as the fourth
century, they insensibly melted away, either in
the church or in the synagogue.
While the orthodox church preserved a just
medium between excessive veneration and im

Franciscan Church, Intramuros
proper contempt for the law of Moses, the
various heretics deviated into equal but opposite
extremes of error and extravagance. From the
acknowledged truth of the Jewish religion, the
Ebionites had concluded that it could never be
abolished. From its supposed imperfections,
the Gnostics as hastily inferred that it never was
instituted by the wisdom of the Deity. There
are some objections against the authority of
Moses and the prophets which too readily present themselves to the sceptical mind; though
they can only be derived from our ignorance of
remote antiquity, and from our incapacity to
form an adequate judgment of the divine economy. These objections were eagerly embraced
and as petulantly urged by the vain science of the
Gnostics. As those heretics were, for the most
part, averse to the pleasures of sense, they
morosely arraigned the polygamy of the patriarchs, the gallantries of David, and the seraglio of Solomon. The conquest of the land of
Canaan, and the extirpation of the unsuspecting
natives, they were at a loss how to reconcile with
the common notions of humanity and justice.
But when they recollected the sanguinary list of
murders, of executions, and of massacres, which
stain almost every page of the Jewish annals,
they acknowledged that the barbarians of Palestine had exercised as much compassion towards
their idolatrous enemies, as they had ever shown
to their friends or countrymen. Passing from
the sectaries of the law to the law itself, they
asserted that it was impossible that a religion
which consisted only of bloody sacrifices and
trifling ceremonies, and whose rewards as well as
punishments were all of a carnal and temporal
virtue, or renature, could inspire the love -
The Mosaic
strain the impetuosity of passic


Phifippine Acetyiene
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PAt
MANILA, P. I.


account of the creation and fall of
treated with profane derision by e0
who would not listen with patience,ll
of the Deity after six days’ labor, 1a
Adam, the garden of Eden, the trege
of knowledge, the speaking serpent, ip
fruit, and the condemnation pronounc:
human kind for the venial offence of
progenitors. The God of Israel was
represented by the Gnostics as a bein
passion and to error, capricious in
implacable in his resentment, meanlv
his superstitious worship, and
partial providence to a single pec
transitory life. In such a charac
discover none of the features of
omnipotent Father of the uni
allowed that the religion of the Jew
what less criminal than the idolatry
tiles; but it was their fundamental d
the Christ whom they adored as tl
brightest emanation of the Deity apl
earth to rescue mankind from their va.
and to reveal a new system nf truth an
tion. The most learned of the fathers,
singular condescension, have imprudent
ted the sophistry of the Gnostics. Ack
ing that the literal sense is repugnant
principle of faith as well as reason, th
themselves secure and invulnerable ba
ample veil of allegory, which they
spread over every tender part of the M
pensation.
(Continued in March)
UNIVERSAL BATTER
P26.50


One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERV
Tel. S
110 P. Faura


N RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   O


OURNAL


February, 1929


je Roman Catholic Church made in the Philippines, in the 16th and 17th centuries, its single
jal conquest in the Far East. Here it remains the church of the people. It is so much, indeed,
led in the spiritual and econoric life of the islands that reflection upon them, such as is in
s in this magazine, properly goes back to include a treatise on its origins. During the next
nths, therefore, such a treatise will be published in convenient installments. It is that of
n, an author selected for his erudition, impartiality, and enlightened piety: in whom the Chuich
ither a friend nor an enemy, but in whom the reader has a mentor unsurpassed. The subject
; of intense interest and the most instructive importance.—ED.


Jewish religion was admirably fitted for
e, but it was never designed for conquest;
eems probable that the number of prosas never much superior to that of
mhe divine promises were originally
distinguishing rite of circumcision
to a single family. When the
Abraham had multiplied like the
sea, the Deity, from whose mouth
d a system of laws and ceremonies,
iself the proper and as it were the
of Israel; and with the most jealous
ed his favorite people from the rest
The conquest of the land of Caanan
anied with so many wonderful and
y bloody circumstances, that the
ews were left in a state of irreconcilty with all their neighbors. They
ommanded to extirpate some of the
rons tribes, and the execution of the
had seldom been retarded by the
f humanity. With the other nations
forbidden to contract any marriages
es; and the prohibition of receiving
the congregation, which in some cases
mual, almost always extended to the
e seventh, or even to the tenth generae obligation of preaching to the Genaith of Moses had never been inculcated
ept of the law, nor were the Jews inimpose it on themselves as a voluntary
aldmission of new citizens that unsocial
ted by the selfish vanity of the
ian by the generous policy of
scendants of Abraham were
ppinion that they alone were the
enant, and they were apprehenishing the value of their inheritance
too easily with the strangers of the
arger acquaintance with mankind
eir knowledge without correcting
de.s; and whenever the God of
ed any new votaries, he was much
ed to the inconstant humor of polyto the active zeal of his own misThe religion of Moses seems to be
or a particular country as well as for
and if a strict obedience had
-rder, that every male, three
should present himself before
t would have been impossible
ever have spread themselves
limits of the promised land.
indeed removed by the dele of Jerusalem; but the most
of the Jewish religion was
uction; and the Pagans, who
at the strange report of an
re at a loss to discover what
, or what could be the inship which was destitute of
s, of priests and of sacrifices.
fallen state, the Jews, still
y and exclusive privileges,
f courting, the society of
till insisted with inflexible
s of the law which it was in
ise. Their peculiar distincand a variety of trivial
vances, were so many
rersion for the other
prejudices they were
painful and even
vas alone capable
om the door of
stianity offerhe strength
he weight
truth
efully


and whatever was now revealed to mankind concerning the nature and designs of the Supreme
Being was fitted to increase their reverence for
that mysterious doctrine. The divine authority
of Moses and the prophets was admitted, and
even established, as the firmest basis of Christianity. From the beginning of the world, an
uninterrupted series of predictions had announced and prepared the long-expected coming
of the Messiah, who, in compliance with the gross
apprehensions of the Jews, had been more frequently represented under the character of a
King and Conqueror, than under that of a Prophet, a Martyr, and the Son of God. By his
expiatory sacrifice the imperfect sacrifices of the
temple were at once consummated and abolished. The ceremonial law, which consisted only
of types and figures was succeeded by a pure and
spiritual worship equally adapted to all climates,
as well as to every condition of mankind; and to
the initiation of blood was substituted a more
harmless initiation of water. The promise of
divine favor, instead of being partially confined
to the posterity of Abraham, was universally


Santa Cruz Church


proposed to the freeman and the slave, to the
Greek and to the barbarian, to the Jew and to
the Gentile. Every privilege that could raise
the proselyte from earth to heaven, that could
exalt his devotion, secure his happiness, or even
gratify that secret pride which, under the semblance of devotion, insinuates itself into the
human heart, was still reserved for the members
of the Christian church; but at the same time all
mankind was permitted, and even solicited, to
accept the glorious distinction, which was not
only proffered as a favor, but imposed as an
obligation. It became the most sacred duty of
a new convert to diffuse among his friends and
relations the inestimable blessing which he had
received, and to warn them against a refusal that
would be severely punished as a criminal disobedience to the will of a benevolent but allpowerful Deity.
The enfranchisement of the church from the
bonds of the synagogue was a work, however, of
some time and of some difficulty. The Jewish
converts, who acknowledged Jesus in the character of the Messiah foretold by their ancient
oracles, respected him as a prophetic teacher of
virtue and religion; but they obstinately adhered
to the ceremonies of their ancestors, and were
desirous of imposing them on the Gentiles, who
continually augmented the number of believers.
These Judaizing Christians seem to have argued
with some degree of plausibility from the divine
origin of the Mosaic law, and from the immutable
perfections of its great Author. They affirmed,
that, if the Being who is the same through all
eternity had designed to abolish those sacred
tem; rites which had served to distinguish his chosen same toleration which at first they had humbly


The
Philippine Guaranty Compary,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS SURETYSHIPS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest
Call or write for particulars
Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
P. O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


people, the repeal of them would have beer nless clear and solemn than their first promt:, a
tion; that, instead of those frequent decltions which either suppose or assert the pe .
tuity of the Mosaic religion, it would have b 
represented as a provisionary scheme intende
last only to the coming of the Messiah, w”.
should instruct inankind in a more perfect m aa
of faith and of worship; that the Messiah hi
self, and his disciples who conversed with I.
on earth, instead of authorizing by their exami'
the most minute observances of the Mosaic la
would have published to the world the abolit 
of those useless and obsolete ceremonies, witho'
suffering Christianity to remain during so ma y
years obscurely confounded among the seo s
of the Jewish church. Arguments like the
appear to have been used in the defence of t
expiring cause of the Mosaic law; but the indu
try of our learned divines has abundantly en
plained the ambiguous language of the Olo
Testament, and the ambiguous conduct of the
apostolic teachers. It was proper gradually to
unfold the system of the gospel, and to pronounce, with the utmost caution and tenderness,
a sentence of condemnation so repugnant to the
inclination and prejudices of the believing Jews.
The history of the church of Jer" dem affe,da lively proof of the necesoaty of those precautions, and of the decp impression which the
Jewish religion had made on the minds of its
sectaries. The first fifteen bishops of Jerusalen
were all circumcised Jews; and the congregation
over which they presided united the law of Moses
with the doctrine of Christ. It was natural that
the primitive tradition of a church which was
founded only forty days after the death of Christ,
and was governed almost as many years under
the immediate inspection of his apostle, should
be received as the standard of orthodoxy. The
distant churches very frequently appealed to the
authority of their venerable Parent, and relieved
her distresses by a liberal contribution of alms.
But when numerous and opulent societies were
established in the great cities of the empire, in
Antioch, Alexandria, Ephesus, Corinth, and
Rome, the res rence which Jerusalem had inspired to all ne Christian colonies insensibly
diminished. The Jewish converts, or, as they
were afterwards called, the Nazarenes, who had
laid the foundations of the church, soon found
themselves overwhelmed by the increasing mul
titudes, that from all the various religions of
polytheism enlisted under the banner of Christ;
and the Gentiles, who, with the approbation of
their peculiar apostle, had rejected the intolerable weight of the Mosaic ceremonies, at length
refused to their more scrupulous brethren the


ENIS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERIGAN GNANGER OF CONMERCE JGURNAL




  


February, 1929


He That Saveth His Life


je Romar
gal conqu much arresting and comforting
led in th an article on tuberculosis in the
is in this cury of last year that the dismnths, thion is reprinted herewith. The
n, an autjaurice Fishberg of New York, is a
ither a frecialist and the author of a stands of intenn the disease.—ED.
Jewish
III
e, but ifumbers, only one out of ten people
eems perculosis, despite the fact that all
as nene have also been infected with
THli. This is surely enough to show
nalone is insufficient to cause disease.
appears that actual tuberculous diexception rather than the rule after
le average person passes through life
ay, despite the tubercle bacilli within
We know very little about the reasons,
become sick while most escape, but
y that these infections are salutary to
ajority of humanity. For it has been
 just as in measles, typhoid, scarlet
many other infectious diseases, an
uberculosis immunizes against another
the same virus. Most attempts made
n immunologists at the prevention of
se are based on this immunological
le practically universal tuberculization
ed humanity has certain protective
e, clearly seen in peoples who have not
enefit of infection during childhood. In
1 Africa tuberculosis is very rare at
and it was unknown until introduced by
icavelers and settlers. Likewise, the
a were free till recent years because of
ez of contact with civilized people and
ibacilli. But when these tubercle-free
e brought to Europe or America they
s infected, and the disease usually runs
very acute and, in the majority of
I course. During the World War the
ops brought from the interior of Asia
glish had an enormous rate of infection
h from tuberculosis. The same may
 when some youth or girl brought up
itry, secluded from contact with the
rge, reaches the city; in such persons
is apt to be very acute, the so-called
sumption. But it is different with
o have been raised in tuberculized
in the large industrial cities. The
though undoubtedly infected, escape
e altogether, while those who become
tuberculosis suffer from a more or less


chronic form of the disease, and it tends strongly
to healing.
The protective nature of tuberculous infection
in the vast majority of cases is considered of such
great importance that some authorities speak
with dread lest the current crusade be successful
in preventing the infection of children and thus
depriving them of its immunizing effect. I quote


but one of many eminent authorities, Louis
Cobbett, of Cambridge, England, who thus expresses himself in his book, “The Causes of
Tuberculosis”:
At the same time it would appear that great
care must be taken lest things be made worse
instead of better; for if this immunization by
means of small doses of widely distributed
bacilli is playing any important part in increasing the resistance of the present generation,
it is just possible that by checking the distribution of the bacilli, as for example by discourag

ing indiscriminate spitting, or by abolishing
bovine tuberculosis from dairy cattle, we may
actually be undermining the resistance of the
race, and paving the way for a future increase
in the severity of the disease.
How much protection is offered by these early
infections is shown by several very interesting
phenomena. The most intimate contact o
individuals is in the marital state and hence, if
the crusaders are right, this should prove a
frequent source of transmission of the disease.


However, we only rarely find tuberculosis in
both husband and wife. Some years ago I made
an investigation of this problem among a certain
group of tuberculous people who lived in poverty
in some of the most congested tenements in New
York City. Most of the consumptives investi
gated shared their beds with their consorts. Yet
in less than three per cent was tuberculous
disease found in both husband and wife—which
was less than the average expectation. Widows
whose husbands have succumbed to tuberculosis
only rarely develop the disease. It is also noteworthy that only rarely do we meet both husband
and wife taking treatment for tuberculosis in
a sanatorium. It is, of course, different in the
cities where public health nurses pester wives of
tuberculous husbands to attend clinics for “observation," or as suspecte—which they may remain
for years. The vast majority of cases of tuberculosis in both husband and wife prove on investigation to have been present before the union was
contracted.
The immunity of the consorts of tuberculous
patients is probably due to infection with tubercle
bacilli during childhood, which we have seen to
be universal. This interpretation is the only
rational explanation we have for such phenomena as the rarity of tuberculous disease in
doctors, nurses and others on the hospital staffs
of institutions harboring tuberculous patients.
Experience shows that they are no more liable
to develop the disease than persons engaged in
other callings and less exposed to infection. And
it is not only a fact now, with precautions taken
against infection, but it was observed long ago,
when tuberculosis was not treated as an infectious disease.
Why do most of those infected with tubercle
bacilli get along very well for the rest of their
lives while a comparatively few develop a disabling or fatal form of the disease? The day
we find the reasons for this fact we may be on
the way to eradicating tuberculosis. Physicians
nowadays speak a great deal about predisposition, meaning that, owing to some constitutional
anomaly, the body of a predisposed person
succumbs in its struggle with the bacillus, while


Insular Life Assurance Co., Ltd


MANILA, P. I.
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oansonrealestates repayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
OR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


HOME OFFICE


Call or write for particulars to:


Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 115
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
Manila, P. I.
Kneedler Building
Telephone 2-36-74


SPONDING TO ADVERT


ENTS PLEASE MENTION   


February, 1929


MMERCE JOURNAL
THE AMERICAN
FO
BER G


19


those free from this anomaly survive despite the
bacilli. But we know little, I may say hardly
anything, about what structural or functional
anomalies thus predispose to tuberculous disease.
Indeed, we are so hazy about predisposition that.
no physician, even of the highest competence.
after examining a healthy person most thoroughly
and applying all available diagnostic tests, can
tell whether he or she will develop tuberculosis
later on. The suspects kept under observation
and in suspense in clinics and sanatoriums for
weeks, months or years are either not organically
sick at all, have other maladies, or are already
actively tuberculous.
At one time it was thought that slim persons
with flat chests, long necks, large bright eyes
and feeble musculature were predisposed to
tuberculosis. It was also believed, contrariwise,
that strong, muscular, well-nourished individuals
were safe against the bacillus. Careful observation has shown all this to be erroneous in most
cases. When a bony, emaciated, narrow-chested
man develops tuberculosis his chances of recovery
are good as a rule, because the progress of the
disease in such men is slow, and strong tendencies
to recovery are manifest. The reverse is true
of strong men, the professional boxers, runners
and football players. When they become sick
with tuberculosis, and this happens more often
than is appreciated, they are often carried off
very quickly. Physicians of the past generation
made a similar error with persons who had what
was called inherited tuberculous predisposition.
They were told to beware of consumption, for
they were thought to be more apt to acquire it
than others, and to fare very badly when they
got it. But the fact is that, barring infants,
when a person of tuberculous ancestry becomes
sick with the disease, his chances of recovery are
better than those of a man in whose family a
case of tuberculosis has never occurred."
These are not the only fallacies hammered
into the populace by those who persistently distribute piffle in the form of leaflets and booklets,
and even elaborate books, on the prevention of
tuberculosis as if they knew how to do it. No
one will question the adage that cleanliness is
next to godliness in all human affairs, but in
itself it has hardly anything to do with tuberculous disease. Excepting in freshly expectorated
sputum, tubercle bacilli virulent enough to
infect an animal have hardly ever been found in
the streets or in the dust of shops, factories, mills,
or public places. Likewise, the fresh air fiends
who insist that lack of sunshine is a direct cause
of consumption may be amazed when told that
coal-miners, who only rarely see the light of day,
are not often afflicted with tuberculosis. Another
class of workers in the dark are the employes
of the subways. Very few develop tuberculosis.
The vivid descriptions of the "lung blocks” in
New York City some twenty years ago did not
take into consideration that these dingy tenements were inhabited mainly by tenants who
could not pay the rents exacted in better houses
—often, no doubt, because the disease had already
disabled and impoverished them.
As bearing upon the greatest boast of those
engaged in the anti-tuberculosis crusade, the
reduction in mortality from this disease, I quote
the words of one who is an acknowledged authority in both biology and statistics—none less than
Dr. Raymond Pearl, head of the Institute for
Biological Research at the John Hopkins, who
said in an address before the American Public
Health Association in 1922.
Some persons are apt to get very angry if
one questions in the most objective and scientific spirit what are the causes of the decline
in the tuberculosis death-rate. They take
the ground, apparently, that because their
efforts to reduce this mortality were sincere
and honest and in the highest degree noble,
therefore the decline has been in actual fact
caused by these efforts, and that to question
them is to impugn both their motives and their
efficiency. As a matter of scientific fact, extremely little is known about why the mortality from tuberculosis has declined.
In such infections as smallpox and typhoid
forer, h. deei
lity clearly foilowed
tha in. oleciion el sinang areventative measEV  isa has not been the
 a
e of the tubercle


---


bacillus in 1882, no preventative measures
against infection had been taken; still, it appears
that the mortality from the disease had been
declining for many years. Dr. Arthur Ransome
has shown that the mortality rates increase
steadily as we go backward for more than 150
years:
In the years 1743-53 there were fairly accurate transcripts from the parish registers; the
proportion of deaths was rather more than
one fifth; in the first returns of the Register
General in 1838, in London, it was one to six


or eight. In other words, the rate per thousand deaths in the former period was about
200, and in the latter about 148. Hence in
the middle of the Eighteenth Century tuberculo . must have been still more common than
in 1838; and then the diminution in the mortality from the disease must have been proceeding steadily, at about the same rate as
observed in the earlier years.
A little reasoning will show that this could not
have gone on indefinitely, for if it had, every
Englishman five hundred years ago must have
died of tuberculosis. Karl Pearson, the highest
authority on biometrics in England, concludes
that
the mortality rate from tuberculosis has been
declining since 1838, 1. e., long before any
special measures had been taken for the control of the disease, or the segregation of the
sources of infection—tuberculous human beings
and animals—had been attempted.
Most other authorities in England, where the
decline can be measured for many years back
with some degree of certainty, are in agreement
with these views. In a recent report to his
government, John Brownlee, who ranks high
both as a physician and as a statistician and is
director of the Statistical Department of the
Medical Research Council, arrives at the conclusion that
there is no doubt that a considerable part of
the decline of tuberculosis in recent years is in
line with the biological properties of disease in
general, and has little to do with hygienic
conditions.
The crusade has plainly not worked effectively
in every place where it has been applied. For
instance, the mortality in 1924 in Syracuse,
N. Y., was 34.4 per 100,000, whereas in neighboring Albany it was 99.9, about three times as
high. In Trenton, N. J., it was 73.2, in Camden
66.5; in Cincinnati, O., 106.9, in Toledo 95.6,
and in Youngstown only 56.7. There must be
some reason for these differences, either in the
method of collecting statistics, in the racial or
age-group composition of the population, in the


occupations predominantly pursued, in local
climatic conditions, or in numerous other factors
about which we know little or nothing. But one
thing is clear; the campaign against infection.
which is all the crusaders can claim to have
pursued, has been futile. An examination of
the population born since the inauguration of the
campaign shows that all past childhood have
nevertheless been infected with tubercle bacilli.
IV
It may be amazing to those who have been


fed up with the stuff distributed by anti-tuberculosis societies and health boards, but it is a fact
that there is no unequivocal case on record showing that the exposure to infection of a civiliz..
adult in a modern city has been followed b.
tuberculous disease. Evidence is available,
indeed, that tuberculosis cannot be experimentally induced in humans as easily as it is inoculated into guinea pigs and rabbits. Injection of
tubercle bacilli into human beings has been tried
several times by experimenters and hardly any
serious harm has been observed to follow. Of
late several European physicians have tried
virulent tubercle bacilli as a cure for tuberculosis
in human beings. They have inoculated several
thousand bacilli under the skin of patients and
even injected them into veins, but no tuberculous
blood-poisoning was observed to follow. These
facts are in marked contrast to the ease with
which infants become sick after exposure, and it
is clear that the fear of infection with tubercle
bacilli is without foundation as regards adults.
If they are to become tuberculous, the causes are
not alone the tubercle bacilli, which everyone
has in his or her body, but other factors about
which we know little or nothing.
Much has been written about cases of tuberculosis that have followed soon after slight or
intimate contact, as those in Germany some
thirty years ago, in which it was believed that
sisters in a certain convent succumbed one after
another after moving into certain rooms in the
cloister in which tuberculous nuns had lived before. There have also been cited husbands who
succumbed to the disease after marrying tuberculous wives, and workmen who became sick
soon after contact in the workshop with coughing consumptives. But none of these cases will
bear close scrutiny. In that of the convent I
have mentioned, an investigation showed that
the morbidity was high in the institution mainly
because tuberculous nuns were sent there in
larger numbers than to others; it was also found
that the mortality was not actually much above
that among the general run of women of the
same age and social condition. The few cases


IRLS


First in 1888—foremost ever since


S LONIG S IDVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


20


  


February, 1929


Going to Washington for State Secretaryship


of conjugal tuberculosis that have been noted
in popular and technical literature are analogous
to the many cases of cancer and diabetes in
both husband and wife which are encountered.
Indeed, a careful study of material gathered in
England by investigators eminently fit to judge
statistics has shown that the chances of tuberculosis occurring in both consorts are about the
same as the chances of insanity occurring, and
a German authority has found that cancer in
both consorts is more apt to occur than tuberculosis. Metchnikoff’s personal experience is very
interesting. He wrote.
At the age of twenty-three I married a
young lady of the same age who was attacked
by grave pulmonary tuberculosis. Her condition of feebleness was such that it was necessary to carry her in a chair in order to mount
the few steps which led to the church where
our marriage was to be celebrated. ... My
wife died of tuberculosis after four years of
suffering. I passed the greater part of that
time by her side in the greatest intimacy without taking any precautions against the contagion; nevertheless, in spite of these conditions, which were especially favorable for
catching the disease, I have remained free from
tuberculosis, and that during forty-four years
since my marriage.
But totally disregarding the paucity of exact
knowledge of the modes of tuberculous infection,
and the differences between tuberculous infection and actual tuberculous disease, the crusaders have been broadcasting misinformation which
has proved very disagreeable and at times unbearable to the unfortunate consumptive, and
no less so to those who were merely suspects or
not at all sick with the disease. We meet with
cases in which after a visit from the public
health nurse, who taiks authoritatively and inculcates misinformation about the dangers of infection, a tuberculous patient, who may have been
cured of his disease, loses his job or is turned out
of his lodging. Parents insist that their sick
son or daughter must submit to banishment to
an institution. A patient is abandoned by the
husband or wife, or is shunned by everyone as a
bearer of pestilence. Fifteen years ago, Ed

His Excellency
HENRY LEWIS STIMSON


VANG R BALNIA CNG G UG MGOT AUHONGS
on tuberculosis in this country, wrote:
Adults are very little endangered by close
contact with open tuberculosis, and not at al
by ordinary association.... It is time for a
reaction against the extreme ideas of infection
now prevailing. There has been too much


Appointed governor general of the Philippines December 7, 1927, and inaugurated in
Manila March 1, 1928, having taken the oath
of office in Washington in December, Governor
General Henry Lewis Stimson said Wednesday,
February 6, that at the request of Presidentelect Herbert Hoover he was leaving Manila
this month to take up a new duty which he
preferred Mr. Hoover should announce the
nature of. The newspapers divined that it is
the position of secretary of state.
Governor Stimson leaves Manila for Washington with the general good will of the islands
behind him, and says he will continue to labor
in the islands’ behalf. He has made occasion
to reprove the doctrine (which some have been
preaching here) that economic progress may
enslave the islands:
illustrating from history he has shown
that commerce thrives
in an atmosphere of
freedom. At least iminediately Governor
Stimson is succeeded
in office by Vice Governor Eugene A. Gilmore, as acting goverLD
)
nor.


Tend me tNe Benuls Memtne ty Meaid
boards and in lectures that has no sound basis
in fact and it needs to be dropped out or
revised.
But the crusaders have not yet revised their
views or their method of attacking the problem.


MR. GILMORE


Join
The Happy
Throng

who have learned to keep in
the pink of condition by
avoiding those heavy meals
which leaves one drowsy and
listless, but instead eat
sparingly and drink plentifully of rich, nourishing
O
BEAR
BRAID
NATURAL MILK


Milk is the perfect foodand
“Bear” Brand is the perfect
milk— because it is the
SAFEST for tropical use!


Luzon Stevedoring
Co., Inc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Phone 2-16-61
Port Area


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


February, 1929





21


THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija,
Director,'Rice Producers' Association


Prices for both palay
and rice have a trend
upward, due as we have
pointed out to limited
supply. Offerings for
palay at the terminals
range from P3.60 to
₱4.00according to grade
with rice at from ₱8.30
to P9.40. Due to scarcity in other provinces
this year, quite a numIO
ber of native buyers are
offering market prices

less transportation to
terminals, especially for the better grades of
palay. Saigon prices for export rice are firm
with a tendency to rise, being on the December
plane at present, which approximates P8.75
delivered in Manila. (Cock Brand. —Saigon II)
of last year’s crop. A large shipment of this is
being sold relatively cheaper, due to its condition, being quoted at P8.30 ex-bodega.
The new crop is moving rapidly to market due
in part to a larger number of threshing units being
used this year, so that by March we can expect
that the bulk of the crop will have been delivered
at terminals for either sale or storage. Price
trends will be upward and should reach those
of 1925 later in the season. There is, as usual,
a lot of garbled talk about diversifying crops.
Outside of a limited amount of sugar, it is problematical what other crop could be produced in
the Luzon plain, owing to its climatic and physical limitations. With the price of palay at
from P4.30 to P4.50 for the next two years, few
rice-growers will abandon its culture for the only
other crop they could raise.
There is another item that seems to have escaped the economist. That is, the transportation problems are being solved by the shipping


entities themselves. As the freights and congested service of the Manila railroad during the
peak season of shipment was detrimental to the
millers, quite a few of these entities have purchased trucks of 200-cavan capacity for the
shipment of rice direct to Manila. This is also
the case with shipments moving north. It was
argued that it could not be done at a profit, but
the Chinese, who rarely lose on their business
dealings, are doing it at a profit, as the most
vital thing is to supply their customers. The
branch lines of railroad, projected, but not yet
constructed, will thus find a competitive transportation service grown to some proportions,
unless they grasp their opportunity. In connection with this we may mention that the district to be reached by branch lines is that of the
rice region par excellence, a strip running along
the mountain ranges from San Miguel, Bulacan,
to San Manuel, Pangasinan, and averaging from
twenty-five to thirty-five miles wide. It is
problematical if this region will ever be devoted
to any other crop than rice. The transportation service to be successful is a study of actual
and potential conditions, the seizing of opportunity, and building to conserve the volume of
traffic in freight. To say the motor-truck cannot compete is far from true, in the face of existing conditions.


ANCESTOR WORSHIPERS
(Concluded from page 4)


leisurely manner so typical of Philippine villages
and villagers, had consumed hours. The bonfire
had now died away to a heap of glowing coals
as hot as blue blazes, which they were emitting copiously. So the fire was ready and the
worshipers were ready to walk on it. They did
so at once, coming from the altar with their low
chants on their lips and guttering candles in
their hands. They quickened their step when
they reached the fire, and they danced when
the guitars and the fiddle played them a lively


tune. First around the scorching edge, then
right through the fire they danced, making an
impromptu competition of it. Someone whispered that the oldest was the best dancer (could
stand, that is, the hottest blaze). He must have
been seventy. A younger man overheard, so
he turned and danced right through the blue
blazes and trampled them out. The third man
chanted a little louder and followed him, and
then the old man did the same. Together
they trampled the whole fire out, taking ten or
fifteen minutes to do so, and they broke up the
larger coals with their bare heels. When he
had been at this a few minutes, the old man put
a red coal in his mouth, holding it firmly between
his lips and making as if to puff it like he would
a cheroot. This was to make the children laugh
and the girls scream; for you certainly will
rarely find your Malay so preoccupied with
anything that he can’t turn aside momentarily
to please the children, if children are there to be
pleased; and he is also a little masculinely vain,
even though old.
So the medicine-making and the fire-walking
was over. The music ended in a flourish, the
old man spat out his coal, and the three worshipers went back to the altar, to kneel and give
thanks. Their feet were examined by flashlight,
closely, and they were not very calloused and
not burned at all.
There were plenty of villagers about, to help
dispose of the food on the altar: the several
baked pullets, the suman, the bibinka, the
maruya and the nipa wine. There would be no
need, and very little sense, in going home while
the moon still shone. The work-a-day strangers
could do that—the Manilans who had come to
see and had been given candles and the benches
and the log-seat by the fire. Strangers understand little of nature, perhaps. They don’t
make medicine.
But it can be made for them. If you are ill
of an abiding and deadly illness, the Cavite
ancestor-worshipers will strive with the demons
within you and try to drive them away. Then
you will be well, perhaps for no more than the
sacrifice of a good beef animal. Primitive, but
not unimpressive, mysticism. Light and dark

SIERILIEERS Por
Doctors and Dentists


Manila Gas Corporation


Main Office:
Calle Otis Tel. 1-69-34


Downtown:
7 Calle David. Tel. 2-16-43


Being one of the many
types of WATER
HEATERS which we
have for use with gas.
We have a type for
every purpose; for the
home, for the club, for
the restaurant, for the
hotel, for hospitals, each
economical and ready
for instant use day or
Vo
night.


(6
Yes, Sir!
There are plenty
of table - waters
but only one


the 100% Pure Mineral Water, the radioactivity of which has earned it a world-wide
name as a preventive of stomach intestinal
and kidney disorders!
A glass of delicious Tansan after
meals will prove this statement
“TANSAN" is on sale all over the Philippines but
should any difficulty be experienced in procuring it
remember it can always be obtained from the
Sole Distributors


F. E. ZUELLIG, INC.


ILOILO


MANILA


CEBU


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


DMMERCE JOURNAL
THE AMERICAI
TAMBEL


Fesiuary, 1929


EZ


ness, mind and dust, comingled inextricably.
But the psychic question: May one speak with
the dead, contend with disembodied demons,
hold concourse with ghosts and courtsful of
undoubted saints? Let us leave it unanswered,
perhaps man ought not dare to know too inuch.
All we really beheld were a rustic Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego, unscathed in a fiery
furnace.
Messrs. Fried. Krupp Germaniawerft, builders
of the well-known Krupp diesel engines, have
just made new arrangements regarding their
representation in these islands, Messrs. Smith,
Bell & Co., having been appointed sole representatives. In addition to the diesel engines built
by the Krupp Germaniawerft works, this agency
also includes the well known Bohn & Kahler
vertical, 4 cycle, full diesel engines up to 100 HP
and also the Motorenfabrik Darmstadt, Modaag
small, horizontal and vertical full diesel engines.
Fried. Krupp Grusonwerk manufacture hemp
lecorticating machinery. Public attention has
lately been focussed on the question of introducing modern methods of cleaning and stripping
nemp by machinery, and articles in this connection have lately appeared in the press.


NEWSPAPERS EDITORIALS
(Concluded from page 11)


army and navy that privilege which is theirs
inder a special legislation. The bill is an open
leclaration that Filipinos are what they are:
Drientals, and Orientals are not wanted in the
Jnited States contingent on a standing policy
afeguarding the welfare of the American people
igainst Asiatics.
There should be no resentment among the
eople of these Islands against the aims of the
fohnson bill. It is admitted that it reflects an
ffort on the part of the American people to
reserve their physiognomy as a people, so to


say, and to keep the economic structure of high
wages and high standard of living among the
Americans unimpaired by aliens. The federal
legislation establishing the quota system was a
measure to the same effect. America could not
absorb, despite her reputation as the melting
pot of the nations, the iminigrants from Southern
Europe. The bar was put up, as the bar would
be put up by the Johnson bill, in protection of the
American people. There can be no quarreling
with the acts of a nation to protect its vital
interests. Where the question is of moment
to its national existence, its government must
act for its citizens that deserve to be protected
by it.
On broad general grounds, that is the case
for America. Specifically, a case can be worked
out, not precisely, for the Philippines, but more
for America herself in connection with the
Johnson bill. For rightly, it has been observed,
that measure returns to conditions their natural
aspect, and divests the relations between the
United States and these Islands of all artificiality.
The existence of American sovereignty is not
the seeking of the nationals. American treatment of the Filipino people by the United States
government, broadly outlined in the famous
MCKinley instructions to the Philippine Commission, has been a sanctioned national policy.
The Johnson bill, outwardly contrary to the
spirit of that fair and benevolent treatment,
really brings it to a head. For the Philippine
problem,—to America a trust upon which there
is no falling down for the welfare of the Filipinos,
—has become an issue upon which there cannot
be any falling down if American welfare is to be
safeguarded. Correctly surmised, that should
mean, on ethical, not political grounds, an
inevitable separation of this country from America upon a mandate from America.—Tribune,
January 22.
AMERICAN CAPITAL
Speaking before the Philippine Chamber of
Commerce yesterday, Senate President Quezon
reiterated his stand in favor of the admission of
foreign capital in the Philippines. He asked


what good will would be had by barring outside
capital from the Philippines? He drove home
the need of allowing foreign capital to help
develop the islands and emphasized the lack of
local capital. And in referring to foreign capital
he meant particularly American capital.
Mr. Quezon is to be congratulated on his frank
and firm stand. In spite of his reiterations in
favor of outside capital there still are a great
number of Filipinos who fear its coming on the
ground that every dollar invested here is a nail
driven into the coffin of the people’s political
aspirations. Nothing more erroneous, of course.
For it must be borne in mind that referring to
the American dollar particularly, wherever it is
invested it has been found to have helped the
people more than to enslave them.
In many parts of the world, in Europe, in
Africa as well as in Asia and South America
itself, the American dollar has played a prominent
part in the development of trade, commerce
and industry, in the restoration of war-torn or
storm-stricken regions and in the extension of
modern agencies of progress such as public roads
and railways, public education and public health.
In no instance has American capital been known
to enslave. On the contrary wherever it goes
higher wages and better conditions of living
and contentment among the people become
MAMIEOSL.
The ballyhoo against America and American
capitalists comes mostly from preachers and
propagandists in Europe and Latin America
who, while calling Americans hard-hearted and
modern Shylocks, cannot but admit the wonders
achieved by American money. For one part
the cognomen is justifiable. American capital
does not rush in easily as does the proverbial
fool. It is the old law of self-preservation.
What American capital has sought and done
in other countries, it seeks and promises to do
in the Philippines. The Filipinos have the
material but they lack the means to make good
use of it. Mr. Quezon and the majority of
the Filipino leaders realize this. Mr. Quezon’s
reiteration before the Philippine chamber certainly is timely.—Times, January 16.


THE VVIME EMRESS OF METOfIO


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EURORE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS


14-16 CALLE DAVID


MANILA, P. I.


N RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


February, 1929


THE AMEKICAN UHAMBER OF COMMERUL JOURNAL


29


Dean Edward Ottoman, of the Chicago
chnical College, recently opined that "people
wanting more speed and the manufacturer
uld make the car as safe as possible.” This
tement was -in reply to a series of questions
pounded by Percival White, prominent
gineer, while making his recent automotive
sivvey.
As the mechanism of the automobile is perng ted it is obvious that greater distances can be
raversed which in turn is the basic reason for
rme public demand for speed. There are two
incipal means of relieving the danger that high
eed is heir to. A low center of gravity is a
eat step, as the greatest danger at high speed
s in the possibility of turning over. Another
eat step is fortification against damage in case
collision or sudden impact.
Dodge Brothers, patrons of this review, adrtise these two guards against injury in their
aew Victory Six motor. Their statement is
mat the entire body of this car is made of two
walls of sheet steel, battleship type, with an air
space between. These walls are joined together
at various points with lock joints giving the
body much greater strength by creating a second
defense against accident.
The body and the chassis are united into one
solid unit in this car.
The floor is built into the chassis frame and the
seats are attached directly to this. The old
insecure framework, including the body sills,
is thus eliminated. And in addition there is a
saving of two full inches in the height of the car
and a resulting lower center of gravity without
sacrifice of road clearance. It would be practically impossible to overturn this car even on the
sharpest corners.
The one unit is necessarily much more solid,
the torsional twists and strains are now taken up
by the solid piece of metal. The body is further


strengthened by the battleship principle of are used to replace the single wall and the result
construction. Two separate walls of sheet steel is an impenetrable redoubt for the passengers.


ESTIMATED PRODUCTION, EXPORTS AND CONSUMPTION OF PIIILIPPINE SUGAR
FOR 1928-29 AS COMPARED WITI 1927-28


1928-1929


Negros


Luzon


Centrifugals.
Muscovados..
Refined......


390,0001 200,000
10,0001 15,000


Total.


400.000


215,000


Centrifugals
Muscovados
Refined .....
Total....


Centrifugals
Muscovados
Refined....
Total....


PRODUCTION


Panay, Mindoro, Cebu,
Lot"


25,000


615,000
30,0000-)
25,000


25,0001 670,000


EXPORTSI
.. 545,000
10,000
  *
23,000



578,000


CONSUMPTION?


50,0001
20,000
2,000


12,000


85,000l
15000
2,000


Haoool


Negros


399,147


399 140


1927-1928


Luzon


IPanay, Mindoro. Leyte,
Cebu"


Total


151,355l


24,2131


574,715


30,776


23,341


54,117


8,000


8,000


190,131


22884


 636,832


523,706
35,679
6,692
866,027


iPractically all exports of centrifugals and refined were marketed in the United States and
muscovados in China and Japan.
ZThere is unknown quantity of low-grade sugars consumed locally which is not taken into
consideration in the foregoing table.
"Based on a per capita consumption of 20 lbs., according to the Bureau of Agriculture.
Based on production figures, stocks at the beginning and end of each crop period and shipment
figures.
"Exclusive of production in Mindanao, estimated at 2000 tons and low-grade sugars produced
all over the Islands, all of which are consumed locally.
Authorized for publication by the Trustees of the Philippine Sugar Association.


The Timberlake
Bill Will Pass......
AWAY
So . ... . go ahead and enjoy
ROBERTSON'S
SCOTCH WHISKY
There is a lot of real pleasure
in it.
Served at the bar.


KUENZLE & STRElFF, Inc.
clusive Distributors
Tel. 2-39-36
T F.¬


APN8 " ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, Dollar Steamship Line Co.


While figures are not as yet available, shipments from the Philippine Islands during the
month of December continued in good volume,
and we are sure that final figures will show
very satisfactory results for the month. Certain
lines of business closed down over the Christmas holidays, and their shipments were naturally curtailed, but this will not seriously affect the
total.
With the sugar shipping season in full swing
and with continued heavy demand for space
from Singapore and Java, the regular lines are
having difficulty in taking care of requests for
space, this being especially true of such bulk
commodities as sugar, lumber, etc. Indications
are that this condition will continue through
March.
The Radio Corporation of the Philippine
Islands, in cooperation with the Philippine
General Hospital and Philippine Health Service,
announce that they will receive without charge
requests for medical and surgical advice from
ships at sea. This will no doubt be of great
assistance in cases of serious illness on steamers
with no doctor available.
Passenger traffic during the month of January
has been very active, this being especially true


of steerage passengers to Honolulu and the
Pacific coast. The total movement during the
month, amounting to 2,128 passengers, was
made up as follows (first figure represents cabin
passengers, second figure steerage): To China
and Japan 198-456, to Honolulu 2-645, to the
Pacific coast 66-618, to Singapore and Straits
Settlements 18—4, to Mediterranean ports 21-0.


W. M. Cameron, oriental manager of the
Canadian Pacific Railway, who was a recent
visitor in Manila on business for his company,
returned to his headquarters in Hongkong by
the President Jefferson on January 19.
E. J. Chalmers arrived in Manila by the
President Taft on January 3 to join the staff
of the Columbia Pacific Shipping Company.
W. F. Cawley arrived in Manila by the President Wilson on January 1 to join the Robert
Dollar Company here. He has been placed in
charge of steerage passenger business.
J. R. Atkins, manager of the shipping department of Warner Barnes & Co., will sail shortly
for England on home leave. During his absence
Mr. Masefield will be in charge of the shipping
department.
G. A Harrell, district passenger agent of the
Dollar steamship lines, returned to Manila last
week from a three weeks trip to southern island
ports in the interests of his company.


S. C. Larson, for some time past secretary of
the Associated Steamship Lines, has resigned to
accept a position with L. Everett, Inc., as manager of their Hongkong office. G. E. Andrews,
Jr. has been appointed secretary of the Associated
Steamship Lines.
J. E. Gardner, Jr., assistant general agent of
The Robert Dollar Company here, left Manila
by the President Lincoln on February 2 for
five months leave of absence in the United States
and will then leave for Genoa where he has been
appointed general agent of the company.
G. P. Bradford, of the Columbia Pacific Shipping Company, was elected chairman of the
Associated Steamship Lines for the year 1929 at
a meeting held January 8. L. B. Jepson, of
the Dollar line, was named as vice chairma.”


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.
Nn lang Ina mana a lanl aman
tion remained inactive, with exports registering
a big improvement over the previous month.
Shipments abroad during January were:
Raw Leaf, Strips Tobacco and Soraps—


Kilos
190
Australia.......................
145,133
China............... . . . . . . . . .
78,404
Hongkong............ . . . . . . . . . .
2,i70
Java...
215,112
North Africa......... . . . .. . . . . .
182,962
North Atlantic (Europe).......
Spain...... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,301,450
Straits Settlements........... ...
4,193
219,566
United States.................


Total.................... 2,149,180
493,170
January 1928.............


Cigars: Shipments to China during January
were rather heavy, in anticipation of the increased taxes going into effect on February 1st.
Export to the United States, while better than
in the corresponding period of 1928, shows a
decline of almost 255 against December 1928.
Comparative figures for cigar shipments to the
United States are as follows:


January 1929........ 13,178,776
December 1928...... 17,398,237
January 1928........ 11,247,174


CARRY ON
"Tis evening. Shadows fall.
The last bird southward flies
Reluctantly. The nest
Yawns wide. Thrice empty is
My heart. The mate, who by
The fireside sat, is gone.
Another Spring? Perhaps.
If not on earth, then in
Some outer, happier bourn.
Meanwhile, O heart of mine,
Intrepid, carry on!
—Luther Parker.


THE YOKOHAMA SPECIE BANK
E LTD. E
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
100,000,000.00
Capital (Paid Up) -
Reserve Fund
102,500,000.00
Undivided Profits
8,281,611.36
MANILA BRANCH
34 PLAZA CERVANTES, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager
PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER
PHONE 2-37-58—GENERAL OFFICE


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Fepruary, 1929


B **
S
* 
S
  


25


The Manila Stock Market During January
By W. P. G. ElliorT


With all indications that the year 1929 would
e a prosperous one from practically all standpints, cable advices received early in the month
mtained the most bearish news received in
ese islands for a decade. Hearings held by
e ways and means committee of Congress,
4 dealing with various restrictions on various
shilippine products, have put a decided check
en business, and a tendency to mark time is
enerally apparent in all lines of trade. In
Pongress, farm relief is actively on the program
d a possible revision of numerous tariff sche les. This last will probably not be accomshed until the next session, but the fact that
ans are being made is important to a wide
ige of industries in these islands. The feeling
s been directly reflected in the stock market,
rticularly in the sugar shares, which are now
the lowest point since the founding of the
ck exchange. Some sugar shares have
clined 5022 from the high point reached in
e tober last year. However, among the more
asoned shares there has been a fair amount of
d inside buying, which is encouraging and
s had the effect of pegging the market at the
tesent low levels, and stopping the decline
the time being. Undoubtedly there are
ne good bargains in sugar to be picked up at
 present levels, among the more seasoned
ues. Banks have continued firm to strong,
e th no pressure to sell, and mines have firmed
smartly on the news that Balatoc has commenced operations. Industrials have also repained firm, with a tendency to advancing prices
some instances.
Banks.—Bank of the Philippine Islands paid
a lividend of 525 at the first of the year, and
corrent reports indicate that the financial poion is stronger than at any time since the
st war period. In addition to writing off
bad and doubtful accounts, a substantial
-nount was placed to reserve. As was to be
naturally expected, after selling at P200 the


shares have gradually declined, and they
were placed at P180 at the close of this
month’s business. Chartered Banks have advanced slightly and after opening at E22 they
were placed at #22-5 with further buyers at
this figure. China Banks have been placed on
fairly large transactions at ₱90, and have increased the semiannual dividend for the last half
of 1928 to 45, thus placing the shares on an
825 basis. The bank has opened a new branch
at Shanghai, another step forward. HongkongShanghai Banks have been very firm and closed
at HK$1350, up 50 points for the month. This
bank has also declared a final dividend for the
year 1928 of 23 plus a bonus of E2 per share,
making a total dividend of E8 per share for the
year 1928. Mercantile Banks have also advanced with buyers at P42. This bank also


paid a dividend for the last half of 1928 of 35,
making a total disbursement of 6% for the past
year.
Insurances.—Compania Filipinas have declined slightly after the dividend of 9% paid for
the last six months of 1928. There are now
buyers of these shares at P3150. Insular Life
and Philippine Guarantee have each paid dividends of 9% for the last half of 1928 and have
buyers at P315 respectively. Unions of Canton
have firmed up smartly, and closed firm and
active at HK$371, up 11 points for the month.
Sugar.—Notwithstanding the bearish news
from the United States, sugars seem to have
reached their low point for the year and the
decline seems to be checked for the moment.
Bacolod-Murcias are offered at P8, and on fairly
moderate transactions, Bagos have been placed
at P20. Cebu sugars have declined slightly
and there are now offers to sell at ₱17 but no
transactions have been reported. Bais have
also declined, with sellers at P950. It is rumour

Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig S von Knobelsdorff
Agents


90 Rosario, Manila


Phone 22324


AMEKICAIN MAILLINNES
BODLARSTEAMS LNE


COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


The "President”' Liners Offer
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


TO SAN FRANCISCO


AND


ROUND THE WORLD


LOS AVGELES


Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATESATURDAYS
24 Calle David


President Hayes -


Jan.


30


President Polk


Feb.


13


President Adams


Feb.


27


President Garfield


March


13


President Harrison -


March:


27


Sailings every fortnight


MANILA


VICTORIA
AND
SEATTLE
via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama
SAILINGS
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS
Telephone No. 2-24-41


FESNO NNNNN ENNN TE NNNONNNO ANNII


26


THE AMEKICAN CHAMBER OF COMINERCE JOURNAL


February, 1929


ed that Bais will pay the usual dividend of 20'.
early in February, therefore these shares seem
attractive at the current quotation. Carlotas
have been very active, after opening at ₱240.
they have declined on fairly large transactions
to P215 and now seem pegged at this figure, as
all offerings are quickly absorbed. Tarlacs on
moderate sales declined to P180 with further
sellers at this figure. Central Luzons are offered
at ₱10 down from last transactions, the closing
offered to sell being P150. Hawaiian-Philippines
have also eased off 7 1/2 points with sellers now
offering at ₱50, this central paid the usual
quarterly dividend of 3% early this month.
Isabelas have advanced 3 points, closing at ₱18
sellers. Kabankalans have eased off, closing
with sellers at P245. Lopez sugars have rel
mained firm and unchanged with buyers at
₱115. A small parcel of Luzon sugars are
offered at P1000, and it is rumoured that this
company will disburse a dividend of 100% in
stock in the very near future. Malabons have
advanced slightly with sales at P24. Mount
Arayats have also participated in the general
decline, closing at ₱100 nominal. Pasudecos
have remained firm and unchanged with sellers
at P48, buyers P45. Pilars report a very
satisfactory year for the 1927-1928 working,
and the directors have authorized an increase in
the capital structure from P700,000 to P2.000,-
000 and these shares have been reduced from
the former par value of ₱1000 to P100. This
means that each shareholder will receive 10 new
shares for each one old share held. There are
offers to sell the new shares at P140 which is
equivalent to P1400 for the old shares. San
Carlos are available at $33, and Talisay -Silays
have buyers at P22. Victorias Milling, common, are firm and unchanged at F165, and
Victorias preferred are also unchanged with
sellers at ₱110.
Plantations.—There were small sales of
Pamplonas at P85 and a fair amount of Polos
were placed at ₱400 with further sellers at
this figure.
Mines.—Benguet Consolidated opened at
P2.35 on moderate transactions and quickly
advanced to P2.45, buyers, but with very few
sellers in the market. Balatocs began operations early this month, and after the usual minor
flows experienced in starting up new machinery,
the plant is now operating smoothly and we
understand very satisfactorily, a very good yield
being extracted from the ore crushed. Balatocs


weries have sellers at ₱150, but buyers are not
inclined to bid more than P140.
Bonds.—Important sales to Tarlac 825 had
been made during the month and a small amount
of Lyrie Theatre 725 changed hands at par.
Carlota 85 were also done at par, for a small
parcel. For the first time in several years a
small amount of Polo plantation 105 are offered
at par plus accrued interest, and this should
prove attractive to investors in bonds. The
new University Club bonds will probably be
over subscribed. These bonds will bear interest
at 8% per annum and judging from the number
of applications already received for these securities "if, when, and as,” issued, the total amount
being for P225,000 only, will be readily taken


In spite of the refusal
of the Supreme Court
of the United States
to revise the adverse
decision rendered by
the federal trade commission on the Philippine Mahogany case,
the consumption of Philippine lumber in America continues to increase; and contrary to
general belief in the
islands, the prohibition
in the United States in


up. Incidentally, this bond issuc covers ouly
about 405 of the value of the property.
The market closed with a firm undertone in
banks, insurances, mines, and industrials; sugars,
are easier but apparently pegged at the present
low levels. Sales for the month aggregated
25,371 shares.
Dividends Declared and Paid.—Bank of the
Philippine Islands—525 for year 1928; China
Banks—45, last half 1928; Hongkong-Shanghai
Banks—E3 plus bonus E2 per share; Mercantile
Banks—325, last half 1928; Phil. Cia de Seguros
—92%, last half 1928; Insular Life—925, last
half 1928; Philippine Guarantee—95, last half
1928; Benguet Consolidated, 5 centavos, last
quarter 1928; Philippine Educations, common,—
325, final, 1928.


feet valued at P3,286,864 as against a total
export last year to the United States of 39,351,-
016 board feet valued at P3,446,757. The
total exports to all countries amount to 85,897,-
736 board feet valued at P6,258,819 as against


Watching Investments
Buying Sound Securities
is the Beginning of Safe
and Profitable Investing
Inquiries Invited
Hair and Elliot
Members
Manila Stock Exchange
P. O. Box 1479
34-B Plaza Cervantes, Manila


72,034,632 board feet valued at P5,558,003 in
1927, showing about 202 increase. One of the
outstanding features of the export trade is the
increased demand in the United States for round
logs which are used in the manufacture of veneer


FOR RENT:—Store space, Calle David
and Dasmarinas, 179 square meters.—
Entrances on both streets.—Excellent


OF INDIA. AUSTRALIA
CHARTERED BANK
AND CHINA


Capital and Reserve Fund.. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor.................. 3,000,000


MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB.BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Mania


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - WALTER E. ANTRIM


O
balient Facts About Lumber Industry in 1928
By ARTHUR F. FISCHER, DIRECTOR OF FORESTRY


have buyers at P2.35 but on account of the small
floating supply, sellers are hard to find. Itogons
were placed on moderate transactions at par,
namely Plo.
Industrials.—Philippine Educations were
again the outstanding feature of this list. This
company has purchased MeCullough Printing
Company, Inc. The purchase represents one of
the most important business transactions in
recent years here, as it combines two of the oldest
American business organizations. The purchase
was made in order to carry out the plan of the
management, namely, to print all their own
publications, the printing cost of which runs well
over P100,000 a year, in their own plant. Educations common paid a final dividend of 35
early this month making a total disbursement for
the year 1928 of 155. Educations common
were placed at P172.50, the highest point of the
year. Educations preferred paid the usual
quarterly dividend of 2-1,25, and these shares
are in fair demand at P106. San Miguel Bre

the use of the name is not applicable to everybody but is confined only to the seven defendants
involved in the suit.
Total export to the United States from January to December, 1928, was 41,753,824 board


show windows. Apply, John R. Wilson, Secretary, American Chamber of
Commerce, 180 David, Phone 2-11-56.


BABCOCK & TEMPLETON, INC.
IMPORTERS—EXPORTERS
PHILIPPINE PRODUCTS
MAGUEY
HEMP
COPRA
FINE LITHO AND PRINTING INKS
Agents for
JOHN KIDD & Co., Lro.
LONDON
SAN FRANCISCO
CEBU
MANILA
NEW YORK


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Rebruary, 1929


  


27


id plywood for doors, intcrior trim, furniture,
e logs arc used in the manufacture
te., while se
cigar boxes. The total export of round logs
zo all countries in 1928 was 14,982,040 board
O board feet in 1927.
8.700
feet as ag
Incomplete figures covering timber cut by 79
sawmills and 5 logging operators without sawf 1,256,019 cubic meters
g sca
mills show
s compared with
14 cubic meters for the
The estimated total cut in
whole year 1
ably exceed 1,500,-
928
the isla
0,000 board feet.
00 c
o greater than the total cut in
vill be
ber production or
,637,556 board feet
ill tal
3 board feet during
s compar
rease of 36%.
ar, G
harges that will be
HE
awmills and important logging

will be about ₱1,145,-
00 in 1927, or an estimO as
M
ls which started operata
o be 21 with the total
" than
Pabout 90,000 board feet. In
d running with a total
mills
00 board feet. Three of
ted e

nning in 1928 are capable
0 board feet a day.
hat during the year just
m
lumber firms registered
reau of commerce and
ust
uthorized capital of these
00, of which P1,548,000
E
men are beginning to apa circular saw is more
iw is shown by the fact
mportant sawmills with

eady bought or ordered
heir circular rigs. At
daily capacity of the three cirt, th
N
board feet. When the
eir combined producnd i
0,000 board feet a day.
shou
E
e in the history of the
nterest manifested
ands
er business as during
anig na un
ass
is interest was shown
y aa
asure
ented in the legislature
egarding the lumb
usiness, by discussions in
mm
, and by articles in the
disc
ress.
ns were concerned mainly
with the fact that ap
ently the lumber industry
Philippines
n the
hands of foreigners.
egislative
easuri
ore, were proposed
to encourage mor
cipation of Filipinos
as in
er industry. The
and Ameri
opula
e industry, however,
ption
was erroneous ber
twas believed that
umber production
ution were controld by
ners.
however, producSa he Mang
nos and Americans
tribution, in
a
I markets at least,
exclusively conti
inese.
That
develop
f the lumber industry
in the Philippines is
iced by neighboring
untries is shown
ict that almost every
during the 1
e years saw forestry
fficials and privat
om Australia, Maras, Burma, Singaj
an and Java, coming
o the Philippines
udy our logging and
milling methods.
the highest forest
fficers of Java anc
a have just left the
Philippines after n
a thorough study of
the lumber indust:
at present there are
two Hindu fores
and one private
corporation official
Burma making investigations as to our method of lumber production.
Practically all the highest officers of Burma and
Madras have spent weeks and months in the
Philippines investigating our methods of lumber
manufacture.


The following commodities were received in
Manila December 26, 1928 to January 25, 1929,
poth inclusive, via Manila Railroad:


Rice, cavans
Sugar, piculs..........
Tobacco, bales..
Copra, piculs........
Coconuts............ . .
Lumber, B. F......
Desiccated coconuts, cases


Jan. 1929 Dec. 1928
113,750
255,875
513,296
331,744
3,720
1,080
142,600
219,900
1,278,200 1,147,300
234,900
345,600
3,528
13,120


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


January sales exceed
those of the same month
in 1925, 1926 and 1927
but are about half of
the January 1928 total.
The average of January
sales 1920-1929 inclusive is P1,390,055, which
makes this month’s
sales somewhat below the
average.


Sales, City of Manila


bocemben
192N


Januin
1030


Santa Cruz.


₱181,394


₱431,240


Binondo....


62,782


San Nicolas


177,902


500


Tondo............ .


36,840


115,418


Sampaloc...


175,413


67,903


San Miguel


13,540


31,000


Intramuros


1,400


205,000


Ermita............


90,784


157,693


Malate............


238.824


90,911


Paco.



21,494


10,997


Santa Ana.........


37,519


16,543


Pandacan..........


3,500


49,250


Quiapo.


229,200


54,480


₱1,270.592


₱1,230,935


Read the Journal Statistics


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OU.


28


  


February, 1929


JANUARY SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


New York Market
(Spof):—The official

announcement in the
latter part of the previous month that the
SA
present Cuban crop will
be entirely unrestricted
N
both in production and
disposal had an adverse
effect upon the AmerTA
ican sugar market during
the first week of the
month under review,

resulting in further decline in prices to 2 cents
c. and f. (3.77 cents I. t.) for present shipments of


Cubas. Another factor contributing to this
market depression was the announcement of an
increase in Licht’s estimate of the European
beet crop by 150,000 tons.
On the 7th, however, the market showed a
slight improvement with small quantity of
Cubas sold to the refiners at 2-1/16 cents c. and f
(3.83 cents 1. t.). Thereafter up to the 15th
the market eas irregular and unsettled and sales
of Cubas were negotiated at prices ranging
between 2-1/32 cents c. and f. (3.80 cents I. t.)
and 2-1716 cents c. and f. (3.83 cents 1. t.). At
the close of the 15th the market became easier
and prices again declined to 2 cents c. and f.
(3.77 cents l. t.). Prices for refined also declined
to the basis of 5 cents, which stimulated demand
for granulated sugar to such an extent that on
the 17th the spot market gained strength resulting in moderate sales of Cubas at 2-1/16 cents
c. and f. (3.83 cents 1. t.).
During the latter part of the month the market
reverted to its irregular, unsettled position in


WISDOM
For a fob
He wears
A nerveless tooth
Mounted
In pale yellow
Benguet gold;
Not the ivory
Molar
Of a slimy saurian
That roamed in the
Mangrove swamp
Back of the barrio
Of san Jose,
But the
Wisdom tooth
Of his money Iending
Spouse,
God shrive her soul!
Still...
Her bite
Was not as bad
As her bark,
And her wisdom
Phenomenal
In things financial
Is the only reason
Why
He rides around
Today
In a velvet lined.
Nickel garnished
Limousine.
—Anony mous.


the second week, and closed weak and dull with
small sales of Cubas to the refiners at 2-1/64
cents c. and f. (3.785 cents 1. t.).
The visible stocks in the U. K., U. S., Cuba,
and European statistical countries at the end of
January were 4,289,000 tons as compared with
3,746,000 tons at the same time in 1927 and
4,103,000 tons in 1926.
Outlook for 1929. Commenting on the
outlook for 1929, Facts About Sugar for January 5 says: “Seldom has a year opened with
a more uncertain market outlook for sugar than
prevails at the beginning of 1929. The known
factors in the situation are regarded by the
majority of the trade as depressive in their
tendency, but there are intangible influences that
may operate to deflect values from their expected
course before the end of the year.”
Dr. Gustay Mikusch, eminent European statistician, estimated the world’s sugar production for 1928-29 at 28,218,000 tons, of which
18,866,000 tons is cane sugar and 9,352,000 tons
beet sugar, as compared with the 1927-28 production of 26,666,000 tons of which 17,527,000
tons cane sugar and 9,139,000 tons beet sugar.
The world’s consumption for 1927-28 was placed
by Dr. Mikusch at 25,742,000 tons, leaving an
excess of production over consumption of approximately 924,000 tons, or a little over 3 per cent.
On the other hand, Dr. H. C. Prinsen Geerligs
pointed out that the excess in the world’s production for 1928-29 may entirely disappear
when estimates are corrected by reason of a
greater absorption from invisible stocks.
Czarnikow-Rionda Company attributed the
steady decline in prices for the past year to two
principal factors, the large decrease in meltings
in the United States and the increase in Java’s
production due to exceptionally favorable growing weather coupled with the good results obtainsa from the new cane variety Poj 2878. The
decline in prices, according to Czarnikow-Rionda
Company, caused buyers to be extremely cautious in limiting their stocks and purchases to a
minimum, resulting in the depletion of the


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


ORLD
IDE
IRELESS


RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES
25 PLAZA MORAGA


Phones:


2-26-01
2-26-02


2-26-03


Always Open


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


THE AMERICAN CHAMB.ER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


29


f ebruary, 1929


visibles by approximately 500,000 tons. This
en thority estimates an increase of about 100,000
ans in the production in the United States and
p ssessions for 1928-29 over the previous year,
t is of opinion this increase is not sufficiently
ge to make a material difference from the past
pear because the carryover from the United
Sates and Cuban stocks is about that much
ess and invisibles much smaller than last year.
‘The wave of extreme depression in the past
yean may be ended,” Czarnikow-Rionda states.
“It is certain that all the unfavorable factors
save been discounted at present levels and next
year all new developments will be in favorof
be market.”
Press dispatches recently received here from
Hlavana reported that five of the most powerful
Cuban sugar concerns financed by New York
interests, have joined in a pooling agreement
controlling approximately 3,500,000 tons of
sugar. What effect this combination may have
on the disposal of the Cuban crop and sugar
ralues, remains to be seen.
In this connection, it is interesting to note
nat prices on the New York sugar market in
928 moved steadily downward. The highest
rice for the year was 4.65 cents duty paid,
quivalent to 2.875 cents c. and f. for Cubas
thich was obtained on January 4, while the
pwest price was 3.77 cents duty paid, equivalent
o 2 cents c. and f. for Cubas, recorded on Noember 1, which was the lowest since 1925. The
verage price for the year was approximately
24 cents duty paid, equivalent to 2.47 cents
and f. for Cubas.
From the trend of prices during the month
f January 1929 and present large visible stocks,
t seems unlikely that there will be immediate
elief in the present market depression.
Philippine Sales. During the month under
eview, sales of Philippine centrifugals on the
tlantic coast, afloats, near arrivals, and for
future deliveries, amounted to 26,000 tons at
prices ranging from 3.77 cents to 3.98 cents I. t.
uring the same period last year 32,250 tons of
hilippine centrifugals were sold at from 4.40
Sents to 4.64 cents I. t. duty paid.
Futures. Quotations on the New York Exhange during January fluctuated as follows:


High


Low


Latest


January 1929...


.. 2.03


1.92


1.98


March..........


 2.06


2.00


2.00


May...........


.. 2.16


2.07


2.09


July............


.. 2.22


2.14


2.16


September.......


.. 2.25


2.17


41


December.......


.. 2.30


2.21


2.21


January 1930....


.. 2.22


2.19


2.19


Local Market:—The local market for centriugals was quite active and small parcels for exports were negotiated at from P8.625 to P9.06
er picul, with a premium of 5 to 10 centavos for
arger parcels.
Owing to the big demand in China, the muscovado market was steady and firm with the Chilese dealers having been invariably the purhasers on the basis of P6.50 per picul for No. 1.
Crop Prospecis. Reliable advices from Negros indicate that in certain districts the present
rop suffered from the typhoon and recent heavy
rains which reduced previous estimates. However, while some centrals complain of the insuficient cane to keep them grinding at full capacity, others are milling more cane a day than
their rated capacities.
In general, on Luzon, the centrals are proceeding with their operations satisfactorily and, on
account of heavy tonnage, may finish grinding
two weeks or a month later than last year.
Planting for the 1929-30 crop is going on satisfactorily. The planters are realizing the advisability of early planting. Good germination is
noticeable throughout the Luzon districts. There
has been too much rain in some districts of Negros. With two months of good weather this
defect may be overcome.
Philippine Exports. Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for the 1928-29 crop from November 1, 1928, to January 31, 1929, amounted to
105,154 tons: Centrifugals, 103,108 metric tons;
muscovados, 643; refined, 1,403; Total, 105,154
metric tons.
Java Market:—No material change in the
Java sugar values was reported during the month.


Advices received early in January reported sales
aggregating 350,000 tons of new crop Java sugar,
el. T


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporalion


Copra.—The local
copra market during
the month of January
was fairly steady at
Manila with prices practically unchanged over
P8
December month end
quotations. Although
prices have declined at
provincial concentration
points, they still remain
in excess of the Manila
parity and a further
A.
reduction will be necessary to meet the ideas
of Manila buyers. With very discouraging
reports, both from American and Europe, there
seems to be little possibility of any improvement
for the coming month. Total arrivals at Manila
for January were 317,206 bags as against 129,-


549 bags for January 1928. Latest cable advices
follow:
Manila, buen corriente, ₱10.75; arrival resecada, P12.00; San Francisco, $.04-3,4 nominal;
London, f. m. m., E23/10/0.
Coconut Ofl.—Sizeable offerings of palm
kernel oil, together with heavy selling pressure
for nearby positions in coconut oil, caused almost
complete retirement of U. S. buyers during the
month, with subsequent decline in prices to 8
cents c. i. f. New York. Earlier in the month
inquiry was fairly active and trades were noted
for scattered tank cars at 7-748 to 8 cents f. o. b.
coast. Our latest reports indicate that most of
the large buyers are well covered up to June, so
that little improvement is anticipated in the
very near future. Notwithstanding the weakness in coconut oil, the cottonseed oil market
continues firm due principally, we believe, to
speculation that there will be additional tariff
increases on vegetable oils, including a tariff for
the first time on Philippine coconut oil. So
optimistic are refiners such tariff changes will be
made effective during the last half of the year
that they have advanced selling prices to 12
cents per lb. for refined oil July forward. Latest
reports from U. S. and foreign markets follow:
Manila, in drums, P.34 per kilo; San Francisco, $.07-3,4 c. i. f. nominal; New York, $.08
c. i. f.; London, no quotations.


“North
Coast
Limited"


(o


"Finest”


“the finest train in the world and I have
traveled on all that are worth talking
about”'—Samuel Hopkins Adams,
Auburn, N. Y.
(CU

Dest
“equipment the very best, service splendid— wonderful train"—N. A. Peterson, oan Francisco.
TOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between
N the North Pacific Coast and Chicago! Leaves
Seattle at 11:00 A. M. for all the principal cities of
N
the United States. Two days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel is its
diner service. New-style Observation-Club car with deep, restful
lounge—cushioned chairs—library—writing corner—club rooms—
showers—and maid and valet service.
The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos.
Cook & Son, Shanghai Commercial Ga Savings Bank, or any transPacific steamship company will gladly furnish additional information.


Oswald Crawford, G. A.
501 Granville Street
Vancouver, B. C.


R. J. Tozer, A. G. P. A.
200 L. C. Smith Bldg.
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.


E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
912 Government Street
Victoria, B. C.


R
NOrtHerHa ACIfICAAALAWAy


(352)


"First of the Northern Transcontinentals”


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


THE AMERICAN CHAMBEK OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


February, 1929


30


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM
can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Islands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


a
A

—
A


tuirioroiooioiobiooiitioioioooool


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, elc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of McCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronagc.
MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
424 RIZAL AVE. Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


TA MI AA 1
Manila Hemp market
for the month of January with statistics up
to January 28, 1929.
U. S. Grades: The

market opened firm and
continued firm till about
the middle of the month
when it was quieter and
prices declined slightly
as compared to the previous days. Prices had

risen too quickly and
buyers retired from the
market. It continued steady for a day or two
and then was dull with a declining tendency,
buyers holding off expecting lower prices. The
market continued inactive and at the end of the
month is reported quiet. At the beginning of
the month nominal prices asked by exporters
were as follows: E, 14 cents, F 13-1,2 cents;
G, 9-1,8 cents; I, 12-1,4 cents; J1, 9-3/4 cents;
$1, 13-1,4 cents; $2, 12 cents, $3, 9-3 4 cents.
By the middle of the month New York selling
prices were: E, 16-3, 4 cents; F, 14-7,8 cents!
G, 9-3,8 cents; J1, 10-548 cents; S1, 14-5, 8
cents. By the end of the month prices were
nominal and quoted as follows: D, 18 cents;
E, 16-5,8 cents; F, 14 cents; G, 9 cents: I,
12-3,/4 cents; J1, 9-3, 4 cents; $1, 13-5,8 cents;
$2, 12-1,2 cents.
The Manila market for U. S. grades advanced
rapidly at the beginning of the month and there
was difficulty in buying even at the ruling high
prices due to the firmness of sellers. There
was a very strong speculative element holding
hemp and local mills and exporters had great
difficulty in buying. The opening prices were
nominally: D. P4l, E. P38. F. F30: G. P20:
1, P27.50: Ji, P21.50: 81. ₱29. $2, P26.50;


S3, P21.50. By the middle of the month dealers
were asking: D, P43;E, P39; F. ₱33: G, ₱20.75;
I, P30; J1, ₱23.25, si, ₱31.50, 82, P28.50;
$3, P23.25. During this period of high quotations, at the first sign of weakness in the market,
the speculators began to sell and prices eased
off until by the end of the month nominal quotations were: D P4o, E. P37, F, P31; G, P19;
I, ₱28: JI, ₱2l; 81, P30; 52, ₱27; 83, P2l.
Sellers were nervous and buyers were indifferent
at the close of the month although any parcels
of U. S. grades might have brought slightly
higher prices than quoted.
U. K. Grades: The London market opened
very firm with very few sellers and the following
prices were quoted: J2, (40; K, E38.10; Li,
E38. L2, 230.10; Mi, E32.10; M2, E28.10;
DL, E28; DM, E25. The firmness in the London
market was increased due to bears covering.
Prices increased rapidly and by the middle of
the month the following prices were quoted:
J2, E42: K, E40; Li, E39.10; L2, E32.10; Mi,
133.10; M2, E30.10. At this period the market
began to decline and this condition was further
aggravated by the liquidation of a prominent
dealer in London. The market continued very
unsettled and was actually stagnant for a day or
two. At the close of the month the market
was dull and the following prices were quoted:
J2, E38; K, #36.10; Li, E36; L2, E30; Mi,
E31.10; M2, E28; DL, 627; DM, Ezs.
The Manila market for U. K. grades opened
firm and local prices ruled higher than the equivalents in the consuming markets. Prices were
nominal at the following quotations: J2, ₱17.75;
K, P16.75; Li, P16.25; L2, ₱13; Mi, P13.25;
Ma, F1l.50; DL, PIl; DM. ₱10.50. The
market continued to advance until at the middle
of the month the following prices were quoted:
J2, ₱19.50; K, P18.50; Li, P18; Lz, ₱14.50;
Mi, ₱15.25; M2, P13; DL. ₱12.50, DM, Pll.
During the latter part of the month the market
remained quiet and while there were some transactions, yet dealers were disinclined to sell
large quantities at the reduced prices. The
market closed at the following quotations: J2,
P17.50; K. P16.50;LI, P16.25; 12, ₱13.25; Mi.
₱13.50; Mz. ₱12: DL, ₱11.50; DM, Pi0.25.


— Ma Maag a Ma Ma 
beia an bau aveng mas a akimle har
restricted business.
Maguey: This fiber advanced rapidly and
the demands of the local market were insatiable.
The unusually large local demand, coupled with
the regular demand from foreign markets, forced
prices up beyond reasonable values. Production in the Northern provinces is very slow in
starting and the demand was greater than the
supply. Prices for this commodity have ceased
off but they are still high.
Production: Production during the month
has been far larger than anticipated. Due to
the recent typhoon, the quality of the hemp,
particularly from Leyte, has declined and there
seems to be a surplus of the inferior grades with a
consequent indicated shortage of the better
grades. Stormy weather in the Bicol region
as well as in Leyte and Samar has prevented
considerable hemp reaching the market. It
is now believed that the effects of the typhoon
in Albay and Sorsogon provinces are very much
less than previously estimated and the same
remarks, to a lesser degree, may be applied to
Leyte and Samar.
Freight Rates: The advance of Ten Shillings (10.—) per Ton in the rate on hemp to the
United Kingdom and Europe became effective
on January 1st, 1929.
Statisties: The figures below are for the
period ending January 28th, 1929:


1929


1928


Manila Hemp


Bs.


Bs.


On hand January 1..


158,452


139,632


Receipts to date.........


106,577


99,689


Supply to date..


264,829


239,321


Shipments to U. K....


21,610


25,431


Shipments to Continent...


11,483


12,019


Shipments to U. S........


45,233


19,989


Shipments to Japan......


36,152


20,330


Smibmenes toAlothes

1,532


4,208


Local Consumption.


3.000


4,000


Total Shipinents


119,010


85,977


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


February, 1929


  


31


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


December, 1928


December, 1927


Monthly average for 12 months
ending December, 1928.


Quantity


Value


22


Quantity


Value


25


Quantity 


Value 20 


* ..........
Sugar.......... . . . ......





64,079,480
4


₱10,921,396


32.0


55,626,800


₱ 9,273,127


40.0


48,309,559


₱ 7,947,611


31.7


Momp.


 . . .......


18,217,680
*


5,429,81.


14,376,894


,,8II


17


14,223,172


1,541.32


18.0


Coconut Oil.


. .........


18,517,49



6,083,9


14,199,182


5,35


16.


898,975


551,796


10.


ODra


...


23,264,710
.......


4,460,039


19,924,845


4,006,302


13.


20,567,809


3,648


13.


Cigars (Number)................... ... . . . . . . .


* .......


........... 21,822,893


889,1


21,618,450


948,323


3.3


17,821,018


Embroidery .......................


.......


*.......


880,08:


550,056


2.C


665,278


Maguey.......


* ...*.


28,051
* .......


426,2:


1


2,057,273


64,410


1.


1,495,620


91,286


Leaf Tobacco..


* .......


960,668
*


290,9


3


2,430,800


689,267


2.4


1,904,429


563,335


Desiccated and Shredded Coconut.............





1,230,982
 ....


,59


1.


1,410,315


3,148


1.9


1,717,427


96,7


Hats (Number)...
* ........ .....4


 *... .


78,138



93,478


2
8,206


111,744


461,064


Lumber (Cubic Meter).....................


........


11,826



10,871


83,-


13,471


454,818


Copra Meal..





10,523,465



769,86


10,398,490


56,-
60


2


8,002,317


497,442


1..


Cordage......


* .*........


597,481
*...


308,644


79,191


319,108


1.


49,056


296,6


1.C


enr
.
Knotted H

dP iR





65,358
*


244,542


P


84
S.


45,165


0.3


14,598


18,570


O.1


88.
Pearl Buttons (C


**...... *


6,36
 *......


48,228


04


68,021


O


72,670


5,59


Canton (low grade cordage fiber)..............
All Other Products ............... . . . .. . . . ..


......*.
 ..........


651,861
*........
*......


122,014
1,278,687


O.:
3.8


731,814


180,258
611,92
S


0.6
2.1


723,549


131,586
2,145,383


0.3
9.5


Total Domestic Products.....................








P33,482,084


99.0


₱29,133,247


99.5


₱25,460,205


99.8


United States Products.......................
Foreign Products. ...........................


* ......*...
......


.... .
* ........


131,560
11,786


'1,742
42,342


0.3
0.5


108,295
38,453


O.2
0.1


Grand Total.





₱33,625,430


100. 0


₱29,247,331


00.0


P25,606,954


00. 0


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


Articles


December, 1928


Monthly average for
December, 1927
2 months ending
December, 1928.


Value


28


Value


22 


Value





Cotton Cloths.........


₱ 3,746,445


16.2


₱ 3,350,662


15.8 ₱ 3,360,59


15.3


Other Cotton Goods.....
t
Iron and Steel, Exce,


1,081,831


4.6


1,203,210


5.6


1,262,274


5.6


Machinery ...........


1,194,027


5.1


1,549,645


1,949,8


8.7


Rice.....
........ *


957,750


4


5,11


flour...........
Wheat


71,683


66
35,





Machinery and Parts of..


,110,120


.8


1,003,8-


Dairy Products........


438,371





97,10


654,068


Sasoline...............


670,476


04,3


2.3


81,48


Silk Goods ......... . . . .


686,516


3.


888,4


2


768,807


Automobiles............


890,434


3


,78
MES


1.


665,350


Vegetable Fiber Goods...


643,073


3.


430,47


Meat Products.........


509,54:


2.2


1.9


461,194


Illuminating Oil......


205,1


1,194,00


56


2.


Fish and Fish Products..


298,39


2


289,482


3


Crude Oil..............


45,2


O.
2


3,4


.3


46,1


O. 2



al..
Chemicals, Dyes, Drugs,


435,126


1.9


205,658


0.9


382,439


1.5


ELC.


371,165


1.6


392,328


1.9


402,579


1.8


Fertilizers..............


824,050


3.6


650,0


3.1


316,054


1.5


Vegetable.
..Y
cept
Paper Goo
s, E


497,132


2.1


262,626


1.2


297,746


1.3


Books.....
.. 4
Tobacco and Manufac

354,903


1.5


517,306


2.4


447,169


2.0


ures of......



1,019,463


325,696


478,408


2.2


Electrical Mach
y...
Books and Other Printed


347,528





271,870


15


329,923


1.5


Matters.
*
Cars and
ages, Ex

177,656


0.8


506,275


2.4


324,811


1.4


cept Autos..
 *...


178,790


O..


24
79


1.2


229,330


1.0


Automobile Tires.......


368,691


1.6


1.


0,04


1.


Fruits and Nuts........


851


236,20


59,204


1.1


Woolen Goods..........


92


141,075


Leather Goods.........
Shoes and Other Foot

199,631


0.9


AEOR


2


263,595


1.2


ware.................


256,546


1.1


188,342


195,723


0.9


Coffee.................
Bread
tuff, Except


190,028


0.9


79,913


82


153,343


0.6


Wheat Flour.........


171,082


117,856


5


166,275


O.


s..
*
'erfun
and Other


182,351


28


7,646


0.4


166,275


0.7


Toilet Goods. ........


149,806


0.6


144,219


146,453


Lubricating Oil.......
Cacao Manufactures, Ex

170,973


0.8


58,366


35


198,359


6a


ept Candy.........


80,804


0.4


53,742


0.3


133,231


0.5


Glass and Glassware....
Paints, Pigments, Var

173,972


0.8


108,426





157,262


0.7


nish, Etc...
*..


133,065


111,028


.5


138,173


0.6


Oils not separately listed.
Earthen Stones and


82,212


ta


80,594


0.4


145,469


0.6


Chinaware..
*
essor


170,487


163,5:


120,7


0.4


Automobile Ac
les.
Diamond and Other Pre

159,994


62


158,921


es


156,979


O.7


cious Stones Unset...
Wood, Bamboo, Reed,


108,871


0.4


133,552


O.7


135,913


0.5


Rattan.......



120,16:


40,667


93,996


India Rubber Goods....


8.


91,9"


53
2


Soap.


284,39


2


231,46


Matches........... .. ..


77,83


123


84,308


Cattle.................


24,889


1


33,2.


38


0.1


Explosives..............


23,025


.1


7.2


58,442


0.2


Cement................


113,02.


0.5


2


75


Sugar and Molasses.....


101,405


0.4


9AS


R


1


Motion Picture Films...


26,001


"2,6.


.2


All Other Imports.....


1,686,371


ii


1,579,219


7.5


1,776,047


8.0


Total.


₱23,125,626


100. O


₱21,176,933 100. 0


₱22,409,584


100 0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED


STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


December,


Monf iy average for
onths ending
12
1928 December, 1927


Ports


Di ember, 1928


Value


Value
Value
28
28
2


Manila.........


...... P34,899,97:


67.7


P30,950,419


60.9


P32,104,183


67.3


Iloilo............


..... 10,608
8.0.


17.6


8,797,263


17.5


456,72


15


Cebu............


85,78
*...


3,22
3
7


14
3


6,941,884


13.2


Zamboanga........


mggos






55,620


1.2


598,980


1.1


olo........... ..


57,16-
*  ... .


O.
2


79,470


0. 3


130,421


0.2


Davao..........


1,352,699
 * .


2.9


,168,651


2.4


184,249


2.5


Legaspi...........


635,312
***


A.1


1.659,609


3.4


1,563,281


0.7


Total P56,751,056 100. 0 P50,424,264 100 0 P48,108,164 100. 0


CARRYING TRADE


IMPORTS


Nationality of
Vessels


December, 1928


Monthly average for
December 1927
2 months ending
December, 1928.


Value


22


Value


22


Value


American...........


..₱ 9,186,266


39.8


₱10.499,553


49.8 P1 Mat

British...............


9,669,118
* *


41.9


6,960,810


33.0


".5


20


panese........... . .


37,9:
* *


1,214,7


TO ¬


Dutch............ . . .


531,976
*


3



7,25


3.5


2


German..............


,260,780
* .


5


1,088,047


5.1





Norwegian...........


568,28
 


2.


1,079


. 36


.9


Philippine...... . . . . ..


9
139,32
 *


.6


110,512


0.5





Spanish...............


102,803


65,912


0.3


Chinese...............
Swedish............. .
Dannish.............
Csechoslovak.........
French..............


39,844
*
*
2,892
* .
 *
* 


O.1


11,815


5,28

S.Otl
15.285


G.S
6.2


By Freight...........


..₱22,589,245


97.7


₱20,710,000


97.8


P. '. $9 28


9!. 8


By Mail.............


536,381
*


2.3


—466,933





232





Total.. 



P23,125,626


100. 0


₱21,176,933


100. 0


P.
EOE


AO2


EXPORTS


Nationality of
Vessels


December, 1928 1


December, 1927


2 months ending
December, 1928.


Value


22


Value


25


Value


22 


American............


...₱16,722,445


43.6


₱14,615,207


49.1


₱11,715,462


46.


British..............


7,105,520



22.6


8,587,504


29.0


8,052,351


Japanese.............


,847,082
* .


2,292,389


18.0


2,166,44


German..............


961,40



3.


1,202,501


4.6


863,41


Norwegian..........


274,593



1.8


487,360


Spanish..............


* .


101,201


Dutch........... . . . .


806,480
* .


294,554


1.2


416,392


Philippine............


39,364



d


4,163


0. 3


145,15


0.6


hinese........ . . . . . .





1,69.


10,715


Swedish............ . .


82,687
* 


0.3


1,645,241


4.8


496,950


2.0


French..............


*


,,880


Dannish.............


.. 1352,110


A.I


53,200


0.2


By Freight...........


..P32,191,779


95.6


₱28,673,256


97.9


₱24,880,167


97.1


By Mail. .......... . .


.. 1,433,651


74,075
-


2.I


—726,786


2.


Total.


₱33,625,430


100. 0


₱29,247,331


100.0


₱25,606,953


100. 0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN


COUNTRIES


Countries


December, 1928


December, 1927


Monthly average for
12 months ending
December, 1928.


Value


22 


Value


22


Value


22


United States........


..P42,090,139


74.1


P36,090,406


2


₱32,762,783


60


United Kingdom......


1,765,453


2,237,3


2,223,


apan...........


3,323,241
* 


3,432,73


3,458,08


China..........


1,548,51



2


1,056,14


1,683


French East Indies...


988,58
*


Germany...............


1,655,42


13


455,69


4
1,2-





Spain..................


14,73


354,889


1,210


Australia....
.  ..


337,46


O.:


British East Indies...


852,133


1,003,81


2


Dutch East Indies....


562,211






678,34


88,49





France...............


681,505
* *


1.2


648,77


6f


Netherlands........


545,770



1.0


486,567


338,.


Italy ...


344,494
* *


0.6


164,652


O.


97,86


Hongkong............ . .


168,646


120,734


O.


274,57


Belgium..............


372,846
* *


Switzerland...........


223,548
* *


5,80


Japanese-China......


90,888


0.2


9.


120,086


Siam..................


40,054


O.


O,"


90


Sweden..............


106,2:
 


52,40


222


Canada..............


90,729



O.


56,452


97,716


Norway........... . . .


98,477
 *


0.2


62,020


O.


67,675


0


Austria......... . . . . .


3,112
 *


,967


18,676


Denmark........... ..


4,945
 


15,509


O.


499


.1


Other Countries......


131,892
* 4





106,655


o


743,086


Total.. ₱36.751,056



100. 0


₱50,424,264 100


₱48,108,164


32


  


February, 1929


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
P?)
“SILVER FLEETExpress Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigerated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


 REP
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18


New York—


BRANCHES:
—London—Merida—


—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.


Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


Mr. MANUEL VALENTIN
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.
244 Plaza Sta. Cruz
Manila, P. I.
Phone 2-61-30


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


N
LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 1423


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: "SALEFIBER”


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


TA
Y


El CTIA


FOR RENT:—Store space, Calle David
and Dasmarinas, 179 square meters.—
Entrances on both streets.—Excellent
show windows. Apply, John R. Wilson, Secretary, American Chamber of
Commerce, 180 David, Phone 2-11-56.


P. O. Box 1394
Telephone 22070
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Investments
Collections
Income Tax
121 Real, Intramuros
Manila, P. I.


No Irregularities


Society of All Nations, International in
Scope, Civic, Educational Charicabie Iin
ternal, Social and Industrial.
A Branch in your Community will help
its progress in every way.
After an existence of six years in the
Philippines, the Bureau of the Treasury of
the Philippine Government cxaminca the
bocka, and Recodo of tuis onvanicationd end
found it to be one of the few large fratermal
and mutual aid societies without irregularhies o anomaha."
Red Rovers of the World
of tF P. I., Inc.
De la Rama Blag. No. 2—Room 23
P. O. Box 1141
Manila, P. I.


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


LA SA GRIG NG ANETEEEN ENEEE TE NENENNEN E EEENEE ERA


Simplicity
and Sturdiness


Willamette logging engines are leaders
in the forest throughout the world


Sturdy Construction:


All parts are built oversize
to provide ample safety
margin for the hardest work. This is responsible for the low
maintenance cost and remarkably long life of Willamette Yarders.


WILLAMETTE
Offices and Bodegas in Manila
Address inquiries to Manila
and Zamboanga
or Zamboanga
Spare parts carried in stock in Manila and Zamboanga by
MEYER-MUZZALL COMPANY
301 Pacific Building, Manila


Mr. Businessman
Do You KnowThat a printed card with your
ad a picture of
layed inside our
attract the atctive buyers?
re mostly riders
.e t-car advertising is recognized
as s valuable advertising medium.
triva it a trial, and results will tell.


9
CORIR

DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA


EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


'full particulars call up
B. TIGH
ing Manager


Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette Mig.
Manila,
31 Tayuman


RIC CUMPANY
Telephone 2-19-11


IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLEL


MENTS PLEASE MENTION   OF COMMERC


RICAN


¡BER OF CO!


TURNAL


WILD WEST SHOW!
A vivid presentation of the bloody struggles —tragedies—passions and
romance of the conquest of the wild and wooly West.
Presented with all its thrilling details by the


UNITED STATES ARMY


CARINIVIAD
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL FAIR AND EXPOSITION
From January 26 to February 10


HITT'S


GLORIOUS NIGHTS
IN THE


FIREWORKS SPECTACLE
will present the


AUDITORIUM


HISTORY of the PHILIPPINES


26,000 square feet of highly


in a


polished floor illuminated


Pageant of Flames


with true Oriental splendor


Don’t fail to take the "PASEO DE LAS ISLAS"
Learn in one hour what you would in months of travel!
See the Igorots, Kalingas, Moros, Manobos, Bagobos and other non-christian tri
about their work and merrymaking in their natural habitat!


Skating Rink


The Most Complete Exposition


Side


New hardwood


OF THE


floor. New


Commerce, Industry and Natural


roller skates.


Resources of the Islands


T O ANNEEANN AAN VEANO TE


5


SPREADING YOUR RISKSThe keen businessman diversifies his investments both geographically and by types, not alone to avoid
possible adverse conditions in some single industry or section of the world, but also to share more widely
in those favorable developments which strengthen investment holding and make them more valuable.
WE SUGGEST

Pittsburgh Hotels Corporation—
5145 Sinking Fund Gold Bonds, due March 1, 1948, yielding approximately................ 5342
Chile Copper Co.-
20-Year Gold Debentures, due 1947, yielding approximately ................. 5142
Cities Service, Power and Light Company5165 Gold Debentures, due November 1, 1952, yielding approximately ............ 5.652
German Central Bank for Agriculture Farm Loan—
Secured 65 Sinking Fund Bonds, due October 15, 1960, yielding approximately ....... . .....
61423
Columbia Steel Corporation—
First Mortgage Sinking Fund Gold Bonds 5165 yielding approximately....................
51225
Norwegian Hydro-Electric Corporation—
Gold Bonds—Series A—515, due 1957, to yield approximately ....... 6.122
Commonwealth of Australia External Loan—
30-Year 55 Gold Bonds, due September 1, 1957, yielding approximately . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 5. 1252
General Electric Co., Germany—
20-Year 625 Gold Sinking Fund Debentures, due May 1, 1948, yielding approximately ... ....
Wo
The average yield on the above list is approximately 65
Full Details On Request


INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION


RIU HERMANOS —623-ESCOLTA-623


FRANK G. HAUGIIWOUT
Biological Laboratory
915 M. H. del Pilar
Manila, P. I.
Stool, Blood am Urine Examinations
Special Sunday and Holiday Hours for
Business Men: 8 to 9 a.m.; 3 to 5 p.m.
Week-days: 7:30 a.m. to 12 m.; 1:30 to 5p.m.


Manila Wine Merchants, Ltd.
174 Juan Luna
Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones: 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to be!) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


Recommended By Leading Doctors
Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake
TEL. 5 73.06
Nafure's IO

L NE A  A AAATE EE O ENN


Thoroughly Modern
Dodge Brothers Standard Six possesses all the performance qualities you expect in a modern motor car—it
accelerates swiftly and smoothly —attains high speed
quickly, and easily maintains it with low fuel consumption that is truly economical.
Built of a quality that has been tested—a quality that
has proved its dependability beyond challenge, this low
priced Six stands out as the finest example of motor car
construction in its price class.
Dodge Brothers complete line of passenger vehicles includes
the Standard Six. the Victory Six and the Senior Six.


Sole Distributors:
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, Inc.
536-568 Gandara
ILOILO — MANILA — CEBU
DODGE BROTHERS
SMASDML R


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


The Presidential Number: Containing FullPage Engraving of President Herbert
Hoover and Many Special Features and
Articles About Him, Including a Character
Sketch by Edward Price Bell, and a
Forecast of His Administration: Also the
Usual Monthly Features, Special Articles,
Editorials, and Commerce Reviews


ULY A MAGAZINE  PREEMINENT "IN


THE*


PHILIPPINES


TABACALERA


The word “TABACALERA"
on a cigar is just as significant
as the word "Sterling” on silver


Your tobacconist
will gladl y
supply you


GOODRICH AIR CONTAINERS
or


Goodrich
de Luxe
The Super Tire
Is practically proof
against all accidents of the road.
It is built to resist
cuts, blows and
bruises.
Ask the Goodrich
dealer


Puncture Proof Tubes will get you
there and back without a flat tire


LIET VO ANANNNN E ETEN NL EINEAN EANEE O CIEENEO


March, 1929


  


DURANT MOTOR CO.
Announces the Production of the
Most Sensational Six Ever Built
At a price which will compare favorably with
a New Six being built by a competitor,
but giving greater value for the money.
BACHRACH MOTOR CO
CEBU
MANILA
ILOILO


STRENGTH—SECURITY—DURABILITY
These three most important
qualities are combined in
YNCHAUSTI MANILA ROPES
They are made to satisfy
the most exacting trade
YNCHAUSTY ROPE FACTORY


845 M. DE LA INDUSTRIA
MANILA, P. I.


HIEOIEO


VEE EN MENAN IE ANCELN CEETEN N GELENO MREI


  


March, 1929


After the Day’s Work
At the Office .....


WATER HEATERS


a hot water bath will actually put new
life into you. These hot baths
are instantly available with one of our


which are operated by gas. Hot water is
as plentiful as cold with one of these.
The hot season is here; let us arrange to
install a heater and enjoy its refreshing,
cleansing, rejuvenating showers.
Manila Gas Corporation
Downtown Showroom:
Main Offic
Calle Otis, Paco. Tel. 5-69-34 7 Calle David. Tel. 2-16-43


Meralco Special Bus Service
For Picnics—School and Business
Excursions —Family Parties—
Pleasure Trips —Outings
Travel pleasantly, economically, and comfortably. Hire your own private Bus for any of the
above occasions.
The Manila Electric Company is prepared to
furnish you clean, comfortable and easy-riding Buses.
The cost per person is trivial.
Call our Transportation Department, telephone
2-19-11, for rates and information concerning this
special bus service.


Manila Electric Company
(MERALCO)
134 San Marcelino
Manila, P. I.


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigareite Mfg. Co.
31 Tayuman
Manila, P. I.


IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLED!


V MEEE N ENENN EAN NL TE NN   A E


MARCH, 1929


Vol. IX, No. 3


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
The American Chamber of Gommerce
OF THET
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.
Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
P. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, VicePresident
B. A. Green, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
T. C. Rockwell
Kenneth B. Day
Alf Welhaven


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Frank W. Butler
Wm. H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


COMMITTEES


The President has named and submits for confirmation the following Committees:


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
H. L. Heath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Carl Hess
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
P A. Meyer, Chairman
ALWA 
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wilson"


FINANCE
J.L. Headington, Chairman
Wml. H. Renmolds
F. W. Butler"


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
L. Spellman
M. M. Saleeby


PUBLICATIONS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Bennett
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, ChairMONY
W. J. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, Chair9
F. W. Butler
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
B. A. Green, Chairman
J. R. Wilson
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
P. Bradrord
P. E. Nante
INVESTMENTS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
E A cicen


Herbert Hoover: America’s 31st President
We start in this month with Herbert Hoover of California
and the world-at-large as our president for the four-year term
fixed by the constitution. Not only does America start in
to be governed by the son of her choice, but also, to a remarkable degree, that same world-at-large with which his career
has so largely been identified and with which he is so familiar.
That world owes Americans and the United States such a big
sum of gold money that it is immodest to mention the precise
amount (if anyone knows what it is), and a great deal of the
mere business of government is involved in carrying this debt
along and occasionally getting portions of it paid—usually
by refunding. The debt concerns government in all the
debtor countries as well as others, as it affects government in
the United States. Though little enough was said on this
point during the campaign, it is proper for this magazine to
suggest that in practice the Hoover administration will belie
the radio, and that the foreign debts will be its first and most
persistent preoccupation. Many of the other questions,
which assumed the aspect of paramount issues, are too controversial seriously to be taken up by the man whom they
aided into the Whitehouse: he will bother with them as little
as possible, probably with some of them hardly at all.
Until the constitution is amended and the president
allotted a sixor eight-year term and no more, the real business of a man once elected is to get himself elected again.
Toward this end Mr. Hoover, instead of breaking new and
stubborn ground, will plow the fields with which he is familiar,
on which he knows something of the crop he may expect.
He will therefore endeavor to promote the prosperity of the
United States, and of the world which has borrowed its money,
by applying his abilities as an economist and engineer to the
problems they mutually confront.
Our thirty-first president is the first who is preeminently
world-minded; as soon as he knew he was to be president,
barring the intervention of Providence (not much thought
of nowadays), he got on a goodly ship and had himself taken
to the capitals of the republics of Central and South America
which are all affected by our major foreign policy, the Monroe
doctrine. The stewardship which the United States must
exercise over the Americas was uppermost in his mind, not
farm relief and prohibition. As to Europe, he is familiar
with that. For the present, Mellon, with whom he disagrees,


ROSSOIS
The
Choice of the Motorists
who Know Value
Specify “ROYALS”—Always replace with
"ROYALS"
We Stand Behind Every Tire Sold
MANILA TRADING AND SUPPLY CO.
BACOLOD
ILOILO
MANILA
CEBU


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  OURIVAL


Marcil, 1988


emains in his cabinet with the treasury portfolio; but this
s subject to later adjustment.
However, you will not wish to be wearied with the surnises of a mere neighbor, so let us turn to as good a forecast
is has come to general notice, that of E. L. Bogart in the winter
lumber of the Yale Review, under the title, Economic
Problems Confronting the Next President.
Bogart takes up prohibition as the campaign’s leading
tudible issue. “The country,” he says, "must now be prepard to pay for the better enforcement of the law to which Mr.
Joover has pledged himself, and which, it may be assumed,
le will seriously attempt to secure.”
With that he concludes, and it’s just another way of
saying, "Well, there’s nothing like trying."
But he says protection "still remains, after more than one
iundred years, the strongest plank in the Republican platiorm. It is true, as Gallatin said in 1831, that ‘both parties
are in favor of a protective tariff,' but the Republicans have
recently found it necessary to outbid their opponents * * s
Economic tides unknown in the days of Clay or even MCKinley,
are now in motion within the country and threaten a breach
in the very citadel. American manufacturers have expanded
their production beyond domestic needs and are pushing into
the markets of Central and South America, of Africa and
Asia, and even into the shops of England, France and Germany; these exports must be paid for by equivalent
imports of goods or services. (Italics ours)
“* * * Not merely will an increasing flood of goods,
for the payment of principal and interest on * * * debts
*
beat against the Great Wall, but—much more
significant—there will be created new economic groups within
the United States whose main interest will lie in the expansion
of foreign trade and who will seek to make a breach in the
Great Wall from within."
Even the winter congress tackled the tariff, and Bogart’s
conjecture that it is to become “an even more vital issue than
it actually is at the present time” has already become a fact.
He doesn’t say what Mr. Hoover will do about it, but it will
be vitally interesting, out here in these islands, to wait and see.
By the way, as this is written (February 27), Mr. Hoover
has not so much as ever mentioned the Philippines. If he
does so in his inaugural address an effort will be made to get
it into one of the other pages.
Bogart thinks farm relief probably the most difficult
problem confronting Mr. Hoover; “there is not one agricultural
industry, as Mr. Hoover pointed out in his acceptance speech,
but a dozen industries, each of which may require a different
treatment.” Discussing this tangled question, the author
shows how little susceptible it is of solution; but he thinks the
promised farm board will be forthcoming, and efforts made to
effect economies in production and marketing (the latter sure
to plunge the administration into controversy with powerful
vested interests, the former probably leading to renewed overproduction!), and “Mr. Hoover will endeavor to introduce business methods into farming by eliminating waste, standardizing
the best methods, reducing costs of production and marketing,
and bringing about a better organization of the industry."


Development of inland waterways will be undertaken: a shipway from the Great Lakes to the Atlantic, and from the lakes
to the gulf.
Mr. Hoover, in his time, has been a leading patron of thacanal systems of Europe and knows by experierice their in
portance to agriculture and commerce.
Then comes water power, in the Bogart list, and he thinks
it quite as much a problem of political power as of wate
power. The first thing to be done is for the Republican
to reconcile the divergent groups in their own ranks in congress who respectively favor government and private con
struction. This question will be much in the news. We may
expect either new government boards or some of the existing
ones materially revised.
We began with the foreign debts, and Bogart ends with
them as "a problem still comparatively new in the Unitec
States, concerning which we are still groping toward a sound
policy.” In 1910 we owed Europe six billions; we have now
paid off that debt, and other countries including Europe now
owe us four times that amount! We are also lending at the
rate of a billion a year, "enough to pay back to us the interest
on existing loans and also add to its (the world’s borrowed)
capital.” But there are offsets; American tourists spend
nearly a billion abroad each year ($770,000 in 1927, and
much more now), and $2,700,000,000 of our imports in 1927
were on the tariff free list. “So it is clear that, in spite of our
high protective tariff, certain channels are still open for the
reception of gaods from abroad. The influence of the tariff
in preventir., foreign debtors from meeting their engagements with us has been greatly exaggerated.
(Italics ours)
‘The real effects are much more subtle and indirect than
the mere blocking of the path, and they bear unequally on
different countries. Since we admit freely practically only
tropical foodstuffs and raw materials, the highly industrializ ed
countries of Western Europe, which must make remittan.
to us, are compelled to exchange their manufactured goc
in the tropical regions of the world for the things which we v.
accept and to send us those things. They, therefore, glut t'
markets to which we wish to send our exports. Since they
have debts to pay us they cannot afford to buy of us as largy
as they otherwise would, either of manufactures or of agcultural products."
Bogart sees quite as much as we do in this moot questica.
to engage Mr. Hoover’s abilities; and he remarks the fact that
the two-thirds rule in the senate has prevented the carryi g
out of a constructive foreign policy—on which point Na.
Hoover has remarked, "We must not only be just, we must e
respected.”
"Unless,” he says, “there can be constant
evidenced among all nations that the lives and property
all citizens abroad shall be protected, the foreign trade a
economic life of the world will degenerate stead of thrive,
And Bogart, sizing him up, says: “If the nerve center
the Coolidge Administration is the Treasury Departmer.
that of the Hoover Administration will undoubtedly be t
Department of State”; and for us, who have seen but recent.
our governor general depart Manila for Washington, p.


Retail
Appine American Dr,
Importers
* Ca

BOTICA BOIE


Wholesale
Agents


MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers


We have been selling drugs for 98 years


V EEE ENAEEN OO


ErCir,


LS


TaEAEt
OrAlmdEe Or COmiMERoL JOoR


sumably to assume the state portfolio, that, surely, is a cogent
commentary. Bogart sums up. The senate radicals still hold
the balance of power; the new congress is dryer than the dying
one, the 18th amendment will be enforced more thoroughly;
the tariff will go up, without much aid from the tariff commission; farm relief will follow Hoover’s ideas or will be vetoed; Boulder Dam may be built by the government, but
the inadequate authority of the federal power commission
(* *
will not be strengthened:"
revision of our own debtGg
Hoover at “Close Range" as
Regards Him
By EDWARD PRICE BELL


funding agreements may come up for consideration"; budgets
may exceed three billions, but taxes won’t go up, because
money can be withheld from the annual payments on the
public debt, now more than three times the minimum requirements. “Prophecy is, however, a dangerous pastime, and
it is unwise to pursue it further.”
So we think, too, and noting that Bogart himself didn’t
get around to mentioning the Philippines, we leave the picture
as he paints it.—W. R.


spiritual energy of our people.” He
seems to be gladdened by the idea of less
labor and more happiness for everybody.
If Mr. Hoover be honest—and I
know of no reason to question his honesty
—it is somewhat hard to think of him
without at least a fair share of the broad
sentiments of humane culture. Indeed,
one can fancy an emotionalist declaring:
“Why, this man is no engineer. He
is no economist. He is a lyricist who
has strayed into politics."
So much for the sentimental side of
Mr. Hoover. Now as to his intellectual
side.
Men of strong feeling, one scarcely
need say, sometimes think badly, if
they think at all. It is agreed generally,
if not universally, I believe, that the
republican standard-bearer, with all his
liveliness of emotional sense, does not
think badly. At the proper moment he
brings his emotions into rigid restraint
and thrusts his intellectual powers into
action. It is the vigor and rigor of
these powers, when in action, which
doubtless have given Mr. Hoover his
reputation for a certain ruthlessness or
cruelty of spirit.
Let us consider first some of the aspects of this man’s mind in the domain
of theory—the doctrinal domain—for
he is capable of doctrinaire thinking.
Such thinking, as we have seen, does not
dominate him; he is, after all, a pragmatist. He enjoys speculation; he is
happy, so to speak, in his philosophical
ramblings; but, in the end, his touchstone is that not of theory, not of logic,
but of the demonstrable, of the concrete.
Results the Necessary Guide
“However a thing may strike us in
the abstract,” said Mr. Hoover to me,
“I conceive that we can be guided finally
by results only.”
Our theory, in other words, must not


Analyst


ACKNOWLEDGMENT: ¿ Due and appreciative acknowledgment
is made herewith that the articles appearing in this issue under
the name of Edward Price Bell were written by that celebrated journalist for the Chicago Daily News, from which they have been taken.


What is Herbert Hoover like in feeling,
in intellect, and in will?
With diffidence, but, I hope, conscientiously, I am going to try to point
some sort of psychological portrait
of the republican candidate for the
presidency of the United States.
What is he like in feeling, which is
the deepest source of men’s thoughts
and actions?
There is, or has been, an impression
in the world that Mr. Hoover is not a
particularly sympathetic man; that he
is more materialistic than spiritual; that
he is more mathematical and mechanical
than humanistic; that he is rather narrowly, rather unintelligently, American;
that he would build up a colossal and
superlatively prosperous America, though
he crushed the rest of humanity.
Does one recognize any resemblance
to Mr. Hoover in this picture?
He Is No “Economic Mussolini”
Well, in the flesh, he does not look
to me like a cruel man. I can see no
savagery in his face. It has no hard
lines. His eyes are not furtive or sinister
or truculent. He does not smile all the
time, but he can smile. He does not
seem domineering; he seems in some
degree the contrary. I cannot recognize in him “the inexorable and
merciless economic Mussolini" portrayed
by one of his French critics.


But we are speaking of outer phenomena. Let us try to get beneath
these. Let us see if, by following certain
of Mr. Hoover’s own words, we can find
our way into his heart.
"I especially rejoice in the effect of our
increased national efficiency upon the
improvement of the American home.
That is the sanctuary of our loftiest
ideals, the source of the spiritual energy
of our people.” Security, comfort, opportunity for the average American
family—these are the tests of governmental policies, says Mr. Hoover.
He Has Dabbled in the Humanities
“Nearly 9,000,000 more homes with
electricity, and through it drudgery
lifted from the lives of women. Time
and distance swept away, life made freer
and larger, by 6,000,000 more telephones,
7,000,000 radio sets, 14,000,000 additional automobiles. Our cities growing magnificent with beautiful buildings, parks, and playgrounds. Our countryside knit together with splendid
roads.”
Does it sound like the language, does
it suggest the vision of the zealot of
mathematics and mechanics and economics? Or would it appear that, at one
time or another, Mr. Hoover has dabbled in the humanities? He talks about
"our loftiest ideals.” He speaks with
apparent fervor of “the source of the




EEN
I


The result of over
sixty y ears of
refining experience


At Service Stations and Dealers’ Stores
Standard Oil Company of New York
MANILA


 ECES O AENNAN AAN NAN O NNAN IN O  IOA


THE AMERICAN
IAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


Marcn, 194


deceive us; it must not leave us with
our theory and nothing else.
Individualism is an important matter in every sphere of human interest
and possibility. What does Mr. Hoover
think of it? What is his reasoned
philosophy in relation to it? Is he an
individualist or a socialist, an egoist or
a communist? Does he believe that
society should look to the individual,
or the individual to society, for salvation? Where does he find the source
and the assurance of progress—in the
man or in the mob?
This psychological and sociological
question is more than an important
question, as important questions go in
current discussion. It is fundamental.
It is crucial. It is perhaps the weightiest
question to which mankind can address
its reason. As you decide it so you take
your own measure, and so you direct
such force as you have in the making
of the political and social system in
which you live.
Mr. Hoover has given a great deal
of thought to persons as individuals and
to the various social orders in the world.
His approach has been that of both the
theorist and the practical man. For
years he was deep in what he calls “the
backwash and misery of war. Political
chaos, social chaos, economic chaos,
individual and class conflicts—he knew
and struggled with them all.
With what result?
With the result of an emphatic, of
what he regards as an irrevocable, confirmation of convictions which already
had come to him—the convictions of an
individualist.
‘I, emerged,” to use his own phraseology, an unashamed individualist.
Individualism and Equality
But, in Mr. Hoover’s view, there are
different conceptions of individualism.
American individualism he differentiates
from all others. He prefers it to all
others. He judges it to be, as a matter
of fact, the only real individualism, the
only principle and practice of actual
personal liberty, yet evolved. European
individualisms are marred by caste and
class. The open door to every one is
not there. Birth and property close it.
And without the open door to every
one there is no individualism in Mr.
Hoover’s understanding of the term.
America, if he be right, is the only
country on the globe where every child
is beckoned upward and welcomed
among the peaks. There is, he holds,
indispensable mutuality of good in this
—good for the child and good for the
nation. There is no other way to get on,
or certainly no other way to get on at full
speed. Equality before the law is not
sufficient. Equality of opportunity is
vital, and only in America, according
to this student of peoples, is there
equality of opportunity.
Democracy in Leadership
Unregulated individualism, in Mr.
Hoover’s opinion, would not be American individualism. There is no such


thing as unregulated individualism in
America. Individual strength cannot
do as it pleases here. If it could, equality of opportunity would not last long.
Equality of opportunity soon would be
strangled. Governmentally, industrial.
ly, commercially, Americans are safeguarded against what Mr. Hoover describes as “tyrannies, dominations, inequalities, injustices.
'Society progresses on its leadership,
was one of the republican nominee’s
statements to me.
Leaders come from the people, all
the people, not just a few of the people.
Great Britain, for example, draws her


HILL'S PHILIPPINE FACTS
Percy A. Hill recently furnished the
information below to a well known British
author making an economic study of the
orient:
“Boiled down, annual earnings in the
Philippines from agriculture, transportation, forestry, mines, fisheries were, in
1928, I estimate, P690,000,000.—Taxes
were above 105 of this.—The population
is about 13 million, as follows: 3/4 million
in commerce, transportation, industry and
retailing; 3/4 million pagans in remote
regions; 1-1/2 million nonproducers, officials, clerks, lawyers, doctors, etc.,
including landowners and city landlords: the 1918 census stated 125, and
it’s now close to 1525; ten million producers.—Total earnings of producers, not
over P300,000,000, based as follows:
Per family, 4.5 persons. Growing rice,
4 million; per family, P200. Growing
and making sugar, 1-1/4 million; per
family, P320. Growing and stripping
hemp, 2-1/4 million; per family, P225.
Growing coconuts and producing copra,
2 million; per family, P280. Growing
tobacco, 1/2 million; per family, ₱180.
Add earnings from minor products and
household industries, P54 per family;
getting about the total of P300 earnings
per family annually.
“Expenses per family are: For rice or
its equivalent, P127.50; meat, oil, salt,
soap, etc., P65.70; clothing, P27; tools,
repairs, etc., P15; expense of one child
in school, P7; housing, repairs, taxes,
light, fuel, etc., P19.80; amusements,
weddings, burials, baptisms, cockfights,
medicines, luxuries, etc., P35; interest
on borrowings, average and universal,
₱45; total expenses, P342.50."
Comment: it doesn’t seem to come out
right. But may it not be nearly correct?


leaders from a fraction—probably onesixth—of her population, while America
draws her leaders from the whole commonwealth. What is the great and
irresistible suctional force which does
this? It is that vital equality of opportunity. It gives us the rarest personalities we produce for leadership in
every branch of effort, professional,
industrial, commercial.
Where Genius Gets Its Chance
Ninety-five per cent of our creative and
commanding capacity, as Mr. Hoover
estimates it, has originated with those
who either worked with their hands
or were born of such workers.
A new idea!
Not at all, but an idea worth remembering and repeating. Denis Diderot, more than a century and a half
ago, addressing the Empress Catherine


on the subject of universities, wrote:
The number of thatched cottage
and other private dwellings being
that of palaces in the ratio of 10,00
to one, the chances are 10,000 to on
that genius, talents and virtue wi
come from a thatched cottage rathe
than from a palace.
So we find that Mr. Hoover, in ak
straction, is a prophet and a philosophe
of democracy. Only an individualis
fills this role—not a Marxite or Leninit
or Mussoliniite; not a socialist or con
munist or syndicalist. Millions of thes
gentlemen, at least, shout against th
goose-step, against militarism, yet woul
stereotype the human race in a regiment
Renewing the American Spirit
Passing from theory to some of thspecific issues of the campaign jus
closing, let us sound Mr. Hoover a littl
on the farming question. He has saic
that it is “the most urgent economi
problem in our nation today,” that "i
must be solved,” that "we Ithe repuk
licansl have pledged ourselves to fin
a solution," and that “an adequate
tariff is the foundation of farm relief."
There you have this candidate’s
position and his promise. But there
is much more in his mind on this subject.
He esteems our farming population as
valuable to us far beyond the utmost
range of economics—as life-supporting
to our social organism. In no circumstances would he see it “industrialized”
out of existence or at all unjustly affected
by progressive “industrialization...
“We cannot spare our farmers,” s.
Mr. Hoover. “We cannot afford, :
have not the remotest desire, to inj.i
them. For one thing, they are our Vs
and invaluable reservoir of individi-!
ism—the sine qua non of our Ameri..
civilization. We get regimented in 
cities. The farmers and the sn.
business men are our only irreducio"
individualists."
Task of Keeping Men Free
Liberty—Mr. Hoover always is talki
about it. It is at the core of his feeling
and his reasoning. It burns like an al a,
light in his consciousness. Take econiomic liberty, for instance. He deeit basic in any structure of freedo.
Socialized governments of every kind
are fatal to it. Therefore, he is agaithem. As little government as possio
in business, and no business dictati.
in government, voices Mr. Hoover
standpoint touching the right relatio
between these power units in mode
society.
“The government should watch t"
game,” said he. “It should see tha
nobody marks the cards or loads toe
dice. If it does more in the directi.n
of actual participation in busines.
bureaucracy spreads and spreads util it suffocates liberty and extinguishe
the primal impuls of
In the Chalat,
Poverty, as I
is bot
an enemy of Y


March, 1929


  


President Herbert Hoover


O great was his power to use the loud speaker,
Profound was his silence when challenged by Smith;
To some he’s a lion, and some think him meeker,
But still a young leader of excellent pith.


He fought for the job, the gang didn’t walk him,
He faces the group there on Capitol Hill;
The senate can balk him and maybe outtalk him,
But maybe it won’t, though—and maybe it will.


His habit is system, his mind runs to science
Applied to the arts—he’s a good engineer:
Disciple of saving and modern appliance
And things that bring comfort and leisure and cheer.


They thought him a lamb they had led to the shamble
From task-boy positions he fashioned his fame:
They scoffed at his work and the way that he ambles,
But he kept right on working and learning the game.


He kept right on going to where he had started
And in the convention he had all the votes:
The gang’s vaunted prowess had somehow departed
And in his corral were all the gang’s goats.


He’s now in the White House, their place is the senate
High forum and cloakrooms and corridors wide;
He thinks of the people and honors their penatesIf the gang doesn't do it he’ll give 'em a ride.


If the gang doesn’t join him in making things over,
The better to function in times that are now,
He’ll microphonize 'em from Spokane to DoverHe’s slow to get going, but man, he’s a wow!
He keeps right on plugging and never hunts cover,
The people all like him, and back him—and how!


R.


which
Hoover
wentto
South
America
whence
he returned
on the
Utah,
of the
same
type.


8


THE AMERICAN
HAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


March, 1929


physical and spiritual malnutrition. It
chains people to a narrow experience,
a narrow outlook and a deadly lethargy.
It is hateful to every normal human
sentiment. The mere fear of poverty
is morally, and, therefore, materially,
destructive. It breaks down the best
there is in youth. It is an awful specter
to advancing age. It strikes at all the
potentialities of national genius. The
legend that poverty and high art are
natural fellows never was, and never
can be, true. Poverty is intolerable in
any country zealous for the greatness
and the humanity of its civilization.
That is what Mr. Hoover thinks.
“The security, the happiness and the
independence of every home”—to quote
this leader—are much on his mind. The
home, to him, underlies everything else.
We shall find our national might and
perpetuity there or nowhere. I asked
Mr. Hoover if he thought the American
home were threatened with disintegration. He did not think so. It is his
judgment that our general prosperity
is making our homes so healthful and
attractive that they are safe and splendid
breeding grounds for the nation. Mr.
Hoover counts our rising generation
the cleanest and most intelligent we
ever have produced.
Hoover’s Prohibition Views
Prohibition.
What can we say of the republican
pilot’s point of view on this question,
which may be seen floating upon the
current of every political discussion?
He is for the retention of the eighteenth
amendment and the enforcement of the
laws enacted thereunder. Prohibition,
as he defines it, is "a great social and
economic experiment, noble in motive
and far-reaching in purpose.” It has
been “deliberately undertaken. Itmust
be "worked out constructively.” It
has engendered "grave abuses. These
must be “remedied.
Criticism of it is all right. To seek
constitutionally to change it is all right.
But nullification cannot be countenanced. “Searching investigation of
facts and causes alone can determine the
wise method of correcting” the “grave
abuses.
So much is official.
But how does Mr. Hoover personally
feel about prohibition?
I think I can tell you, though you
must not take it as a direct quotation
from the republican nominee. I think
he believes thoroughly in prohibition.
I have not a doubt that he would like to
see, and is confident he will see, the
great social and economic experiment,
noble in motive and far-reaching in
purpose, a complete ultimate success.
He believes in it for moral reasons—is
convinced it will make better women
and men. He believes in it for intellectual reasons—is  convinced it will
give to America better minds. He
believes in it for economic and human
reasons—is convinced that it v ill beget
—already is begetting—bettez wo hers,
with happier wives, happin aaaran


richer, more cultivated, more charming,
civically more stable and useful homes.
I give you that as Mr. Hoover’s individual faith respecting prohibition.
Helps Toward Permanent Peace
As to the tariff and restriction of immigration his attitude is known to every
body. He is uncompromisingly for them
as essential to our prosperity, and hence
to all that our prosperity means to other
people. For Mr. Hoover, despite certain foreign prepossessions, would not
depress foreign prosperity. He rejoices


Mr. Hoover’s South American cruise
ought to be good business and good
diplomacy. Since our President-designate (he won’t be president-elect,
remember, till the electoral votes .-
formally cast and officially a-ted)
was presumably set in motion by domestic rather than foreign exigencies
there seems no reason to fear that
he will bring back with him such a
cargo of ill-will as Mr. Wilson brought
back from his unlucky excursion to
Paris. Mi. Wilson, by force of circumstances, was compelled to appear to
the Europeans in the red coat and
white whiskers of Santa Claus, whose
pack was full of good things for all
good children; and after considerable
argument as to who were the good
children and who were not, it turned
out that there were not enough piize
packages to go round
Mr. Hoover seems to think, and
most people will agree with him,
that modern diplomacy is mainly a
job for business men. The professionalizing of the American diplomatic service which has been gradually
progressing for twenty years past is a
good thing, but there seems to be
a feeling in Washington that the
professionals, the career men, are too
much under the tradition of prewar diplomacy when an ill-chosen
phrase might mean the difference
between peace and wai, and success
could be attained by an aptitude for
dining out. At any rate Mr. Coolidge
has set a callous Vermont foot on the
proposal of the career men to regard
themselves in a diffeient class from
other executive appointees. Some of
them were going to ignore the practice
of turning in their resignations on
March 4: they meant to go right on at
the desk, as if we still had the same
old President. Possibly Mr. Coolidge
also wishes we were going to have the
same old President; but he knows
that we are not and he is going to
make the diplomats kne it too.
—Elmer Davis, in Life.


in it. He knows that prosperity anywhere aids prosperity everywhere. He
is a thorough convert to the postulate
of the interdependence of the world.
Mr. Hoover is for all the principles
of the republican platform, including
that of adequate national defense as the
necessary accompaniment of systematic
and ceaseless efforts toward settled
international peace. He is for persistence in America’s endeavor to develop
in the Filipinos qualifications for state

hood, and for strict fidelity to Americal
traditions in the western hemisphere
believing the Monroe doctrine to b.
exclusively an instrument ,of justice
good will and stability.
We have given some attention to Mi
Hoover’s emotional nature and to his wa;
of thinking. What sort of will has he
The answer is in his record as a privat.:
citizen and public man—a record, admittedly, progressive, constructive, distinguished. It is not enough to bi
broadly sympathetic. It is not enougl
to think with originality and accuracy
and power—at least, not for a man o
affairs. This man must have will force
of extraordinary quality, for only througk
the exercise of such force can he crystal.
lize his sentiments and thoughts into
tangible achievement.
I have found no one to say that Mr.
Hoover’s will force ever failed him in his
private ambitions—in his career as a
mining engineer or international business
man—nor in his feeding of the Belgians,
nor in his work as American food administrator, nor in his epoch-making
labors as a co-ordinative and co-operative
influence in the industrial and commercial realms since he accepted the
office of secretary of commerce of the
United States.


JAPANESE PROPHET VISIONS
PEACE


Prof. Donsho Kodama, most famous
prophet in Japan, using a system descended from ancient times, has announced
his latest results at a meeting of ne
Peers’ club under the auspices of P r
quis Komura, counselor and one of t
ablest men in the foreign office, a
attended by scores of men prominent
governmental and other circles. Pr f.
Kodama’s predictions, which are m ie
annually, attract nationwide attent n.
Referring to the United States, Froi.
Kodama said:
“The great prosperity of the Uni
States will continue. According to 
book of divination the cotton crop
be poor, but other crops will be v.
good and trade will flourish undimini:
ed. Great Britain and Japan v
work harmoniously regarding ChirThe United States will come to
year that its attitu
realization
unworkable and as
toward Charesult it will co-operate with Gre
Britain and Japan in Chinese affair:


PHILIPPINE LIMERICKS


A daring young girl who was curious
One day climbed the heights of Ca
Burias,
Her skirts were a reminder
To her boy friend behind her
That the winds on the cape are ju s
furious.


A gracious young modern Priscilla
Came out from the States to Manila,
The young fellows, who would,
All did what they couldBut it took an olde -er to thrill 'er!


March, 1929


  F COMMERCE JOURNAL


An End and
The electoral vote for Mr. Hoover was
impressive. So, too, was the popular
vote for Governor Smith. His brave
campaign will not be forgotten nor the
issues he fought for come to nothing.
The electoral vote, however, determines
the choice of the country. Mr. Hoover
is the next President.
Mr. Hoover will bring some outstanding qualities to the White House.
He came into public life in the beginning as a man no longer concerned with
making money but looking for an opportunity to complete his useful career
in some interesting and disinterested
public service. Mr. Hoover’s war-time
record testifies to his humanitarian
impulses. His peace-time record in the
Department of Commerce is evidence,
if more is needed, of an immensely
practical ability. Before and during
the campaign he has shown that he is
able to dream of a time when we shall
be as rich in spirit as in pocket; that out
of the industrial age, made possible by
the leisure that prosperity brings, will
come a larger and fuller life than the
American people have ever known.
Those qualities won many votes for
him, and rightly so. We need them
badly in the high places of government.
His campaign, on the other hand,
was conducted much of the time in such
a way as to make many people wonder
if the Hoover of Belgian relief was not a
myth. The Hoover of 1920 who was
so little of a partisan that he did not
know to which party he belonged,
seemed never personally to challenge
the reactionary elements of his party.
To some his appeal to the country
seemed a stand-pat appeal; a mild and
dignified effort which only suggested:
“Why change?” His most eloquent
speeches dealt with the tariff and with
prosperity; and in such a way as to
further the legend that prosperity was
created by his party and not, as is the
obvious truth, chiefly out of great natural
resources by the genius and energy
of the American people.
The issues that wanted debatingprohibition and giant power—found him
not clear cut in the expression of his
thought. When he is President he will
have to be more explicit in stating his
views to Congress.
Friends of Mr. Hoover pointed out
that he was the successor of a highly
popular Administration; that neither
custom nor sound political sense called
for an offensive by the candidate of the
faction in power, and that faction as
powerfully entrenched as the Republican Party. Don’t, said they, look for
Hoover the man in Hoover the candidate. The real man, they declared, was
much more peppery and positive. The
game he had to play was distasteful
a hgn; but having been nominated he
aieled the most effective means of
g ing.


A Beginning
If that necessity existed, it exists no
longer. Unmistakably, he is committed
to continue the policies of Mr Coolidge
so far as that means a sure nd even
continuance of our prospere development. He has received" mandate,
we believe, to continue the Coolidge
policy of "let the government alone.
Mr. Coolidge, as we have remarked


THE FOREIGN OPINION
On Board U. S. S. Utah (en route
to Hampton roads, Va.), .Jan. 5.—
Early tomotrow, all going well, the
Hoover good-will party will stand
again upon American soil after an
absence of seven weeks on a journey
covering in mileage more than twothirds of the circumference of the
globe.
It seems fitting for The Daily News
correspondent to say something concerning the way in which Mi. and
Mrs. Hoovei have treated the journalistic contingent of the party
There are no two opinson this
subject. Mrs. Hoover’s thought oi
the correspondents seems to have
been unremitting. She and Mr. Hoover have entertained them regularly,
accoiding to an impartial rule, at
breakfast, luncheon and dinner, thus
greatly enlivening the long marches
of the sea. On land also the writers
have been constantly within range of
the president-elects courtesy and
have received every journalistic advantage consistent.
Conferences, too, and private individual conversations have been granted by Mr. Hoover, the “chief" talking
on such occasions not for quotation
but without timidity, evasion or
reserve. Never, I should suppose, has
a public man in a position of the
highest responsibility displayed more
respect for the good faith and prudence
of his journalistic associates than the
American president-elect has shown
since the Maryland weighed anchor
at San Pedro. It appears to have been
his postulate that he was a demociatic
official speaking to the newspaper
organization of a democratic people.
In my attempt just prior to the
recent election to analyze the sentimental, ethical, intellectual and volitional qualities of Mr. Hoover,
found him to be a man of sympathy,
principle, penetration and determination. All these qualities, to my mind,
have been illustrated in the spectacular scenes of the last seven weeks.
This statement is made, not particularly for the information of the
American people, whose able measurement of Mr. Hoover is alieady of
record, but in the hope that it may
in one way or another have some influence in predisposing foreign opinion
to expect from the next Ar rican administration not an ati ade harsh
and narrow-gauged, but an attitude
amicable and broadly intelligent.
Edward Price Bell.


before on this page, came into office
when we were exhausted by war and
by two such taskmasters as Roosevelt
and Wilson. He, most politically-minded of men, gave us what we wanted;
which was a vacation fror tha
duties of citizens under a dem
form of government.


It was only a rest period and we
believed that it must end with Mr
Hoover as it would have ended with th
election of Governor Smith. Entire
authority has not been delegated to him,
his views have not been unanimously
endorsed, all discussion is not silenced.
However complacent certain Republican politicians may be as a result of
the impressive victory, Mr. Hoover
must know that there is no ground for
complacency. He won State after State
that chose Democratic candidates for
State office or for Congress. He was
supported by wet Republicans and dry
Democrats. The progressive West was
as loyal as the conservative East. It is
certain that he was substantially aided
by the vote against the personality of
his rival, his religion, and the accent of
the sidewalks of New York; but it is
equally certain, by the very enormity
of his vote, that he is the hope of many
liberal-minded men and women.
Such is the magnitude of his triumph,
indeed, that he is released from obligation to any faction; even, to a degree,
to his party. He must work through
his party, of course, but the vote was
peculiarly to him. He is free to begin
the reconstruction of his party. He will
have to reconstruct it; the success of his
administration and the future of the
Republican organization itself will depend on the type of men he will call to his
side. Lack of long political experience
did not interfere with his success at the
polls; perhaps it will enable him to bring
to party management a fresh point of
view.
Mr. Hoover’s first official act as
President-elect is his trip to South America. This will take him to the principal
republics in our hemisphere. Most important in our immediate problems of
foreign relations is the development of
good will as well as good trade between
the suspicious peoples of Latin America
and ourselves. In this journey
Hoover has the chance of ser.-
cause that is of concern to all of ot
people without regard to party. In the
direction of foreign affairs as well as ir
the exercise of executive powers i
domestic affairs, he has a great re
sponsibility and a great task.
He can
ne President of all of ur
of the fount million who voted fe
Smith as of the twenty-one million wh.
voted for him.—Outlook and Independent.


Watching Investments
Buying Sound Securities
is the Beginning of Safe
and Profitable Investing
Inquiries Invited
Hair and Elliot
Members
Manila Stock Exchange
P. O. Box 1479
-B Plaza Cervantes, Manila


ESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THI

ME ROF COMMERCE JOURNAL


THE AMERICAN CHAMBE


SR COMMEKUE JOURNAL


IVIalO


HERE—AND THERE IN WASHINGTON
Our readers have already perceived, we trust not too painfully, that
we are in a lyrical mood, and we hasten to explain. It seems to us that
a period of law making is being followed by a period of law enforcement;
and our reaction to laws is similar to our reaction to acquaintanceships—
we prefer the old. We are glad that Colonel Stimson was able to say when
he went away, on February 16, having come here March 1 last year, that
he had completed his work. He of course intended it to be constructive,
as it may turn out to have been. But eight several frauds and defalcations involving public funds, reported in the morning paper bidding him
farewell, are an index of a part of the cost of letting down in government
in order to concentrate upon revising and inaugurating mere laws.
No doubt Colonel Stimson had some realization of this; let us hope
he will be appreciative of the task he left Governor Gilmore and the manner
in which it has been undertaken. Well, at least the beef privilege was not
left over; of all the last-minute actions of Colonel Stimson, before leaving
Manila to become President Hoover’s state secretary, his extension of this
privilege for another year was, to us, the most astounding. It was the
most inconsistent with the avowed prime purpose of encouraging diversification of farm industries and of production. It allows half the Manila
market to be supplied with foreign cattle. But as we say, it was a yeailet
of law making and legal tinkering, clearing the way for what is to come
after. The corporation law having been amended, big holdings of stock
in farm corporations engaged severally in growing the same crop are now
legal; under the Alunan act, too, reservations of gigantic areas of public
lands may be made by the governor, and these may be parcelled out to
individuals and joint stock companies and partnerships in a way to bring
about the cultivation of rubber or hemp or sugar cane or pineapples or
anything else on as large a scale as anyone may desire.
Newspapers report that International Harvester, a big customer for
iber, will make a survey of Mindanao with the objective of putting capita
nto increased production of Manila hemp. The McCormicks, pere and
iIs, have both been here and a decision has been made. California Packers may go ahead with pineapples now, and Goodyear is already busy with
rubber. We shall be producing more, then, inevitably, manufacturing
more, and the issue of whether our products are to be taxed upon entering
the United States will become more acute. But it is only one phase of a
larger fight soon to be waged between those who take a domestic-trade
view and those who have an overseas-trade view; also, it is not to be avoided.
But what the status of the Philippines will be when it is all over—who can
say? The question has been caught up in the tangle of werld economics.
Colonel Stimson’s job is completed here, the scene shifts to Washinghere the corporation and land measures have been approved. As to
awakened here, there’s a good deal that’s conservative, on which
int we publish in this issue translations of two La Vanguardia editorials,
ritten by Pedro Aunario, who knows his public.
Presently we have an advantage in Washington, at least an apparent
ne; even in the short session Congress got round repeatedly to action on
hilippine matters, the senate under the whip of Senator Hiram Bingham
f Connecticut, who stands openly for perpetuation of free trade between
ne islands and the United States. The Wainwright bill providing a biennial
ongressional visiting committee became law, and the Bingham bill creatng a committee to study the question of combining insular affairs in a
eparate bureau or department and report to congress not later than December 16. We can easily see that a great deal of influence in favor of the
project could be evoked, and we know Bingham means business when he’s
Here we would interpolate that notwithstanding President Hoover’s
ission of the Philippines from his inaugural message, and the fact that
far as we recall he has never publicly referred to the islands, he must
and with the overseas traders because his viewpoint is worldwide. Nor
'oes that signify, in the least, that we shall come out of the impending
struggle with the status quo unimpaired; far from it, for it’s going to be a
fight to the finish. In other words, we are unable to share fully the optimsm of the Manila Times over Senator Bingham’s attitude; to us it isjust
in indication of the alignment, great help for us, but not sure to be vicorious. Which brings us, in closing, to some sound opinion prevalent in
the legislature: notwithstanding changes of law, no great volume of American capital will come here until the permanent relation the islands are
to have with the United States is determined. So let the issue be closed
on clearly defined lines, and let the joint commission to Washington, of
governmental and other delegates, be on its happy way.
As secretary of state, Colonel Stimson, whose ardor for free trade
quickly subsided when he discovered how much and how powerful op

position there was in congress, will wield more influence than he would
have in Manila; if a new status for the islands is evolved, he may be expected to have a great deal to say about it. And we think he will be lining
up with Forbes, who, in his book just published, The Philippine Islands,
Houghton, Mifflin (the book is for sale by the Philippine Education Company), outlines a government of autonomous authority under an American
high commissioner. It can’t be denied, and therefore should be stated,
that some influential members of the legislature expect something lying
in this direction to come of the agitation for tariffs against our products.
Such is the situation as Hoover begins and Coolidge moves back to
Northampton. Procrastination may be urged, but it is altogether
possible that long before Hoover’s first term closes the question will have
to be taken up and decided. For these islands will produce, and they will
manufacture too. We think that by reading the lines and between the
lines of the articles in this issue from the pen of Edward Price Bell, reporting Hoover’s South American tour, much insight can be gained into how
the President will handle the question if it comes up to him.


GOVERNOR GILMORE'S TRIBUTE TO HOOVER
“Any statement concerning President Hoover and his work would be
incomplete if it failed to call attention to the fact that he is an idealist, but
a realistic idealist. As an engineer he achieved remarkable success in
dealing with material things. He is a genius in organization, management
and execution. He expects and gets results, but his interest is not in mere
material things nor in mere efficiency. Unless these produce better homes,
better living conditions, better men, women and children, and richer intellectual and spiritual life, they are of no consequence, and, in the language of the Apostle Paul, are 'as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.”
We courteously acknowledge this statement, made for publication in
this issue of the magazine commemorating President Hoover’s inauguration.


FOUR HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE
The executive intent in calling a special three-day session of the legislature February 7 to 9 was not revealed until things got going, except that
the call spoke of money wanted for storm relief, which the session would
consider with such other matters as the governor might care to lay
before it. But banking legislation was the real purpose, and four banking
bills were galloped through in the grand manner of him who sees his duty
in a divine vision. Yet it was admitted that no imperative necessity existed, the bills were a part of the completion of Colonel Stimson’s work
within the scope of a year, we are to believe. Anyway, we now have a bank
bureau with the author of it, Earl B. Schwulst, as bank commissioner
getting P7,200 annually under the act itself, together with something more
from the Belo act—enough altogether to make up a sufficient compensation. But it is said he will only remain in the post a short time, the more
permanent commissioner is still to be named. It’s another good job, for
three years, the period for which the extra compensation is provided; after
that a local protege is expected to take it at P7,200—which of course no
competent man will do. Competent men command more, so the place
will have to pay at least as much as the first-class bureaus, P12,000. The
commissioner’s bureau is under the finance department and has ample
powers, which is right.
Another one of the four acts permits local banks to establish branches
abroad. The other two, of which one does not go into effect until August.
1 next year, govern loans and local deposits of branch banks in the Philip
pines, f. e., branches of banks incorporated elsewhere than in the islands
These banks, taken so by surprise, voiced an objection to the bills, but it
was only too evident all along that Colonel Stimson would follow Mr
Schwulst’s advice and sign them, as he of course did. Ninety per cent of
deposits in these banks must either be in the islands at all times or in a
designated repository outside them, save when the commissioner lifts the
restriction, and residents and citizens of the islands who are creditors o
the banks have preferential rights to this amount. The aim is to proteci.
local depositors and is said to be directed at branch banks which may in
future be established here and allowed to receive deposits; Colonel Stimsor
said he had no misgivings regarding the branches operating here now, thouglthey are the only ones now affected.
This goes into effect next August: Any single borrower may no"
borrow from a branch bank receiving deposits in the Philippines more thar.
525 of its deposits, plus 155 of the net due from such branch to the home
office and outside branches, but a like amount can be borrowed wher
secured by readily marketable nonperishable insured staples. is too
deep for us. Evidently the bank commissioner is to have plent, to do
That seemed to be the banks’ principal objection, new wine in old bottles—
new interventions and regulations when the old familiar ones were ad
mittedly doing the trick. But we must approve the government’s objective
ample financial safeguards, and applaud it if attained.
We hope Mr. Schwulst, who seems to be adept in such matters, wil
get around to a study correcting present methods of remitting money fron
the provinces into Manila by men squaring up their commercial accounts
It is common for such men to entrust sums running into thousands of peso
to the salesmen from whom they have purchased goods, rather than to
resort to money orders; and the risks of such a practice are obvious; sales
men may be overtempted, and all the time they are carrying sizeable sum
of money their lives are in danger. What is needed, apparently, is an
adjustment of money order rates downward and an increase of the maximum amount for which they may be issued.


March, 1929


THE AMERICAI'CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


1


Four Best Manila Newspapers February Editorials


A PRODUCER'S RIGHT
There are those who advise against stressing
economic development of the Philippines at this
time because of the fear of stimulating the move
in the United States against Philippine products.
However, there is not the slightest chance in the
world to slip up on the American producers.
Exaggerated statements of the enormity of the
prospective production here have an element
of danger, not so much because of the fright
they cause as because of the use to which they
are put in propaganda.
The fact is that when these Islands are developed this will become a larger consuming
market, will buy more from abroad, from the
United States in particular, and at the same
time will consume more and more of the local
products. The size of the consuming market is
determined directly by the purchasing power
of the people, and the people of the Philippines
now are low in purchasing power, lowest where
economic development is most backward. Official records show a relatively slow rise of the
general purchasing power, and these figures
harmonize with those showing slow economic
development.
Competition in world trade never was stronger
than it is now. No material change is in prospect. Such favorable conditions as those which
resulted from the world war, those which stimulated Philippine trade to the point of intoxication, are not to be expected again, at least not
in the immediate future. This means that
Philippine development must come in the face of
competition. When competition from the Islands is felt in the United States it will be opposed. Those feeling the competition would
have it stopped. Therefore they protest.
No one can accept for the Philippines such a
place of inferiority as to say that the Islands
must produce only those things offering no
competition. Free and unrestricted access to
the American market is a right belonging to the
Philippines, a right which must be recognized
unless the fundamental principles which gave
the American government birth are to be scrapped. What can be produced in the Islands
and sold in the United States to advantage has
a perfect right to go there, and no apologies
need be offered or secrecy resorted to.
This does not mean that surpluses are to be
encouraged. Surpluses are economically unsound and to be avoided, irrespective of conditions regarding competition. At present the
world is over-supplied with sugar and building
up a bigger surplus is unwise. It is unwise from
the Philippine point of view and unwise from
the point of view of every sugar producing
country.
But that does not mean that the Philippines
must be pushed into the position of undevelopment to avoid incurring displeasure from competitors.—Bulletin, February 14.
THE SECRET OF HIS SUCCESS
This afternoon’s public demonstration in
honor of the departing Governor-General and
Mrs. Henry L. Stimson will mark the last of a
series of brilliant farewell affairs. No sooner
had the Chief Executive announced his retirement from the duties at Malacanang to assume
new ones in the cabinet of President-elect Hoover
than invitations began pouring for “despedida”
banquets and receptions in his honor. And
while the Governor-General was being shown
how the country appieciated his constructive,
though short, administration here, Mrs. Stimson
on the other hand was being feted by the women
of Manila, not alone because she is the wife of
the Governor-General but also for the fact that
Manila’s society has seen in her the most gracious
hostess that Malacanang has ever known.
The Stimsons are leaving this country with
the vivid impression of their social conquest and
their political triumph.
For socially, with the aid of the first lady of
the land, Stimson’s administration has been
splendorous. Politically, Mr. Stimson leaves
the impress of his dominant personality upon
the recent statutes enacted by the Legislature,
and upon the whole machinery of government.


What makes his brief sojourn in this country,
as the highest representative of the sovereign,
stand out prominently in America’s record here?
It is the character of his administration which
is only a reflection of the very character of the
man. He fancied that he would mould these
Islands after his own pattern of how a modern
twentieth century country should be. And he
set about constructing, at first strengthening the
foundation upon the fundamentals laid down
for this country by such great Republicans as
MCKinley and Taft. And in less than one
year he had almost completed his task, the only
thing left undone being the superstructure.
And the reason why he could accomplish so
much in such a short time was that he came
knowing what he wanted to do, and did it.
What was it that made his administration
epoch-making? It was the setting down of a
very simple formula for a successful government
in these Islands—recognition of the rights of
the Filipinos as co-participants in the administration—without which, no Governor-General
can ever hope to make a success at Malacanang.


EDITORIAL SELECTIONS FOR
FEBRUARY
Bulletin, February 14.—A Producer’s
Right. Selected by Professor Cristino Jamias.
Herald, February 23.—The Secret of
His Success. Selected by Mr. Jesus
Valenzuela.
Times, February 11.—Dawn of a New
Day. Selected by Professor Vicente
M. Hilario.
Tribune, February 7.—A Great Loss.
Selected by Professor Verne Dyson.
Certified, G. P. Shannon.
Since no selection is made among
these four best editorials in the daily
English-language papers during February, the order in which they appear
has no significance in this respect.
Dr. Shannon as well as other members
of the English faculty of the University
will be absent from Manila during the
summer, and this feature will not
appear in our April and May issues.—
ED.


For sometime, the Filipino people have been
branded in the metropolis as recalcitrants, for
the reason that they would not bend their will to
the command of its pro-consul in the Philippines. There are even those who would make
the Filipinos believe that the purpose of various
reactionary measures pending in the United
States Congress, all inimical to Filipino interests,
is to teach the Filipino people how to accept the
dictates of the representative of the sovereign.
But Governor-General Stimson came to the
Philippines. He came not to rule but to be
useful to the Filipino people and to serve his
country. He came with an understanding
heart. He came with honesty of purpose to
perform his duties toward the people under his
charge and toward the nation he represents.
He sought not only the counsel of his own adVisers but also that of the Filipino leaders.
And it was his close contact with the people that
convinced him that what they wanted was reasonable.
Governor Stimson, however, had his own
ideas of government. He had his own policies
which he knew were good and were intended to
produce the greatest measure of well being for
the people. And he used not compulsion but
persuasion in making the people see what he
wanted them to see. This was the essence of his
government. And it was the secret of his success in the Philippines.
In the departure of Governor-General Stimson, the Philippines loses an able administrator.
But it has made a good friend. Our best wishes
for a happy trip to the homeland and greater
success in their new duties go to Governor and
Mrs. Stimson.—Herald, February 23.


JACOB


LEVY


PHILIPPINE HATS


Buntals


Bamboos


Calasiaos


Balibuntals


Correspondence Solicited


227 Calle David
Cable Address: “TEXTILES”


Manila, P. I.


DAWN OF NEW DAY
A convention of Filipino business men is
decidedly a sign of the new day that is dawning
in these Islands. For 30 years the best minds
in the Philippines have been dedicated to politics.
For many of those 30 years, business and trade
have been, if not despised, at least, considered
as the occupation of mediocre intellects. Thus
we have seen develop in the Filipino people
political consciousness of a high order. Save
for the influence of demagogues, the Philippines
has little to learn from any democracy in the
world. Whatever defects exist—as the American sees them—are incident to the psychology
of the people.
But if progress has been made politically at a
rapid rate, penetration of Filipino influence in
the business world has been slow. True it is,
there are many more Filipinos in business today
than there were a decade or two ago. Those
Americans who recall Manila life as it was in the
days when this publication first saw light, remember the entire dominance of the Chinese in
retail trade. The Escolta was a Chinese street.
Then time transformed it into a district of
American and European store-keepers. Today
it is preponderantly Filipino.
So with other parts of the city and the Archi
pelago. The Filipino is gradually taking over
retail trade. He is venturing into the wholesale
and importing field. He is becoming a manufacturer. His capital is entering productive
enterprise. His interest today is not entirely
absorbed by politics and the desire to enter the
government service,
The American quarrel with this change is tha
it is not rapid enough. Business is still a neg
iected and noe a heniy honored had. Ti
business man is today, not considered quite ithe category of the gentiemen who can prefi.
their names with the title, honorable.
So it is that the first convention of Filipino
business men, meeting today, is a portent of thi
new day. We do not believe this convention
will revolutionize Filipino life. We have little
hope that it will be followed immediately by a
determined Filipino drive which will make
Filipinos masters of every sphere of business
activity. Nor doweimagine that this convention
purely of business men, will divorce itself fron
politics. A glance at the names of some of th
delegates shows that the politicias! And office
holders will constitute a good part of t le member
ship.—Times, February 11.
A GREAT LOSS
The appointment of Governor General Henry
L. Stimson to the highest post in the Hoover
cabinet represents for him a signal honor and a
great opportunity to serve his people, and for
these Islands a great loss.
It is his praise that he goes to his new post
with the unqualified support of the elder American statesmen, like Elihu Root and Charles
Evans Hughes, both of whom have been secretary of state; and of Chief Justice William
H. Taft, former President. *—Tribune, Feb. 7.


N L AAINO TO ADVERTISEMENIS FLEASE MENIION THE AMERICAN CRAWAR OF CONMENGE JOUIENAL


22


PNPE
A

  


March, 1929


Hoover’s Tour Softens View Held by World
By EDWARD PRICE BELL


On Board U. S. S. Utah, En Route
to Hampton Roads, Va., Jan. 4.—A
better understanding of President-Elect
Hoover’s personality promises to rank
among the most substantial advantages
of his good-will mission to Latin America. This better understanding, starting among Spanish personages whom the
president-elect has met, will be transmitted by them more or less fully to
European and Asiatic officials who live
in the Latin-American capitals.
For foreign statesmen, diplomats, manufacturers, traders, bankers and other
persons of influence to obtain a truer
image of Mr. Hoover than they have
had hitherto will be for the world to
gain an important political asset.
The belief is widespread outside the
United States, if not prevalent in the
United States, that Mr. Hoover is
economically probably the hardest boiled
man ever elected to the American
presidency. It appears to be assumed
that he is not only hard boiled, but
unintelligent economically—disposed,
that is to say, to prosecute American
business expansion on the theory that a
foreign loss anywhere is an American
profit and that if the United States only
can destroy foreign competitors utterly
abit will rise to the Hooverian ideal of
ansconomic mastery and unchallengeable
political pre-eminence in the world.
ibi Of this strange misconception, this
fantastic distortion, there is very little
left, I fancy, in Latin America. Foreseen at least by a great many as an
i advance agent of American business,
t Mr. Hoover really appeared among the
Latin Americans as a philosopher and
y friend.
He said next to nothing about Amersa
ican business. Rather did he give his
ntime to talking with his hosts about how
they could make their own countries
Amore prosperous, not pretending of
/ritourse to be blind to the fact that the
ncreased Latin-American prosperity
bne
bpwould be a good thing for all foreign
ksellers in these markets, including the
MAmericans.
bi I imagine that one Latin-American
i'statesman was a little surprised when
this remark suddenly burst from the
p. lips of the president-elect:
. “We don’t care how much you buy
ffrom the British. The more you buy
Hirom the British the more we shall be
able to sell them."
In this bit of conversational spontaneity rests the germ of Mr. Hoover’s
whole economic philosophy and the world
should knowit. No good can come from
the notion in foreign minds that the next
president of the United States is out to
destroy the prosperity of other nations.
Such a conception not only implies
economic idiocy on the part of Mr.
Hoover but is dangerous.
If ever a man understood the international benefit of national prosperity
Mr. Hoover does. Both his cconomic


faith and his humanity urge him to these
principles, which he believes will enable
each nation to realize fully on its potentialities.
I recall more than one instance of the
evil effects of the political personality


NANCE, ROTARY HOST
Lunching the other day with Colonel
Curtis Nance and the Rotarians at the
“RCP” transmitting station, we got to
the bottom of the business right away—a
franchise.—But about really understanding radio, ether you do or you don’t.—
But think of all radio does—it puts Will
Rogers’s wisecracks over without the aid
of the lariat.—Will put over a good one
recently, “The United States never lost a
war or won a conference!”—He also
advises Al Smith not to call it raddio
next time.—Think again about what radio
can do: back in the days of MCKinley
and Mark Hanna, politicians used to wear
custom-made suits—and now we have
radio-made presidents!—The editor broadcasting:
All through the campaign
In sunshine and rain
The whole blooming country was shaken;
Al couldn’t avoid
Mispronouncing the woid,
But the radio brought Herb the bacon!
The election started Will Rogers studying French—says he wants to find out
what cherchez la femme means!—
Talking about the ladies, and old times,
there is the Dumb Dora who thinks Mark
Hanna the name of a popular tailoring
house!—“Stop whirling me around so violently!” she said to her dancing partner.
“Oh, but I must; I’m radio-minded!"
When are you going to tune us out? We
just radio with desire to go on—on with
Will Rogers, say, at about ten grand a
week!—Anyway, we just wanted to say
that the luncheon was good, we enjoyed
drinking it a lot! Right then and there
the dope on the 7th round of the SharkeyStribling opus came through in four
minutes!—A message was handled a few
hours earlier from Montivideo to Osaka
via Manila in 57 minutes! And there’s
direct short-wave radio whoopee now
between Manila, South America (presidential tourist resort), Europe, Asia,
Dutch East Indies, the homeland or
where are you! And Colonel Nance’s
company is handling under contract the
principal interisland telegraph business
and making a good job of it!—Yours for
bigger and better radios! Why, when
we came to these islands and came to,
you had to send your cables home for
money via Hongkong and London. Now
you just put 'em on the radio and they
go everywhere! That’s the real static
of the situation as we get it.
—Radiolite.
P. S. Before taking us out where the
dinguses were all dingusing away, Colonel
Nance told us all not to be touching and
picking up things. We certainly appreciate a host who knows his Rotarians!


ill understood or misunderstood. Earl
Grey’s inability to grip the inner Bethmann-Hollweg, as the former British
foreign minister himself told me, was one
of the reasons why the prewar diplomacy
of Europe proved futile. And on the
other hand, if Lord Grey could not
understand Bethmann-Hollweg, neither


could the German understand Lord Grey
or Lord Haldane. To the end Bethmann-Hollweg believed that Grey and
Haldane were bluffing when they declared that the German invasion of
Belgium would bring Great Britain to
the side of Belgium and France.
Some years earlier Tokyo’s false mea:
ure of Theodore Roosevelt almost in
volved Japan and America in waWithin the last two or three years
wrong view of Premier Mussolini cause
perilously strained relations betwee.
Italy and France, the latter together wit 
Germany and even Great Britain suspecting that Premier Mussolini wante.
war when he wanted only a fair cor
sideration for Italy with its great recor
of sacrifice in Armageddon.
In his time the non-American worl
has scrapped its suspicious and fean
of Mr. Hoover and accepted him fo
what he is—a man of reason, generosit
and peace, with a firm belief that ai
nations gradually will find their true line -
of economic progress and will pursu
these lines to decent standards of livint
To the extent that the Latin-America
trip has dissipated and shall dissipat
erroneous views of the man about to
become the chief executive of the United
States, this visit may be reckoned of
general value to mankind.


The queerest type of love letter
perhaps known in the world is that in
vogue among the Mangians of the
hill lands and mountains of Mindoro,
Philippines, who still hold to the ancient
alphabet of about three vowels and ten
consonants which they group into words
inscribed on bamboo in a single vertical
column, their bolos serving them as a
stylus. They are an extremely simple
and timid people and their more aggressive Malayan neighbors have made
them hunt cover in the highlands and
the primeval forests. For business,
aside from the very important business
of making love, they hardly need writing
at all; and surely no bamboo ledgers to
record their wealth. But love mak
as ardent demands upon them as up
other folk, and their swains fallen vict!
to Cupid whip out their bolos, sladown a good-sized bamboo, and go
verse-writing with intense gusto.
that a love missive may be strung alo.
the length of a 40-foot pole, and tin
one end trailing in the forest path as t
poet indites a warm postscript on t
other. Popular damsels soon have enou.
finely etched poles to build a hut
to burn such tell-tale documents wot
be to light a fire endangering the fore
Specimens of the love-letter poles ha
been acquired by scientists and tran
lated, and the astounding truth d
covered that a Mancian in love is a
inordinate liar!


Little Miss Muffet
Sat en a tuffet
Necking a Persian bey;
Such was his dexterity,
She bawled with asperity,
How do you get that way!”


March, 1929


  


Universally Popular!


anla Sigars
C



"MANILA CIGARS,” which are HAND-MADE LONG FILLER, are a product
which both the wholesaler and the retailer can depend upon for profit.
To the wholesaler, “MANILA CIGARS” offer quick turnovers.
To the retailer, this product is a repeater.
Such results are made possible by the combination of good qualities of Philippine
leaf tobacco seldom found in other tobacco. A pleasing taste, delicate aroma, and even
burn are inherent in the selected tobacco used, grown in the Cagayan Valley which is
annually fertilized by Nature by the overflowing of the Cagayan River.
The more one smokes “MANILA CIGARS,” the surer he is of this product’s unexcelled qualities.
There are “MANILA CIGARS" of all shapes and classes which offer wonderful values.


List of Distributors Furnished on Request


Address:


CHARLES A. BOND


Philippine Tobacco Agent
15 William Street, New York City, U. S. A.


Or


THE COLLECTOR OF INTERNAL REVENUE
Manila, P. I.


NO ANIENEEE





DEI
A
NE
P
  


March, 1929


he Fire Trees
By GILBERT S. PEREz


rth
Y
na
ir
be
d
a
are
ert
I
g


f c
eve
th
2V
f
my thot
1a
hat
th
the 
arn
slave
ryst that sho
y ey
ned
onc
le gra
 a
nt mist.
e leaf-starved


Of the campus
And the mud-slushed snow
On Madison street
In far-away Bryn Mawr.
So I dropped the knife,
And with it fell
The live coals
Of my hate-gorged love.
And I picked up the basin
Of balsam and oil
And threw it
At the brazen hussy’s
Pock-etched face.
So he blackened my eye
And I limped away


With his brawling brown brat on my hip:
And I left him alone
With the Krag-voiced hell
That my hate-seeped soul
Had brewed
In the death-encompassed,
Vulture-haunted,
Carrion-shambled
Kotta on the hill.
Lanao, February 21, 1929.


AN OVERSIGHT


Throughanoy . sight, the name of the author
of Five Tables of Bridge was not included with
that story, which appeared in our February issue.
Her name is Mrs. Anna Broad, she lives in Zamboanga and writes under the pen name of Henry
Philip Broad. Her husband is engaged in business in Zamboanga.—Ed.


Amazing Reductions in Prices


on


OLROEEM
PASSENGER CARS


Now


You Save


Phaeton -


₱1590


₱160


Coupe -


1975


225


Cabriolet


2170


230


Coach -


1990


185


Sedan


2180


195


Imperial


- 2190


260


Discount for Cash
For a short period only Chevrolets will sell
the lowest prices on record for the Philipr
Act Now—Buy a Chevrolet
ommercial Compan
Chevrolet Distributor


MBER Of
NDING RE



March, 1929


  


Frank Conservatism at Last! La Vanguardia Editorials


Press dispatches say that at present
thgre is not the least desire on the part
of Congress to precipitate any discussion, and much less to approve the reactionary measures tending to limit free
trade and exclude Filipino immigrants
from the United States—to preclude a
heated political controversy. The more
influential leaders in the present administration have, it seems, said that discussion of such projects would afford
opportunity to those who want the
Philippines separated from the United
States to strive for this extreme solution,
if they should see in this an advantage
for their schemes of exclusion. Such
an opportunity would be seized not only
by those who at whatever cost wish to
erect a tariff wall between the United
States and the islands, considering them
a foreign country, but by those elements
both in and outside the United States
which look with favor upon an extreme
solution of this character.
We believe that such prevision and
perspicacity are in accord with the
policy of Republican administrations in
the past. The traditional policy of
that party is to proceed by gradual
steps, by evolution more or less slow,
but sure, according to the party, to
evolve into an autonomy which eventually will lead us to liberty; and this
purpose is found faithfully reflected in
the address of Governor General Stimson to our legislators. This policy is the
more sagacious for being in harmony
with the opinion of the majority party
just now. The conservative class of
Filipinos, in demanding that the present
incertitude be clarified, does not necessarily demand a radical solution involving immediate political separation and
opening a new era of doubts and indecision for foreign (American) capital which
desires to aid us in our plans of economic
development.


The conservative class in the Philippines desires stability, a route laid out


WHO WANTS THIS INFORMATION?
The commerce bureau has courteously
furnished the following information for
a correspondent whose letter does not
now turn up, but the information seems
to be of enough general interest to be
worth space:
No air lines save army and navy air
lines, information regarding which is
withheld, are in operation in the Philippines.
There are 41 common carriers in the
islands, 26 of them shipping companies.
There are 116 steamiships registered in
the islands, 114 are for coastwise transportation and 2 for bay and river transportation.
Use of the cutter Busuanga as a hospital
ship was discontinued in 1919 and the
ship sold to T. R. Yangco, who sold it in
turn to Hijos de F. Escano, who in their
turn sold it to La Naviera Filipina, Inc., of
Malitbog, Leyte, out of which port the
ship is now operated as the Zambales.
Bishop Charles H. Brent fathered the
hospital-ship idea and secured the aid of
the Rockefeller foundation for the purpose.
No such ship is now in operation.
Telephone companies in operation:
Philippine Tel. & Tel., Manila; Negros
Tel. & Tel. Co., Inc., Bacolod, Occidental
Negros; Panay Tel. & Tel. Co., Inc.,
Iloilo, Iloilo; Cebu Tel. & Tel. Co., Inc.,
Cebu, Cebu.
The following provinces have their own
(. e., provincial-government-owned) telephone systems: Abra, Agusan, Bataan,
Batangas, Bohol, Bulakan, Cagayan, Camarines Norte, Camarines Sur, Cebu,
Cotabato, Davao, Ilokos Norte, Ilokos
Sur, Laguna, Lanao, La Union, Leyte,
Mindoro, Misamis, Mountain, Negros
Oriental, Nueva E-ija, Pampanga, Pangasinan, Rizal, Sorsogon, Sulu, Tralak, Tayabas, Zambales, Zamboanga.
Baguio has its own teleghone system.
Juan Jaucian owns and operates a telephone system at Ligao, Albay. There is
a telephone system in operation at Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya.


ACHIEVEMENT ARO PROMOTION
TN this intensive period when human values
Iare measured in terms of efficiency, and
earning power depends upon results, no man
or woman can expect to realize a full measure
of success without efficient eyesight.


Retarded promotion and blighted
achievement follow in the wake of defective
vision.
Always the best in quality
but never higher in price


OXY GE.
Compresse
Oxygen
99.5% pui


HYDROG
Compress
Hydroge
99.8% pi


ACETYLEN
Dissolved
Acetylene fi
all purposes


WELDING
Fully Equip
ped Oxy-Acetylene Weld
ing Shops


BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
Electric Storage Batterie:


Phiippine Acetyiene Ce
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO a
MANILA, P. I.
y


along a plain road, but without
eagerness and precipitation of
patient man who wishes to dwe.
own house at once, knowing it i
completed and its security not gua
teed against imminent risks. The
servative class, when it has thoug
divined possibilities of a radical cha
has been the first to sense the g
consequences: to work for auton
which we desire firmly estabi:
without breaking abruptly the r


The
Phiippine Guaranty Compan,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds f
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS SURETYSHII
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.


We also write Fire and Marine Insug,?"

ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
Eoans on real estate repayal
by monthly or quarterly inst:
ments at low interest


Call or write for particular:
Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
P. O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OL


  Ol
MMERCE JOURNA.


March, 1929


onomic ties uniting us with Amerassuring us for some time to
le continuation of her influence
islands.
conservative class, finally, benat if the understanding not to
in Congress any discussion of the
ires menacing our material interso as not to give opportunity for
ne action) prevails, the way toward
ional solution, to autonomy, and
tually to liberty, in accordance with
ublican traditions, will be smoothed
made easier for these islands.
Ve agree with those who think that
present tendency of Nationalists
1 Democrats is to consider the econic problem as a problem apart. The
servation is exact, and classifies us
th, prudent nations and men who!


On Board U. S. S. Utah, En Route
Hampton Roads, Va., Dec. 28.—
ery observant person who has travelwith President-Elect Hoover on his
od-will tour will step ashore at Nork, Va., with a clear understanding of
t question long puzzling to Americans
o why the peoples of Latin America
r aggression from the United States.
This fear is by no means unnatural.
main sources are three—history,
cal wealth and relative naval and
yeakness.


know how to trim their sails to suit the
wind. Most of us used to believe, very
sincerely, that political independence
must precede economic independence.
We did not, we could not, conceive of
a parallel road with economic and
political interests progressing side by
side. Our conviction was that without
the first, political emancipation, economic independence was impossible.
With the discarding of this view,
which has been truthfully noted by
observers who follow carefully the course
of events, Nationalists and Democrats
relieve themselves of a great many
differences of opinion; they erase that
dividing line, very marked in the past,
which kept them apart on the problem
of economic progress prior to the advent
of independence.
And it is greatly for the good of the


When have the inhabitants of these
vast territories not been acquainted with
aggression? When has not exploitation
been as familiar to them as are their
mountains, rivers and plains?
Without attempting to apportion
praise or blame the fact is unmistakable
and virtually universal that Central and
South America think of history only to
recall cruelty or spoliation. Ravaged
as they have been for gold and silver
and other forms of wealth, they are still
rich and they are weak. Rich and weak,


country that this is so. The majority,
in wisely modifying their views to conform to reality, make it possible for us
Filipinos to devote our principal efforts
during the present epoch of our existence
to material interests, the creation of
great industries, the exploitation of our
natural resources, so as to give greater
vigor and expansion to the spirit of
liberty, and to its institutions, the whi.-
we seek with the utmost fervor, from thsovereign power, stabilization of our
present uncertain status—within the
scope of the most liberal conditions
which circumstances and the tradition:!
policy of the Republicans, unvarying t.
to the present, may make it possik:
generously to concede. We do not nov.
desire the impossible.
As promised last month, the Journal has undertaken
additional translations from the pen of Pedro Aunario,
La Vanguardia's editorialist. The editorials translated
vee R.
pectively published in La Vanguardia of February 12 and February 18.—ED.
they are encircled by power. Need
one say more of the question?
American policy—the Monroe doctrine—once these nations set up politically for themselves, threw an effectual barrier between them and reconquest. It guaranteed their security
from transoceanicpresumption andgreed.
It continues to offer this guaranty.
But has the United States done what
it has done for Latin America only to
hedge about a mighty preserve for itself?
Has it warned off others not for Latin
America’s but for its own profit? These
are the questions which haunt the minds


Puzzle Clarified by Hoover Tour
By EDWARD PrICE BELL


Just Arrived
The Philippine Islands
by
Former Governor-General
W. Cameron Forbes
The most complete, the most authoritative, and the most well ordered and lucid
listory of the first American adventure in
colonial administration.
In two large illustrated volumes, P27.50.
Note: The publication of this book was
lelayed and the original publisher’s price
icreased because of additional appendices
and a more complete index.


Philippine Education Co., Inc.
Manila, P. I.
101-103 Escolta


ELMAC, INC.
625 Rizal Avenue
Telephone 2-35-32
Manila, P. I.


El. Motors and Generators
Machinery of Every
Kind and Description
Electrical Supplies
Electrical Installations
Engineering and Contracting


RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Maron, 1929


THE AMEKICAN CHAMIBER OF COMMEROL JOURNAL


of our liberal fellow Americans.
Mr. Hoover has labored diligently
to end such doubts and fears once for
all. He has argued in effect that North
American power is South American
power—that Latin America is safe
while the United States is safe—and
that they can pull together for their


mutual good and for the common good
of the world. Latin America awaits
with greatly increased confidence verification of this argument. It is up to
the American people through the upport of wise measures of government
to see that this newborn confidence shall
not be disappointed.


What Will You Do When You're Fifty?


Psychiatrists, who study man’s brain
and nature, tell us we use but little of
the brain in our conscious life; there’s
a deeper and greater substratum of gray
matter whence hazy notions and queer
ideas rise to the semiconscious surface
during dreams, and where our other self
exists and our repressions are hidden
beneath the power of our conscious will
and the demands the world makes upon
us. This isn’t, of course, a strictly
scientific way of stating it; the essential
fact is that when we go plodding about
on the business of earning our daily
bread, taking unto ourselves some bonny
lass and subsequently baptizing one or
several bairns in our name, we are just
Jones, Smith or Brown—lawyer, doctor,
or what-not; but when we lay daydreaming or busy ourselves in enjoying our leisure, relaxing the powers that
make us sweat, we become Jones the
eminent authority on torts, Smith of
the cancer research laboratory, Brown
the orchid fancier.
In our leisure, then, we ride our hobbies; and science now makes us know
that this chap who goes riding hobbies
is the chap we live happiest with—who
must be humored sufficiently for the sake
of our health and sanity. Riding hobbies makes life take on purpose, each
day becomes important—may indeed
bring the reward the years have postponed. Will you, if you are skeptical,


tell me what Lindbergh is going to do
If he
with himself when he is fifty?
is merely to go on flying, then he is to


Paris. Even a Lindbergh
way of avoiding going, a:
seed; and no doubt he will
is, he must.
What will Coolidge do?
this question almost with
realizing how deeply they :
the springs of existence. B
of money, and no expensive
would say he can just do 1
while away his time. A
Vermonter, whiling awa)
It will be interesting to wa¬
adjusting himself to life!


The Insular Life Assurance Co.,


MANILA, P. I.
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans onrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
S
FOR ABOUT 131.00 ANNUAI
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife on
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy. 3,
Ceo


C. S. SAL!


Call or write for particulars to:
HOME OFFICE
3rd Floor, Gac.
4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. P
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 734
P. O. Box 128
V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


become a drudge and end where he
began, at something no more interesting
to him than carrying the aerial mailswhich is what he did before flying to


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insuran-. C.,
Kneedler Building
Manila, P. I.
Telepho


IN RESPON


NO A EE 


Whitehouse. Taft, fortun
a refuge in the supreme co
can do, to the end of his da
likes best, carefully consof the land.
But we are in the el
descend to lower levels.
man to do when he’s fift
that drove him on ir
ways he disliked, but,
The Sugar News Pr
second edition of the Hand
Philippine Sugar Indust
the members and officials a
planters’ associations and :
ters milling with the varit
It is therefore a valuable
as it gives full names anc
dresses. It also contains a
tion of George H. Fairchi
on the industry in the Philir
price is $1.75, or $2.50 for
postage extra. These
spectively P3.50 and 5
copies require 14 ctvs. pos
in the islands, 14 cents td
United States, and H-A
countries, and 16 cents to
tries outside the postal un
the Sugar News Press, P
Manila, P. I.


TION   OF COMMERC


OF COMMERCE JOURNAL
THE AMEKICAN CHAMBEl


March, 1929


veaken perceptibly with the
ther self continues its inands.
no saying what these dein every man they are dif have in mind two acquaintirs, each well known in his
anila. One has a bent for
e would like to have leisure
to familiarize himself with
ry few, and all fragmentary
d—Gothic manuscripts exworld! The other man is
to mention his hobby might
dentity; but it is far remote
sent activities, with which it
ion. It is what he knows,
sly, he ought to be about.
nearer the earth, our son
a his reading, the other day,
Tord factories a man learns
rk in fifteen minutes. He
course, unless he be the
dumbells; what he does
mnort time is what Ford will
gh wages for doing for a long
from these wages he should
Ford does, surely, to make
ependent enough in a reasono get on the hobby of his day
1 ride it hard to the horizon
y necrosis.
bbies we all ought to have,
ived clearly early in life as a
ig; this is simply because we
al and spiritual beings swathego. The spiritual babbles
Idhood for a while, amusing
 with its antics; then come
lays of adolescence, followed
id the will to mate. The
reupon dominates for years,
nem perhaps; but finally,
nbers of this ardent strife,
enix in godly majesty—the
rinner longings. Oh, to ride
low!
sure to be the normal extan, as that Le will live to
should normally encounter
age he anticipates
age, his anticipations
ne progress of medical
our years, and our task
selves masters of those
and win from them some
rd for ourselves.
th has a great deal to do with
For who, fully aware of
ematurity brings its changes
es childhood and youth, and
ime will come when he no
zest for the physical game,
which his subconsciousness
will not down, would careopportunities to have, at
1 he will require it, a sufthich he can call his own—
e can mount his hobby and
o a world of his own makn speculate too, dabble in
tocks and bonds—anything
earning ability at the maxvhile he can bear the load:
e life’s physical compensa

tions give him will power enough to keep
toiling away and keep the subconscious
suppressed and inhibited. But above
all else, let him keep adequately insured;
whatever else fails him, whatever other
ships fail to reach port, this surest one
of all will return to him with interest,
all the treasure he has consigned to it
out of his earnings during the years when
life was a simple physical formulagrow up, get a job, save so much, get
married, work, save, build a home, share
with the wife and children and neighbors and nation.
That’s the physical, and for man,
who is said to have a soul, it isn’t enough.
There must be something more, something wholly apart from the mechanics
of life, something impelled by that


larger part of our sluggish brains, which
speaks a language our youth doesn’t
comprehend, but which, to our age, is
the language of command: Thou art a
man, do thou then what thyself tells
ye to do. When we have so managed
as to be able to obey that impulse,
age is a benizen; and when we haven’t,
it’s a blight. Of all the institutions of
modern civilization, among all the ways
of pooling earnings, massing capital for
the redistribution of principal and interest when the individual demands,
insurance recommends itself as safest,
hence the best. To every man who plans
for life after fifty, excepting the few who
are fortunate enough to acquire riches,
insurance is practically indispensableand for all it is highly advisable.


ADDITIONAL BAGUIO NIGHT SPECIALS
After March 8th, Two Baguio Night Trains will leave Manila every MONDAY
and FRIDAY of each week until further notice.
The MONDAY Night Special will return the following WEDNESDAY night,
and the FRIDAY Night Special the following SUNDAY from Bauang, Union, at 9:00
p. m. and from Damortis at 10:30 p. m. as usual.
BAGUIO DAILY SERVICE
TWO NORTHBOUND TRAINS FROM MANILA
every day with autobus connection at Damortis
Baguio Express No. 10 leaves at 8:00; arrives Damortis 2:00 p. m.
Bauang, Union, 2:58 p. m.
Thru Train No. 2 leaves at 10:00; arrives
Damortis 5:43 p. m.
Bauang, Union, 7:02 p.m.
AUTOBUS CONNECTION FROM DAMORTIS
with Baguio Express No. 10
First class passengers arrive Baguio 4:00 p. m.
Third class passengers arrive Baguio 5:13 p. m.
with Thru Train No. 2
First class passengers arrive Baguio 8:00 p. m.
Third class passengers arrive Baguio 9:00 p. m.
All thru trains, including the Baguio Night Special, connect at Bauang, Union,
with the autobuses operated by the Northern Luzon Transportation for the Ilocos
provinces.
PASSENGERS RATES


Manila-Baguio
an
ann
One-way......................... ₱14.33 ₱ 6.39
Round trip, 120 days............. 23.32 11.78
Manila-Damortis, one way.............
3.89
8.88
Manila-Bauang, Union, one way.......
10.24
4.55


NOTE:—Third class passenger rates will be reduced effective March 21, 1929.


MANILA RAILROAD COMPANY


DING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION


CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


March, 1929


  


Baler: Where the Red and Gold Flew
Longest in the Philippines: Mission
Trail Series


capes. “The roads con
with neighboring towns :
and heavy going during ththey offer little security,
many wild people dwelling
especially toward Casigur
nangonan. For this reason
defense of the town, in 1!
de Esparragosa built two w
one up in the mountains a
on the river bank opposinear the shore. The con
both of them was directed 
with whom the town shared
Enough on that point.
gathers that Baler nestles
Caraballos and on the east
by the sea, that the valle
Jose, a mountain stream, i
the surrounding terrain,
mountainous, is the habit:
and Montescos. The Cl
munity settled round the
course peaceful; the clima
and the water supply fron
good. “The immense field


INFORMATION
INVESTOR
Expert, confidential repo


The town of Baler, Tayabas, was
formerly the seat of government in the
Distrito del Principe created in 1856
by the Spanish government of the
Philippines out of territory theretofore
pertaining to Nueva Ecija; and when
the district was suppressed, which we
suppose was done in the organization of
provinces in accordance with MCKinley’s
instructions and the provincial government act, that part of the district embracing Baler was attached to Tayabas.
How much Nueva Ecija got back we do
not know, for the purpose of these
articles it is unimportant. Tayabas
was made a contorted stringy province
adjoining Laguna and extending up the
Pacific coast, for Baler can be reached
from Nueva Ecija only by a very hard
mountain trail, while with the coast
towns of southern Tayabas, and the
provincial capital, Lucena, there is
coastal communication by sea.
The Distrito del Principe was bounded on the north by Isabela, on the east
by the ocean, on the south by the Distrito de la Infanta (Tayabas), and
on the west by the Caraballos.
“The first apostle (to this region),”
says Father Huerta, "was Fr. Esteban
Ortiz, about the year 1578, but because
of the scarcity of priests he was soon
called elsewhere. In 1609 our venerable
martyr Fr. Blas Palomino and some
companion priests visited the region
and founded the following towns:
“Baler.—The founding of this town
dates from 1609, at which time Fr.
g"-: Dalomino and six other priests
pennta sen te difficult country lying
sestwara
he Caraballos, leaving,
n 15
ia first minister at Baler


Fr. Francisco de San Antonio.” The
Franciscans gave the town over to the
Recollects in 1658, who, for the same
reason that had actuated the Franciscans,
scarcity of priests, abandoned the mission in 1703, the Franciscans taking up
the work again in that year. On December 27, 1735, a tidal wave washed
away the town and the land on which it
stood. Numbers of the inhabitants
lost their lives, others swam to safety.
The present town is on the bank of the
San Jose river, a league distant from
the inlet formed by Encanto and Baja


Philippine Trust Comp
COMMERCIAL AND SAVINGS BANK
Offers every Banking and Trust convenience. Genuine
conservative Banking is our aim, and we emphasize th
Business -Building Service we extend to our Depositor
Frequently we are able to put our customers in possessio
of facts that bring them profit or save them loss
4)% per Annum on Savings Accounts
Interest on Fixed Deposits upon Request
We would be glad to meet you personally and talk ov
your banking requirements.
We serve as:
Trustees
Financial Agents Transfer Agents
Wm. T. Noltit
Guardians Executors
Receivers
Monte de Pieda
Registrars
Administrators
Attorneys-in-fact
Depository for Securities
Plaza Goiti—
Rendering a specialized service in the
P. O. Box
managenient and settlement of estates, etc.
Tel. 2-12


on Philippine proje
ENGINEERING, MIN
AGRICULTURE, FORES
LUMBERE
Hydroelectric proje
OTHER COMMERCIAL
INDUSTRIAL ENTERE
BRYAN, LANDO"
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: "YPIL,”


ANG TO ADVERTISENENTS FEEASE MENTON TNE ANERIGAN CRANBER OF GOMMERC


  


Maron, 1949


Vare suitable to cvery sort of production, but the
nly cultivate a small portion of them— growing
th rice and corn for their own requirements.
her Esparragosa, already mentioned, overcoming
difficulties, opened a canal upward of a league in
large enough to irrigate lands sufficient for the
000 or 6000 families, yet surely no more than
ons have taken advantage of it."
at Baler, classically remote, isolated and wholly
and unimportant to the empire of Spain, that a
son of fifty-seven Spaniards and one Filipino
er, and the parish priest, Fr. Candido Gomez
tking the number fifty-eight in all, withstood a
arkable duration, lasting from June 30, 1898, to
), at the hands of a force of Aguinaldo’s revoluimanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Aguilar. Thus
sisted by quite as heroic a spirit as ever animated
in defending her realm, endured 294 days after
f the protocol of peace between the United States
nd 293 days after the Red and Gold had given
ila to the Stars and Stripes!
did the besiegers inform the garrison, making
ite stand in the parish church, that the sovereignpover the islands had ceased: “We replied that
quished were allowed six months for the evacuation
tory;. . . .we were left to be among the last to be
d, the captain-general knowing, as he surely must
large amount of provisions, ammunition,
les that we had at our disposal.”
t the garrison was exhausted, the men starving
asional one deserting. Disease was doing its permchief; Second-Lieut. Juan Alonzo Zayas died
followed soon by Captain Enrique de las Morethan two months after the American occupation
Then the command fell to Second-Lieut. Saturn Cerezo. Wounds and illness took off fourteen
men, and four deserted. Cerezo remained adarepeated stories that he was holding out in behalf
ause—a cause already lost—and he shared with
their privations, heartened them and resorted to
gent devices to prolong their resistance.
adered why relief did not come from Manila,
pubted but that it would come. Father Carreno
t, June 1, 1899, some newspapers from Madrid
r, and Aguilar, when the garrison in the church
pf truce to permit it, got the papers into Cerezo’s
Ad the men eagerly examined these newspapers,
they had been printed by the revolutionists
e garrison and induce its surrender; so a dean attempt to reach safety near shore, where a
ing boat could be flagged, was planned to be
efore dawn next morning. But Cerezo examined
¡ain, finding in a copy of El Imparcial an ordinary
of the transfer of station of a young officer well
erezo. He knew the officer had been seeking the
d that in making up a sham newspaper edition
n would not have been thought of.
as true after all, that Spain’s sovereignty over the
had ended, and the garrison had been forgotten!
 called a parley of his men, convinced them of the
that he had convinced himself of, and they left
hands. He soon arranged honorable terms with
very shortly the remnant of the beleaguered
under enemy escort and marching over the
, Tarlak, then Aguinaldo’s headquarters. There
serters with the escort troops, and Cerezo holds
sible for annoyances suffered on the march; but
es of them? On July 20 the men who reached
 embarked on the Alicante and repatriated
aching Barcelona September 1. The deserters
ns in the brig, and one of them (let us withme) felt so reluctant to face his country’s
he refused food and water and starved


Electricity
Within the
Reach of Everyone
HEIndividual Self-ContainedElectric
I Lighting Unit is another instance of
electricity spreading its comforts to the wholeof
humanity.
Nomatter where you live, with a Westinghouse
Electric Lighting Unit, you can enjoy the physical comfortsofelectricity withthe mental assurance that your unit is electrically perfect and
your supply unfailing.
The Westinghouse Electric Ligbt and Power
Plant is a supply station entirely within itself.


Light Your Home


with Electricity


The Westinghouse Home Light Plant will
bring to your own home all the advantages of electricity. You just touch a button and every corner
of the room becomes bright
and cozy—children get their
lessons done more quickly.
The Westing house
Home Light Plant supplies
enough current to operate
electric fans in the hot season. With this convenience you can be cool and
comfortable no matter how hot the sun may be.


Send for Catalog No. 88 which gives
Prices and Easy Terms
MACLEOD OE CO.
154 Marquez de Comillas
MANILA
CEBU — ILOILO — VIGAN — DAVAO


DING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  


himself to death.
“There was no affliction that had been
wanting to us in this humble spot (the
parish church of Baler),” says Cerezo,
"designed only forreligious supplications;
neither the inclemency of the weather,
nor the rigor of the siege, nor the blows
of treason, nor the pestilence.” Before
leaving the church, Cerezo had two
traitors shot.
Aguinaldo caused Cerezo and his
men to be treated with the utmost
courtesy; he had established a hospital
at Cabanatuan for the care of sick and
wounded Spaniards, and Cerezo, who
had injured a foot in jumping out of a
house in Pantabangan where robbers
had attacked him in the night, was


treated here. "Aguinaldo . . . furnished
them newspapers in which was published
a decree of his, declaring them worthy
of the admiration of the world 'for the
valor, constancy, and heroism which
that handful of men, cut off and without
hope of any aid, has defended their
flag for the space of a year, realizing
an epic so glorious and so worthy of the
legendary valor of the Cid.””
With safe conduct into the American lines, the spaniards were at last
out of danger and well cared for.
Mascardo gave a banquet for the
garrison, at his headquarters in Angeles.
In Spain they received the plaudits of
the nation, and if you were to visit
Cerezo’s home town, you would find a
principal street there called, in commemoration of Baler, Calle Martin
Cerezo.
“By royal orders . . . there was granted
to each officer, living and dead, increased
rank; to Dr. Vigil”—he who had been
the garrison surgeon—"was granted the
cross of the first class of Maria Cristina;
and to each of the thirty-one men of the
detachment the silver cross of military
merit, with a small monthly pension for
B.... ana thn,.
ceedings having
mnen hso belot  he upreme Council
of War and Mag
re was conceded
a aa 


to Major Las Morenas and to Captain
Cerezo, each, the cross-laureate of San
Fernando, and annual pensions to Cerezo and to the widow of Las Morenas.
Cerezo’s home town put a memorial
tablet on the house where he was born,
and authorized a popular subscription
with which the townsfolk bought him a
golden sword. “Such is the merit of
the defenders of Baler, of that poor
church where, for ten months after the
loss of our sovereignty in the Philippines, the Spanish flag continued to
wave. Nor was it humanly possible
to sustain it (the siege) a single day
longer.” These are Cerezo’s words.
We take our brief allusions to the siege
from an account originally published


in El Mercantil, no doubt a piece of
that long and excellent editorial work
Don Romero Salas, dean of Manila
journalists, has done in the islands
during a period of forty years. The
series as it appeared attracted the at

tention of Major F. L. Dodds,
who got a copy of the origin
published in Spain (from whi
Mercantil's series had come),
slated it and secured its publicat.
the United States by the Franklin
son Publishing Co., Kansas City,
under their copyright of 1909 antitle, Under the Red and Gold:
Siege of Baler—Cerezo.
It is Dodds’s text that we have
from which too we have taken
engraving of the church where the
was sustained. Next month the re
will be privileged to journey fa
with the Franciscans through norTayabas. It is hoped the digre
to relate something of the story e
siege of Baler will be pardoned.


Enterprising missionaries bent on
vertising the gospel and selling kconducted “The Quiet Corner" at
nila’s recent carnival, where on one
was a salty vaudeville show and or
other an exhibition advertised “for
only.” Barkers gathered hourly cro
for the shows, but many people in t
crowds chose to go into “The C
Corner" and join in the hymns
listen to the sermons. There was st
patronage all the time, and many e
of the gospels were sold. Now?
same missionaries wish to establi
similar place downtown in Manil
a more ambitious plan, perhaps
medical service and a hygiene s
added.


“At the regular annual meeting of the
ors of the Christensen Plantation Co.,
the office of the company at Padada,
February 5, a dividend of 12% was de
this being their fourth consecutive div
At the same meeting it was decided to in
the capital stock of the company by the :
ization of P200,000 of 10% cumulative p
stock. The new capital will be used to
rate the planting to coconuts on the co
land, and provide equipment and bu'"


Auantic oun anor acinic et
OF MANILA
ENGINEERS
MANUFACTURERS
CONTRACTOR
71-77 Muelle de la Industria


We Have
The Largest and Most Complete Stock
of Drygoods in the Philippines
If you need silks, linens, cottons, or
notions you can serve yourself best
by choosing from our large stocks
We also carry haberdashery, and
make men's suits and shirts
Manuel Pellicer y Co., Inc.
Phone 2-11-06
44 Escolta, Manila


IN RERPUMAT


* ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE MERICAR GPAMERT 


MMERCE JOU


  


MAatrl, 1929


ORIGINS OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH
Gibbon: Continued from February


as been remarked with more ingenuity
ruth that the virgin purity of the church
ever violated by schism or heresy before
ign of Trajan or Hadrian, about one hunyears after the death of Christ. We may
ve with much more propriety, that, during
period, the disciples of the Messiah were
ged in a freer latitude, both of faith and
ce, than has ever been allowed in succeedges. As the terms of communion were
sibly narrowed, and the spiritual authority
 prevailing party was exercised with inng severity, many of its most respectable
ents, who were called upon to renounce,
provoked to assert their private opinions, to
e the consequences of their mistaken prin, and openly to erect the standard of rebelgainst the unity of the church. The Gnosvere distinguished as the most polite the
learned, and the most wealthy of the Chrisname; and that general appellation, which
ssed a superiority of knowledge, was either
ned by their own pride, or ironically bestowy the envy of their adversaries. They were
t without exception of the race of the
les, and their principal founders seem to
been natives of Syria or Egypt, where the
ath of the climate disposes both the mind
the body to indolent and contemplative
tion. The Gnostics blended with the faith
hrist many sublime but obscure tenets, which
derived from oriental philosophy, and even
1 the religion of Zoroaster, concerning the
nity of matter, the existence of two prines, and the mysterious hierarchy of the inle world. As soon as they launched out into
rast abyss, they delivered themselves to the
ince of a disordered imagination; and as the
¡ of error are various and infinite, the Gnoswere imperceptibly divided into more than
particular sects, of whom the most cel.
ed appear to have been the Basilidians, the
tinians, the Marcionites, and, in a still
period, the Manichaeans. Each of these
ould boast of its bishops and congregations,
doctors and martyrs; and, instead of the
Jospels adopted by the church, the heretics
red a multitude of histories, in which the
s and discourses of Christ and of his
es were adapted to their respective tenets.
uccess of the Gnostics was rapid and exre. They covered Asia and Egypt, estab themselves in Rome, and sometimes pendinto the provinces of the West. For the
part they arose in the second century,
led during the third, and were suppressed


in the fourth or fifth, by the prevalenge of more
fashionable controversies, and by the superior
ascendant of the reigning power. Though they
constantly disturbed the peace, and frequently
disgraced the name, of religion, they contributed
to assist rather than to retard the progress of
Christianity. The Gentile converts, whose


Paulist Fathers' Church, Manila


strongest objections and prejudices were directed against the law of Moses, could find admission
into many Christian societies, which required
not from their untutored mind any belief of an
antecedent revelation. Their faith was insensibly fortified and enlarged, and the church was
ultimately benefited by the conquests of its
inveterate enemies.
But whatever difference of opinion might subsist between the Orthodox, the Ebionites, and
the Gnostics, concerning the divinity or the
obligation of the Mosaic law, they were all equally
animated by the same exclusive zeal, and by the


It is not high pressure salesmanship—It is not persuasive
advertising—It’s the machine itself that has sold nearly
a million and a half Easy-Writing Royal Typewriters.


TYPEWRITERS


CAMERA SUPPLY COMPANY
2-39-30
P. O. BOX 778
10 ESCOLTA, MANILA
TELS.
2-21-98


same abhorrence for idolatry, which had distinguished the Jews from the other nations of the
ancient world. The philosopher, who considered
the system of polytheism as a composition of
human fraud and error, could disguise a smile of
contempt under the mask of devotion, without
apprehending that either the mockery, or the
compliance, would expose him to the resentment
of any invisible, or, as he conceived thein, imaginary powers. But the established religions of
Paganism were seen by the primitive Christians
in a much more odious and formidable light. It
was the universal sentiment both of the church
and of heretics, that the daemons were the authors, the patrons, and the objects of idolatry.
Those rebellious spirits who had been degraded
from the rank of angels, and cast down into the
infernal pit, were still permitted to roam upon
earth, to torment the bodies, and to seduce the
minds, of sinful men. The daemons soon discovered and abused the natural propensity of
the human heart towards devotion, and, artfully
withdrawing the adoration of mankind from their
Creator, they usurped the place and honors of
the Supreme Deity. By the success of their
malicious contrivances, they at once gratified
their own vanity and revenge, and obtained the
only comfort of which they were yet susceptible,
the hope of involving the human species in the
participation of their guilt and misery. It was
confessed, or at least it was imagined, that they
had distributed among themselves the most
important characters of polytheism, one daemon
assuming the name and attributes of Jupiter,
another of EEsculapius, a third of Venus, and
a fourth perhaps of Apollo; and that, by the
advantage of their long experience and aerial
nature, they were enabled to execute, with sufficient skill and dignity, the parts which they had
undertaken. They lurked in the temples, instituted festivals and sacrifices, invented fables,
pronounced oracles, and were frequently allowed
to perform miracles. The Christians, who, by
the interposition of evil spirits, could so readily
explain every praeternatural appearance, were
disposed and even desirous to admit the most
extravagant fictions of the Pagan mythology.
But the belief of the Christian was accompanied
with horror. The most trifling mark of respect
to the national worship he considered as a direct
homage yielded to the daemon, and as an act of
rebellion against the majesty of God.
In consequence of this opinion, it was the first
but arduous duty of a Christian to preserve
himself pure and undefiled by the practice of
idolatry. The religion of the nations was not
merely a speculative doctrine professed in the
schools or preached in the temples. The innumerable deities and rites of polytheism were
closely interwoven with every circumstance of
business or pleasure, of public or of private life,
and it seemed impossible to escape the observance of them, without, at the same time, renouncing the commerce of mankind, and all the
offices and amusements of society. The important transactions of peace and war were prepared
or concluded by solemn sacrifices, in which the
magistrate, the senator, and the soldier, were
obliged to preside or to participate. The public
spectacles were an essential part of the cheerful
devotion of the Pagans, and the gods were supposed to accept, as the most grateful offering,
the games that the prince and people celebrated
in honor of their peculiar festivals. The Christian, who with pious horror avoided the abomination of the circus or the theatre, found himself encompassed with infernal snares in every convivial
entertainment, as often as his friends, invoking
the hospitable deities, poured out libations to
each other’s happiness. When the bride, struggling with well-affected reluctance, was forced in
hymenaeal pomp over the treshold of her new
habitation, or when the sad procession of the
dead slowly moved towards the funeral pile, the
Christian, on these interesting occasions, was
compelled to desert the persons who were the
dearest to him, rather than contract the guilt
inherent to those impious ceremonies. Every
art and every trade that was in the least concerned in the framing or adorning of idols was polluted by the stain of idolatry; a severe sentence,
since it devoted to eternal misery the far greater
part of the community which is employed in the
exercise of liberal or mechanic professions. If


SPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


March, 1929


  


we cast our eyes over the numerous remains of
antiquity, we shall perceive that, besides the
immedlate representations of the gods, and the
holy instruments of their worship, the elegant
forms and agreeable fictions consecrated by the
imagination of the Greeks, were introduced as
the richest ornaments of the houses, the dress,
and the furniture of the Pagans. Even the arts
of music and painting, of eloquence and poetry,
flowed from the same impure origin. In the
style of the fathers, Apollo and the Muses were
the organs of the infernal spirit; Homer and
Virgil were the most eminent of his servants; and
the beautiful mythology which pervades and
nimates the compositions of their genius is
destined to celebrate the glory of the daemons.
ven the common language of Greece and Rome
bounded with familiar but impious expressions,
hich the imprudent Christian might too careiessly utter, or too patiently hear.
The dangerous temptations which on every
side lurked in ambush to surprise the unguarded
eliever assailed him with redoubled violence
en the days of solemn festivals. So artfully
were they framed and disposed throughout the
ear, that superstition always wore the appear

THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija,
Director, Rice Producers' Association


Prices for both rice
and palay remain
practically the same
as those of last
ES 
month with but little
fluctuation. Brisk
demand from the
m southern islands as
well as other points
is keeping the marA
ket steady. Supply
from the granary
province, Nueva Ecija, is also steady
and by the end of March it is expected
that the major portion of the crop produced will have been stored, the volume
of deposits awaiting market rises being
much greater than that of last year.
Indo-Asian prices for the cereal are
reported to be firm with a tendency to
advance. Rice imported into the Philippines during the last month of the year
was almost a million pesos, an advance
of P850,000 over that of the previous
month. It is expected that the scale of
imports in rice will be materially increased each month to assure supply.
As usual, transportation for the milled
product from the terminal points is
inadequate to the seasonal demands.
In connection with this, should be taken
into consideration direct shipments required for southern island points rather
than the filling of the Manila bodegas
for more storage purposes. Due to a
larger volume being shipped direct by
trucks, this problem is somewhat lightened, but there still remains room for
improvement. It is for study in rapid
and efficient transportation in the service
of interprovincial commerce.
Author:—Thanks ever s nuch for
your criticism of my manuse t.
—don’t
Critic:—Oh, quite all ri
mencken it!
For 12 months Philippine cotton imports
have averaged in value $2,334,000.
Pupils enrolled in Philippine public
schools now number nearly 1,125,000.


ance of pleasure, and often of virtue. Some of
the most sacred festivals in the Roman ritual
were destined to salute the new calends of January with vows of public and private felicity
to indulge the pious remembrance of the dead
and living; to ascertain the inviolable bounds of
property; to hail, on the return of spring, the
genial powers of fecundity; to perpetuate the
two memorable seras of Rome, the foundation
of the city and that of the republic; and to restore, during the humane license of the Saturnalia, the primitive equality of mankind. Some
idea may be conceived of the abhorrence of the
Christians for such impious ceremonies, by the
scrupulous delicacy which they displayed on a
much less alarming occasion. On days of general
festivity it was the custom of the ancients to
adorn their doors with lamps and with branches
of laurel, and to crown their heads with a garland
of flowers. This innocent and elegant practice
might perhaps have been tolerated as a merecivil institution. But it most unluckily happened that the doors were under the protection of
the household gods, that the laurel was sacred to
the lover of Daphne, and that garlands of flowers,
though frequently worn as a symbol either of joy


The month has seen an abnormal
shortage in the money market, and
local banks have been hard pressed to
maintain their legal reserves. The shortage in the money market is due principally to the large amount of funds
withdrawn to finance sugar, hemp and
copra commitments, but with the low
prices now ruling for the Islands commodities, sales of these products are
negligible, resulting in funds remaining
in the provinces, thereby causing a
shortage in the Manila money market.
While the money shortage is more or
less seasonal at this time of the year,
the present shortage is abnormal and
it is very apparent that in addition to
the funds withdrawn for usual financing,
large sums have also been withdrawn by
individuals, who have accumulated
"pannicky” feelings, as the result of
the reports from Washington regarding
the various proposed restrictions on
Philippine products, and the political


or mourning, had been dedicated in thei
origin to the service of superstition. The t
bling Christians, who were persuaded in
instance to comply with the fashion of tl
country and the commands of the magistra
labored under the most gloomy apprehensio.
from the reproaches of their own conscience,.
censures of the church, and the denunciatio
of divine vengeance.
Such was the anxious diligence which wa
required to guard the chastity of the gospel fror
the infectious breath of idolatry. The supersti
tious observances of public or private rites wer
carelessly practised, from education and habit
by the followers of the established religion. Bu
as often as they occurred, they afforded thChristians an opportunity of declaring and cor
firming their zealous opposition. By thes
frequent protestations their attachment to th
faith was continually fortified; and in proportio
to the increase of zeal, they combated with the
more ardor and success in the holy war which
they had undertaken against the empire of the
demons.
(Continued in April)


situation in general.
The Bank of England advanced it
discount rate from 4-172 to 5-1/25
early in the month, and while this had
been expected, and with it a tightening
of interest rates, the effects were alse
felt in the local market. Apparently
a number of local business men have
been placing their surplus funds on cal
loans, in foreign markets, attracted b
the high rates of interest, and this al:
helped to cripple the local market,
these factors uniting in making th
widest fluctuations in gold dollar an
sterling exchange, since the stabilizat
accomplished under the wood regime
However, as the month closed,
much better feeling prevailed and fur
withdrawn on “pannicky” tendeno
began to find their way back to
banks again, thereby improving t
cash position considerably. But the
is a great scarcity of export bills.
fered, and if these come into the mark


AOKMO
REPUTATION
has been built through service on the road—not
by extravagant claims. We say nothing about
DUNLOP Tires that is not fully substantiated by
DUNLOP Performance.
When you ride on them you know that all the
claims made for DUNLOP are facts. Try
DUNLOP next time and prove it for yourself.
DUNLOP TIRES
First in 1888—Foremost Ever Since





The Manila Stock Market During Februar
By W. P. G. EllioTT


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN —-


  
RCE JOURNAL


March, 1929


it will have the tendency to deate the gold dollar and sterling
ange to further lower levels. Notistanding the shortage in the cash
ition and other bearish news of
lining prices, mines, banks and instrials report good earnings. Bent Consolidated report a net profit
r 1928 of ₱1,238,074.16. Philippine
ducation Company, Inc., report sales
r January 1929 of P176,252.28 as
mpared with P134,757.23 for the
me month last year, being an increase
₱41,495.05. Balatoc Mining Cominy also report the result of their first
lean up” when, after 13 days working,
ld bullion was produced to the amount
f P95,000.00.
Press despatches also announce that
note issue amounting to $2,500,000
as been absorbed by the San Francisco
arket. These notes bear interest at
e rate of 65 per annum, maturing
bruary 1, 1932 and are reported as
ect obligation notes of the Archlop of Manila. It is presumed that
de funds raised from this issue will be
sed to increase the capital of the Philppine Trust Company. The people
3ank and Trust Company, a new listing
n the exchange, report a particularly
ood year ending December 31, 1928.
lapital structure is one million pesos
lly paid and the surplus is P59,322.44.
le bank has a branch in San Pablo,
guna, and expects to open other
anches as soon as practicable. At the
nual meeting, the stockholders aped the formation of a new subary company to be known as the
id and Mortgage Corporation. This
ipany will make long term morte loans, character loans, underwrite
buy Philippine securities, stocks
i bonds, and make such loans as are
de by similar corporations in the
ited States. Last year the bank
adled private bonds to the value of
19,000 and first mortgage participacertificates valued at P274,500.
usiness sentiment is rather mixed,
regards the trade outlook for the
lediate future, for while some intries may suffer losses due to low
es now prevailing for their products,
iers are making good profits, and
is the necessary balance for future
de expansion is maintained.
All things considered, the outlook  r
future seems very promising, as r
dern business organizations are ray
changing the forms which owner: lip
as taken in the past, and large scale
Nustry and business are taking the
Minant place. Large scale producon means that large amounts of capital
ist be assemble from many sources.
 this end the corporate form of ornization is well adapted. Through
e issue of stocks and bonds, it offers
eople with funds, a means of employaent of such suited to their temperalents and needs. That people of even
nall wealth are putting some of their
arnings into stocks and bonds is without
estion. The trading on the stock


exchange during the month has reflected
this very strongly, for not only has the
February trading been heavier than
usual, but many small lots have been
placed in the provinces, showing clearly
that funds heretofore lying dormant,
can be made available for meritorious
commercial enterprises.
Sugar shares have shown a tendency
to hold steady at the present levels, and
seem to be pegged for the moment.
The more seasoned sugar shares have
been fairly active, with quotations well
maintained, while the newer issues have
sagged off considerably. Banks, mines
and industrials on the other hand, have
advanced slightly. Bonds have also
been very active, with heavy buying
during the month.


Banks.—Bank of the Philippine Islands have eased off slightly with sales
at P175, China Banks have buyers at
P88. Hongkong Banks after heavy
activity closed the month at HK$1300
ex-dividend business done. Mercantile
Banks have buyers at P42, but sellers
are unwilling to come to terms at less
than P44. The Peoples Bank & Trust
Company shares have been listed on the
exchange. This Bank has made an


excellent record since its organization,
capital structure is ₱1,000,000 fully
paid, and surplus as of December 31,
1928, amounts to P59,322.44. On the
first day’s trading, sales were made at
₱107 and the quotation has continued
steady at this figure.
Insurance.—Unions of Canton have
continued to advance and closed the
month firm at HK$380, buyers. Compania Filipinas are firm with buyers at
P3150. Insular Life and Philippine
Guarantee are also firm with buyers at
P315 respectively.
Sugars.—There has been a lot of
activity in sugar shares, with prices on
the more seasoned shares well main

tained, but a rather sharp decline is
noted on the newer issues. BacolodMurcias on fairly large transactions
were placed at P7.50 down 1/2 a point
from last sales. Bagos on small transactions were done at ₱19. Cebus
changed hands at P17, one point lower
than previous transactions. Bais are
nominal at P800, but this decline is
more or less reasonable in view of the
fact that the usual 205 dividend was
paid this month. Carlotas have held
firm at P215 with many transactions
₱100. Pasudecos on moderate sales
were placed at P45. Pilars have changed hands at par, P1000, for the old
shares. San Carlos are still offered at
$33, and Talisay Silays were placed at
P22. Victorias Milling common were


reported, Tarlacs were placed at P165
and later on firmed up to P170 at the
close. Central Luzons are still offered at ₱150 and Hawaiian-Philippines are firm and unchanged at P50
sellers. Isabelas have sellers at P18,
and Kabankalans are unchanged at
P240. There are buyers of Lopez at
₱115, Luzons are nominal at ₱1000.
Malabons are also nominal at P24
and Mount Arayats are unchanged at


done at P165 and Victorias preferred
are unchanged with sellers at P110.
Plantations.—Pamplonas have been
very active with many sales reported at
P80, Polos on fairly large transactions
were also placed at P400.
Mines.—Mining shares have furnished the market sensation of the
month, with most excellent reports
coming in from the mountain district.
Benguet Consolidated reports the biggest net profit realized since its organization. The report states that 98,500
tons of ore of an average value per ton
of P27.59 were treated during the year
ending December' 31, 1928. The gross


BABCOCK & TEMPLETON, INC.
IMPORTERS—EXPORTERS
COPRA
PHILIPPINE PRODUCTS
HEMP
MAGUEY
FINE LITHO AND PRINTING INKS
Agents for
JOHN KIDD & Co., Lrd.
LONDON
MANILA
NEW YORK
CEBU
SAN FRANCISCO


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - WALTER E. ANTRIM


RESPONDING TO ADVERTI ANES PLEASE MENTION   


March, 1929


  


value of gold and silver produced was
₱2,717,074.16. Exploration work has
been carried on steadily during the year,
with very fair results. The Colbath
drain tunnel was completed in December
last year at a cost of P499,664.89. The
tunnel is 7094 feet long and completely
drains the mine, although the quantity
of water coming out is much larger than
was expected. The Northern Luzon
Power Plant is expected to be in operation by October, 1929, and this should
give all the necessary power needed for
the many Benguet Consolidated projects.
Benguets on the strength of their excellent annual report have advanced to
₱2.60 with further buyers at this figure
but sellers are hard to find.
Balatocs have also joined in the
general advance, selling up to P2.50
on moderate transactions. Balatoc had
their first pouring last week and P95,-
000 of gold bullion was the result. This
result was obtained for only about 13
1/2 days operation, a total of 1281
tons of ore being treated of an average
value of $25 per ton. A new ball mill
has been ordered for Balatoc at a cost
of approximately P50,000 installed, and


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
By RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


The cash shortage
became so pronounced that during
the second week
of February certain
banks were forced
to drop their buying
rates for U. S. S
T to the level of
the Insular Treasury’s rate of 7185
discount. As the
month advanced,
the situation eased
somewhat and at the close banks were
buying moderate amounts of U.S. $ TT
from close customers at from 3/85 to
1/45 discount. The selling rates sagged
in sympathy with the market and banks,
in order to maintain their cash reserves,
were obliged to make frequent concessions of 1/85 or better. The end of
the month found banks still pursuing
their cautious policy of avoiding heavy
purchases.
Purchases of telegraphic transfers
made from and sales made to the Insular
Treasury since last report have been as
follows:
Purchases
Sales
Week ending—
January 26... $1,000,000
February 2..
Nil
February 9..
$500,000
Nil
February 16..
Nil $500,000
Little activity was displayed in the
sterling market. At the close there
were sellers of TT 2/- 9/16 and buyers
at 21- 3J4.


when this is completed, it is expected to
double the present production. At the
Balatoc meeting of shareholders held on
the 19th instant, a committee was appointed to assess the value of the mines
with a view to discussing plans to effect
a merger with Benguet Consolidated.
This will insure continuity of management and cut down the overhead considerably. A similar committee from
Benguet Consolidated will meet the
Balatoc committee later on, to discuss
the merger proposition.
Itogons on small transactions were
placed at P10. During January the
mill operated 29-1/2 days, 1893 tons
of ore were mined and 2108 tons were
treated at an approximate value of
$11.35. The bullion production amounted to 2129 ounces valued at P41,895.24.
Industrials.—Philippine Educations
continue to be the outstanding feature
of this list. The sales and earning of
this industrial have increased month by
month since the incorporation of the
Company, so that there are buyers
of common shares at P170 with no
sellers. Educations preferred continue
in good demand at ₱106, many tran

sactions being reported at this figure.
A small lot of San Miguel Breweries
are offered at P150 but buyers are not
inclined to bid more than P135 for these
shares.
Bonds.—The bond market has been
a most active one, large holdings of
Carlota 825 changing hands at P1035.
A fair amount of Bais 85 were also
placed at par plus accrued interest.
Important sales of Tarlac 85 were also
made during the month at par. Al
small amount of Polo 105 changecl
hands during the month at par, this
is the first transaction reported for Polo
bonds in many months. San Beda 85
were also placed on moderate transactions at P102 flat.
The market closed with a firm undertone, banks showing a slight tendency
to decline, while insurance, mines and
industrials continue firm with advancing tendencies. Sugars, for the more
seasoned shares, have held their own,
the new issues having declined moderately. Sales for the month aggregated
23,049 shares.
Dividends Declared and Paid.—Central Azucarera de Bais, 205 for 1928.


OF INDIA, AUSTRALIA
CHARTERED BANK
AND CHINA


Capital and Reserve Fund. . .... . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . 57,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor.................. 3,000,000


MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


On the last day of March the New
New York bar silver quotation was
56-344 which was also the high mafor February. The low point for
month, 55-3/4, was reached on Feb
18 and the closing quotation was S6
Telegraphic transfers on other
were quoted as follows on Fel
28th:
Paris, 12.45; Madrid, 155 172;
gapore, 116; Jaan, 91 348; Shang
78 348; Hongkong, 99 1/4; India,
1J4; Java, 122 142.


On January 31 the New York-London
cross-rate was quoted at 484-27432.
It dropped to a low of 484-13/16 on
February 4, reached a high of 485-11/16
on February 7, and closed at 485-9432.
London bar silver was quoted at
26-3/16 ready and 26-1,4 forward on
January 31, was high on February 1,
at 26-5716 ready and 26-1/4 forward,
fell to a low of 25-548 ready and 25-11/16
forward on February 16, 17 and 18,
and closed at 25-15/16 ready and 26
forward.


Hoover Finds Nations Ripe for Exploiting
By EDWARD PRICE BELL


On Board U. S. S. Utah, En Route
to Hampton Roads, Va., Jan. 2.—Pronounced optimism with reference to the
whole Latin-American situation political,
social, economic and financial, may be
said, I think, to express broadly President-Elect Hoover’s impression as a
result of his strenuous experiences of the
last few weeks. He has found the
peoples visited wide awake and ambitious, eager to take their fitting places
in the march of modern progress.
Problems they all have, as the United
States and every other nation have
problems. There remains here and there


some political instability. Social conditions in a few countries are less advanced than one wouldli ke. The line
of economic development is not everywhere unobstructed. Fiscal difficulties
continue to confront several of the
governments. But everywhere are signs
of improvement, and, what is better, a
resolute purpose to improve, in the
national purpose.
My conviction is, though I speak
without specific authority on the point,
that Mr. Hoover from the earliest days
of his administration will be found vigorously supporting the idea that the


ONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNA


  


March, 1929


United States can do nothing wiser than
give practical encouragement to LatinAmerican development.
These republics need money. They
need it for putting their financial houses
in order, for building modern highways,
for public-health services, for agriculture
and for industry. Their crude materials
are no longer enough to maintain them
in social well-being and in solvency
They need diversified and intensified
a griculture and they need native manuactures. American wealth should help
hem to get these for from such developrent in Latin America will come inc.) ised Latin-American purchasing powil with its commensurate opportunity
for American exporters, especially of
standard articles of large scale production.
In such production lies America’s
pre-eminent advantage in the southern
republics as elsewhere and as American
industry gains here it opens ever wider
demands for products of American
agriculture.
Already sound financially in many
parts and moving toward soundness in
all parts, Latin America, given the loans
it needs, should be quite out of the woods
fiscally in a very few years. Its progress in these respects in the last five
years has been as notable perhaps as has
any similar progress anywhere.
One proviso applies implacably to
any loans Americans may consider in
relatios to Latin America and that is
y shall go for construction and
lat
ot or destruction. There will be no


encouragement under the Hoover administration for financing of that deadliest of all enemies of both prosperity
and humanity—war. Mr. Hoover believes in loans for productive purposes
and for no other. Productive loans
here are all to the good.
America’s iron and steel products
will sweep the boards in Latin America
for a number of reasons. In the first


On Board U. S. S. Utah, En Route
to Hampton Roads, Va., Jan. 3.—Considerably less than 1,000 miles at midday today lies between the battle ship
Utah and its anchorage in Hampton
Roads. West of us some hundreds of
miles, Florida juts out into warm water.
Eastward rolls the Atlantic unaffected
by land until it breaks on the coast of
Africa and Europe.
By far the greater part of the Hoover
good-will journey has been by sea—all
of its except that from Washington to
San Pedro and that from Valparaiso to
Buenos Aires, or about 4,000 miles out
of a total of more than 18,000. Only
one storm has fallen upon he good-will
voyage, that which swept across the
Gulf of Tehuantepec early in December.
Almost no rain has been seen by sea or
land, the days usually being flooded with
sunlight and the nights with moonlight.
Bad weather has banished at Mr. Hoover’s approach as if the gods of mete

place these republics cannot compete
in this field for while they have iron-ore
deposits they have no coal for metallurgical purposes. In the second place
America’s mass-production methods in
the domain of machinery give the
Americans such a lead over all competition as virtually to establish their
supremacy in the Latin-American markets.


orology were in collaboration with the
good-will missioner. Victor Hugo said
that a fewdrops of rain more or less decided the battle of Waterloo. Sunshine beyond question has aided the friendly overtures of the American president-elect. It
has warmed not only official but unofficial Latin America to a responsive mood.
For days since the Utah steamed out
of the harbor of Rio Janeiro, with a
rainbow of fireworks bursting out in
profusion against the imposing silhouette of hills and mountains, the trade winds
have been rolling up a considerable sea,
but the battle ship has cut its way to the
highest breakers with little motion.
The finest spectacle at sea aside from the
moonlight nights with grand cloud combinations has been that of radiant arches
in the moist air ahead of the ship. Two
of these of great beauty appeared yesterday as if set up to welcome the goodwill party home, where they unfeignedly
long to be.


Sunshine Helps Hoover’s Diplomacy
By EDWARD PrICE BELL


THE WIIEEMIRESS OF TETACIRIO


CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS
MANILA, P. I.
14-16 CALLE DAVID


VEN NO ANEENA ENT ENE E NAO GANO O E


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


THE AMERICAN CHAMIBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


27


Monroe Doctrine Has New Vitality
By EDWARD PRICE BELL


U. S. S. Maryland, Dec. 1.—Faith
1 the Monroe doctrine as an all-Ameran policy grows with one’s observaon of the general situation as President
rlect Hoover’s good-will voyage proesses. It seems clear not only that the
olicy has been justified from the first,
ut that it is justified now. Nobody
enies its importance in the past. It
rived the Americans for a great compsite democratic experiment. It saved
iem from the chronic threat of war
y ith grave possibilities for all concerned.
If overseas menace of this kind no
nger impends, who can disassociate
ne Monroe doctrine from this immunity?
t is true that European powers today
e e not attracted by Central or South
A merica as a theater of adventure, but is
anybody prepared to say that this would
necessarily be a fact if Monroeism had
lapsed? I do not believe that such a claim
is likely to be made by those acquainted
with conditions germain to the question.
All-American safety still depends upon
all-American unity. There is no direct
threat to Canada. There is none to the
United States. There may be none to
Mexico or Brazil or Uruguay or Argentina or Chile or Peru. But these names
do not exhaust the prospect. There are
weak links in the all-American chain.
There are more than half a dozen of
these, the breaking of any one of which
might drop the Americas into trouble.


One does not like to speak of the
United States as the protector of the
American republics and of American
peace. She is only one of these protectors, but she happens to be a powerful
one. She has both the ideals of democracy and power to give these ideals


support which no nation or group of
nations is likely to scorn.
What the United States really stands
for in the south is neither indifference nor
dollar diplomacy, but ordered liberty and
economic progress with equal opportunities to all who come to these part upon
peaceful missions. President-Elect Hoover’s administration, if I am not misttaken,
will vindicate literally this definition.


Toasted!
Lucky Strike!
It’s a
World-Wide
Favorite
Fred M. Harden
Importer
Plaza Lunch Manila, P. I.


The
Bill


Timberlake
Will Pass......


AWA.


So . . . . . go ahead and enjoy


RODLRISONS
SCOTCH WHISKY


There is a lot of real pleasure
in it.


Served at the bar.


KUENZLE & STRElFF, Inc.
Exclusive Distributors
343 T. Pinpin
Tel. 2-39-36


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE


Luzon Stevedoring
Co., Inc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Phone 2-16-61
Port Area


MENTION   OURN


28


  


MAon, 1929


MAL


MLAAN


E


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, Dollar Steamship Line Co.


Statistics are again
not available in time
for this report, but
there is still a very
satisfactory amount of
This
cargo moving.
applies particularly to
U. S. Atlantic Coast
ports on account of the
heavy movement of sugar. The regular lines
have been unable to
handle all this business,
and a number of full
cargoes of sugar have
shipped on chartered steamers.
Space is easier, and indications are that sugar
shippers are pretty well covered for their requirements for the balance of the season as tonnage is offering quite freely for April with no
takers.
Rates are steady, no important changes having
taken place during the month.
Passenger traffic for the month of February
has again been quite heavy. This is the peak
season for steerage movement to Honolulu
and the Pacific Coast, and, as will be seen from


the figures below, this business for the past
month has been very active. The passenger
movement during the month is made up as
follows: (first figure represents cabin passengers,
second figure steerage) to China & Japan 242-266,
to Hon-lulu 5-869, to Pacific Coast 73-842, to
Singapore & Straits Settlements 5-0, and to
Mediterranean Ports 15-1.
E. M. Wilson, general agent of the Dollar
Steamship Line in Los Angeles, who spent several months in Manila on business for the
company, left for Shanghai by the President
Cleveland February 9.
Hugh Macgowan, who was relieving in the
passenger department of the Robert Dollar
Company, Manila Office, returned to his headquarters in Shanghai on the President Cleveland February 9.
J. R. Atkins, in charge of the shipping department of Warner, Barnes & Company, left
for England on home leave on the Changte
February 18.
J. F. Tomkins, manager of the shipping department of Macleod and Company, returned
from home leave February 23 on the Empress
of Russia.
The Shanghai Office of the U. S. Shipping
Board has been closed, and Victor Smith who
has been in charge for some months will proceed


to Calcutta to prepare a report for Washington
on shipping conditions in India. He will pass
through Manila on the President Garfield
March 12.


Chas. Kirkwood of the Fuel Oil department
of the U. S. Shipping Board here has resigned
from that position to take effect March 15.
We understand he will remain in Manila.


Robert Hill has resigned as Iloilo agent of L.
Everett, Inc., and H. W. Dean of the Cebu
office has been transferred to Iloilo. J. G.
Meadows has been appointed agent of this
company in Cebu.


SUPPORTS FREE TRADE


A special general meeting of the chamber of
commerce was called March 6, by P. A. Meyer,
president, and the decision of the board of
directors to protest directly to the secretary of
war was approved unanimously by members.
The cable said:
“The American Chamber of Commerce or
the Philippine Islands is opposed to any legislation affecting in any way the principle of free
trade between the Philippine Islands and the
United States, such legislation being contrary
to the moral obligations of the people and the
government of the United States to the people
of these Islands, in addition to which such legislation would seriously hamper and impede the
economic development of these Islands and
greatly curtail exports from the United States
to the Philippines.”
This is not the first action taken by the chamber of commerce to oppose proposed restrictive
legislation in the United States. It has circularized scores of chambers of commerce and
trade and commercial organizations throughout
the United States, asking them to study these
proposals, and if they were convinced the proposals were unwarranted and unfair, to go on
record to that effect.
The result of this campaign was encouraging.
Some of the largest chambers of commerce in
the United States and some of the most powerful
trade organizations, including the Merchants”
Association of New York, passed resolutions
opposing such action and forwarded them to
Washington. One chamber of commerce, after
appointing a committee to look into the subject
thoroughly, sent personal letters to leading
senators and congressmen, asking them to vote
against the Timberlake resolution or any similar
restrictive and unfair legislation.


FOR RENT:—Store space, Calle David
and Dasmarinas, 179 square meters.—
Entrances on both streets.—Excellent
show windows. Apply, John R. Wilson, Secretary, American Chamber of
Commerce, 180 David, Phone 2-11-56.


THE YOKOHAMA SPECIE BANK


LTD. E


(ESTABLISHED 1880)


HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN


Capital (Paid Up)
Reserve Fund
Undivided Profits


Yen
100,000,000.00
102,500,000.00
8,281,611.36


MANILA BRANCH
34 PLAZA CERVANTES, MANILA
K. YABUKI


PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER


Manager
PHONE 2-37-58—GENERAL OFFICE


IN RESPONDING TO DVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


March, 1929


  


29


Hoover Urges Navy Aid Diplomacy
By EDWARD PRICE BELL


On Board U. S. S. Utah, En Route
o Hampton Roads, Va., Dec. 27.—
Why not conscientiously make the
United States navy an arm of American
liplomacy?
This query opened a brief article
wrote (by request of the editor) for
he ship’s paper, “The Big U.” Subequently at a Christmas dinner given
y Capt. C. R. Train in honor of Presdent-Elect and Mrs. Herbert C. Hoover
and their party, two of the chief speakers,
Mr. Hoover and John Griffith Mott, exressed views completely harmonious
with the suggestion. It would not be
n the least surprising, therefore, if our
laval forces were seen more regularly in
oreign ports during the Hoover adninistration than they never have been
n the past.
My article continued:
"Personally I dearly believe in this
xtension of sea power. Existing primarily, of course, for purposes of war,
the navy none the less can reenforce the
influences of peace. Already, no doubt,
especially in the persons of certain able
and magnetic naval officers, the navy
has done diplomatic work of great importance. But cannot more be done?
cannot naval diplomacy be made to
operate more systematically?
“Mr. Hoover is nearing the end of
what I believe will be a journey of


outstanding consequence in the annals
of the larger accomplishments of the
United States government. He has
labored with an industry equaled only
by his sincerity and magnanimity of
aim. His feet will rest on the path he
has chosen.
"And the navy has worked with him.
It has borne him with dignity and comfort over thousands of miles of seas. Its
traditions and might, in my judgment,
have been invaluable in the prosecution
of his great enterprise. Is not this sea
power and war power capable of acting


beneficently in spheres of diplomacy and
peace?
“Our naval men are educated men.
They are men of moral worth and of
manners. They command magnificent
ships and splendid personnel. They know
a lot about work and should know more.
“I would see them carrying the stars
and stripes into the harbors of other
nations, big and little, and using their
disciplinary efficiency and culture in
spreading acquaintance with the United
States of North America and its ideas
of democracy in politics and social
equality and that doctrine of industry
and trade which sets a common value
upon the prosperity of every country
on the globe.”


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig S von Knobelsdorff
Agents
90 Rosario, Manila
Phone 22324


AMERICAN MAIL LINE
DOLLAR STEAMSHIP LINE


COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


The "President” Liners Offer
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


TO SAN FRANCISCO


AND


ROUND THE WORLD


LOS ANGELES


Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATESATURDAYS
24 Calle David


President Garfield -
President Harrison -
President Monroe
President Wilson
President Van Buren


-March 13
-March 27
April 10
April 24
May 8


Sailings every fortnight


MANILA


VICTORIA
AND
SEATTLE
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama


SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS
Telephone No. 2-24-41


VENCN O NNNNN N EE EENN O CNN  IIA


30


  


March, 1929


For generations the British government has understood the diplomatic
significance of its ships. It has favored
the frequent appearance of its flag
wherever a vessel will float. Not only
martial, but mercantile craft have helped
in the diffusion of the realization of
British power and hence the augmentation of British prestige. Moreover,
Britons have known that sailors preserve
a higher morale when they are traveling
from one definite objective to another
rather than circling aimlessly at sea.
Similar views have not prevailed to
anything like the same extent in American naval practice. We almost have
seemed afraid to travel regularly and
widely abroad.
Such home port huggers have our
warships been, as a general thing, that
when President Theodore Roosevelt
proposed a trip by the American fleet
around the world foreign newspapers
discussed the idea as a sensational departure and even hinted that it boded
ill to the peace of the nations. American naval vessels stand for peace, not
for war, and the more there are of them
within rational limits the greater will
be America’s influence not only for
pacific relations among the peoples, but
for all the ideals implied in the word
Americanism.
We want sea power proportionate
to our industrial and commercial greatness and we want to make a continual
friendly transmaritime showing of both
our ships and our men.


Chinese vises are necessary on passports
used in China.
Buildings are limited in Manila, which
has never had a severe earthquake, to a
height of 30 meters.


Aboard U. S. S. Utah, En Route to
Key West, Fla., Dec. 24.—As the resplendence and hospitality of Rio Janeiro
recede, President-Elect Herbert Hoover
settles down to a close consideration of
his forthcoming policy relative to the
southern American republics.
Every situation touched since the
first delightful landing at Amapala,
Honduras, has been improved: Where
prepossessions were favorable to the
United States they were strengthened,
and where prejudices ran counter to
good continental American relations
they were diminished or destroyed. The
ground everywhere has been cleared or
put in process of clearing for the greatest
edifice of understanding ever designed
for the Americans.
But only these preliminaries have
been accomplished. The real and lasting work remains to be done. And
nobody knows better than does Mr.
Hoover that this work is going to test
him and his aids far more severely than
he or they have been tested hitherto.
Sentimental tides flow swiftly in
Central and South America. If they
bear strongly toward pan-American unity
today, they carry within themselves the


Manila is a leading primary market for
snakes skins.
Monthly imports of machinery into the
Philippines have arveraged $759,009 during a
year.


possibility of a quick change. It is Mr.
Hoover’s purpose to act with promptness
to prevent such a change. In this, as
in other matters, he will put his faith
in organization. He will equip the
state department at Washington with
what it needs to observe the tides of
feeling and thought in Latin America
and to influence these movements for
the good of the Americans as a whole.
The American secretary of state is a
hard pressed man. He cannot survey
the entire world, and still less can he
look after the incredible mess of detail
demanding the attention of his department. Central and South America
constitutes a special problem. We know
less about these diversified and sensitive
peoples than we know about Great
Britain or France or Germany or Italy,
or even of Japan and China.
I expect to see in the state department
at Washington a reorganized and vastly
better Central and South American
division with some expert such as John
P. Fletcher (ambassador to Italy, now
with the Hoover party) at its head and
with a group of ambassadors, ministers
and other officials working under it such
as the United States never has had in


U. S. Policy Forms in South America
By EDWARD PRICE BELL


For Dainty Feet
Our new showing of models for ladies
will charm the members of this sex.
Beautiful, soft leathers; exquisitely
finished; with all the comfort for which
HIKES are famous.
HIKE SHOE FACTORY
Style Creators
Manila, P. I.
286 San Marcelino


SOLD EVERYWHERE
IN LARGE AND
SMALL CANS


Are your
Children
Getting
Enough
Milk?
If they are not, in time
it will tell on their general health. Every tissue in their bodies
composing vital organs, muscles, membranes, bones and
teeth will suffer!
Milk is a perfect
food for growing
children, and the
perfect milk is
ceBEAR
BRAND
NATURAL MILK!


IN RESFONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS FLEASE MENTON THE ANERIGAN GRAMBER OF COMMERGE JGURWAL


Aviartil, T


ATS


AAMEIMOI
MMEKCE JOURNAL


31


the southern hemisphere.
Particular responsibility and particular
knowledge are the requisites in Washington. In, the southern republics familiarity with Spanish and Portuguese
tongues on the part of our representatives will be included among the primary
requirements. General culture also will
be esteemed. President Hoover will try
to find diplomats, consuls and commercial attaches who speak not only
the linguistic, but the sentimental tongues of these peoples. These are difficult criteria and they cannot be had
all at once, but a start can be made in
the direction of their realization.
The so-called career men in diplomacy
will not be preferred necessarily. Diplomatic inclination and experience will
not be enough. Fundamental fitness
for the delicate service in the harmonizing of inter-American standpoints will
be compulsory. What confronts us
broadly is an escape from the stereotyped
practice in our dealings with the southern American world. Its importance
has not been appreciated and its problems
have not been understood. Given the
support of American public opinion,
Mr. Hoover’s administration, I think,
will carry the United States far on the
road of all-American conciliation.
On Board U.S. S. Utah, En Route
to Hampton Roads, Va., Dec. 29.—Does
freer economic intercourse between the
Americans threaten the integrity of
Latin-American civilization? Such a
possibility disturbs some Latin-American
minds. In yesterday’s dispatch I tried
to show why the peoples south of the
Rio Grande fear aggression and exploitation, pointing out their natural
wealth and naval and military weakness
in the midst of external power and with
long memories of plunder at foreign hands.
President-Elect Hoover returns to the
United States where he will arrive Jan.
6 with information of still another fear
and I think a deeper one than that indicated above. Those who are apprehensive in this sense feel that no
amount of material prosperity could
compensate Latin-America for the loss
of its spiritual birthright.
The southerners are proud peoples.
They hark back fondly to their racial
origins. They prize their languages,
their social customs, their religious faith.
Looking about them even now they see
American aspects everywhere—American automobiles, street cars, the telephone, electrical machinery, radios and
merchandise. Strip Central and South
America of the products of North American genius and enterprise, and they
would soon fear an instant reversion
of from a quarter to half a century.
One of the finest features of all we
have seen on this journey has been the
electrical feature. The Buenos Aires
and Rio Janeiro electrical displays
will giltter in our recollections for many
a day. North American genius and toil
produced this light, as well as useful
things almost countless. Swell this im

portant tide of American manufactures,
reason some Latin-Americans, and eventually we shall be swayed beyond salvage.
Mr. Hoover, in my opinion, has done
much to lessen this apprehension. He
has shown the keenest interest and
sympathy in local Latin-American problems, giving his counsel liberally when
requested and suggesting ways to further
Latin-American progress. And he must
have put a final quietus on at least one
fantastic notion.
His hosts thought him intolerant.
They fancied that the recent election
in the United States was a contest
between protestantism and Catholicism,
and that since protestantism won Mr.
Hoover might be invading Latin America as a protestant crusader. It seems


safe to say that this notion has been
not only scotched but killed in all the ten
countries visited.
English is spreading among the Latins,
but the loss of their language obviously
is so remote as not to warrant so much
as theoretical notice. Their social customs also may be modified somewhat by
American influence, but they will remain overwhelmingly Spanish or Portuguese probably to the end of time. As
for their religious faith, if it ever changes
it will change, needlessly to say, through
other than American impetus.

Moreover, students of races and
nations know that, however far they
may travel in outward modification,
they keep their inward identities—the
only things which really matter.


Enjoy smooth, cinderless
travel across America via the New
BNO
In

Seattle to Chicago—No Extra Fare
Enjoy your trip through the scenic Cascade Mountains behind
giant electric locomotives. You will have the complete services and luxurious comforts similar to those of a fine hotel as
you travel eastward—skirting 60 miles of Glacier National
Park—and reaching Chicago, without change of cars, for
direct connections to all points East. Great Northern representatives board ship at Victoria to arrange all travel
details for you.


Full information from
J. Wesley Young, G. A., P.D. Edw. A. Dye, General Agent
1205 Fourth Avenue
Seattle, Wash.


607 Hastings Street
Vancouver, B. C.


A. H. Hebb, Agent
916 Government Street
Victoria, B. C.


C.A. Gerken, General Agent
1009 Hearst Building
San Francisco, Cal.
M. J. Costello, Western Traffic Manager
Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hillrail


A Dependable Railway


TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Salient Facts About Lumber Industry In 1928
By ARTHUR FISCHER DIRECTOR of FORESTRY


In the new diplomacy which better
informed statesmanship promises for
the Americas all these matters, one may
conjecture, will be brought within the
scope of education. The watchword
should be “Let no two nations be afraid
of each other.” The world is drawing
together. More and more is appearing
the dependence of every other country
upon all and the dependence of all
upon every one. Superficial changes
there may be, but fundamental changes
of spirit, no. It will be among the
objects of the Hoover administration
to convince Latin America that the
closest continental American relations
involve no peril to the integrity of Latin

A review of the
annual reports of the
Bureau of Forestry
for the last five years
shows that the lumber industry has
hadan extraordinary
growth during this
period. It is shown
that with almost no
exception all the
phases of the lumber
industry have had a steady increase.
For instance, in 1923, there were only
32 sawmills in the Philippines; in 1928,
there were 71. (These referonly to
sawmills working under Bureau of Forestry licenses.) Logging operations em

and 26 in 1928. Timber cut by sawmills and important logging operators,
about 484,000 cubic meters in 1923 and
about 1,263,500 cubic meters in 1928.
Lumber turned out by mills operating
on Bureau of Forestry licenses alone
increased from 136,000,000 board feet
in 1923 to over 227,000,000 board feet
in 1928; and export from less than 37,-
000,000 board feet in 1923 to about 86,-
000,000 board feet in 1928. And the
total cut in the Philippines increased
from 793,234 cubic meters in 1923 to
about 1,500,000 cubic meters in 1928.
The average yearly increase or growth
of the lumber industry from 1923 up to
and including 1928 is about 205.
The year 1929 willsee agreater increase
than in any previous year. There are
at least half a dozen Bureau of Forestry
licensees with sufficient capital planning
either to build new big sawmills or to
replace their present circular rigs with
modern band mills. A corresponding
addition to the logging equipment will
also be made. These new installations
is the result of an increased demand for
Philippine lumber, so popular in the
markets abroad. Based on present indication, there is every reason to expect
that 1929 prices will remain satisfactory
and the total volume of the export trade
will probably go beyond the 100,000,000
board feet mark.


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


MN
totals
were the best for
this month since
1920. January was
very satisfactory and
with last year’s business considerably in
excess of any year
since 1920, Manila
real estate continues
to show steady and
 
healthful gains. This
is particularly gratifying in view of the
increasingly large amount of business
being taken by suburban developments
from the city proper.


Sales, City of


January


February


Manila


1929


1929


Sta. Cruz....


.₱ 431,240


333,429


Binondo......


546,680


San Nicolas...


500


9,000


Tondo........


115,418


96,858


Sampaloc.....


67,903


76,983


San Miguel.


31,000


40,300


Quiapo.......


54,480


45,680


Intramuros...


205,000
a


Ermita.......


157,693
*


115,625


Malate.......


90,911


71,944


Paco.........


10,997


13,328


Santa Ana....


16,543


6,300


Pandacan.....


49,250


1,500


Santa Mesa...


28,958


₱1230.985


₱1386,565


American civilization in its essentials. oloying mechanical power, 14 in 1923


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


ORLD
13E
TRELESS
RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


25 PLAZA MORAGA


Phones:


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


— Leat INa 
used for local consumption shows no
change for February. Shipments abroad
maintain a satisfactory level. Comparative figures are as follows:
Raw Leaf Stripped
Kilos
Tobacco Seraps
1,153
Australia......... . . . . . . . .
12,142
China.......... . . . . . . . . . .
Czechoslovakia............ 1,027,364
2,713
Dutch East Indies.......
1,079
Hongkong........... . . . . .
65,583
Japan........... . . . . . . . . .
North Africa. 204,968
124,330
North Atlantic (Europe).
Spain..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,575,908
180
Straits Settlements........
United States............. 168,480
19,228
Uruguay.............. . . ..


Total.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,203,128


Manila of 335,000 bags. With the very large
stocks of raw material both in America and
Europe in addition to the healthy supplies in the
warehouses of local mills, it is not likely that
prices will advance even though supplies diminish somewhat during the next two months.
February arrivals, as mentioned above, were
335,088 bags as compared with 108,971 bags for
February, 1928. Latest cable advices follow:
Manila, Buen Corriente, P10.00 to P10.25;
Arrivals Resecada, P11.25 to ₱11.50; San Francisco, $.04-1,/2 Sellers; London, f. m. m., (22,15J0.
Coconut OH.—Heavy selling interest in this
item was responsible for a decline of 1/4 to 148
cent per pound in the U. S. market during the
month of February. Within the same period
there was a noticeable weakness in the whole
Fats list, particularly those which are imported
into the United States. It seems that foreign
producers are under the impression that sales
had better be made before the new administration makes any adverse Tariff changes and the
result has been an enormous combined selling
pressure in the American market. If consuming
buyers are to be believed, we do not recall any
time during the past five years when they were
so heavily bought up as they are at the present
time. The month of February opened with the
East Coast market of America at 8 to 8-148
cents per pound C. I. F., and at this writing,
there are no buyers at 7-344 cents per pound
for June December shipment. At the same


time Palm Kernel Oil, our greatest competitor,
is being freely offered at 7.60 cents per pound
C. I. F. New York or New Orleans. The Pacific
Coast market of the United States is likewise
dull with scattered business in tank cars at
7-548 cents F. O. B. Coast. Latest cable
advices follow:
Manila, in Drums, P.33-1/2 to P.34 per
kilo; San Francisco, $.07-1,2 to $.07-578
F. O. B. tank cars; New York, $.07-344 C.I. F.;
London, No quotations.
Copra Cake.—While the European market
for copra cake has remained steady during the
entire month, the price tendency has been downward, with buyers extremely cautious. A fairly
large volume of sales were noted at E8/18/0
to E9/2,6 for Hamburg and as high as E9/10J0
for Scandinavian Ports. There is little selling
pressure on the part of Manufacturers and a
steady market during the month of March is
anticipated.


Two can live as cheap as one,
Once true, is now;
Two can live as cheap as oneThey can, and how!


January.......... . . . . . . . . 2,149,180
February 1928............ 2,660,522


Cigars: Exports to the United States
show a further decline during February,
the total being about 105 less than in
January and 335 less in comparison
with December 1928. Comparative
figures for shipments to the United
States are: February 1929, 11,903,434
cigars; January 1929, 13,178,776; February 1928, 15,310,447.


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By M. D. ROYER
Traffic Manager, Manila Railroad Company
The following commodities were received in Manila January 26, 1929 to


Feb. 25, 1929, both inclusive, via Manila
Railroad:
Feb. 1929 Jan. 1929


Rice, Cavans....


272,500


255,875


Sugar, piculs....


584,752


513,296


Tobacco, bales.


240


1,080


Copra, piculs....


186,100


142,600


Coconuts.....


2,186,800


1,278,200


Lumber, B. F..
Desiccated coco

434,700


345,600


nuts, cases....


20,664


3,528


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporation


Copra.—With well
maintained copra arrivals during the month
of February, coupled
with the extraordinary
weakness of foreign marP
kets, prices thruout the
Archipelago declined approximately 50 centavos
per picul during the
month. Although there
is a noticeable falling off
in production in some
A
parts of Southern Luzon, Sa
increased production from oth
Ui
affected by the November t; 2 se
sponsible for the record Febri ay sum 

IN RESPONDING TO AD"ERTISLRLAS


“Northa
Coast
Limited”



"Finest
“the finest train in the world and I have
traveled on all that are worth talking
about”'—Samuel Hopkins Adams,
Auburn, N. Y.

“Best


“equipment the very best, service splenA
did—a wonderful train"—N. A. Peterson, San Francisco.
NOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between
IN the North Pacific Coast and Chicago! Leaves
Seattle at 11:00 A. M. for all the principal cities of
A
the United States. Two days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel is its
diner service. New-style Observation-Club car with deep, restful
lounge—cushioned chairs—library—writing corner—club rooms—
showers—and maid and valet service.
The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos.
Cook &l Son, Shanghai Commercial Gu Savings Bank, or any transPacific steamship company willgladly furnish additional information.


Oswald Crawford, G. A.
501 Granville Street
Vancouver, B. C.


R. J. Tozer, A. G. P. A.
00 L. C. Smith Bldg.
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.


E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
912 Government Street
Victoria, B. C.


NorthernPacificRailway
"First of the Northern Transcontinentals”


MENTION   


34


  


March, 1929


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the Manila Hemp market
for the month of February with statistics up to
March 4th, 1929.
U. S. Grades: At the beginning of the month
the hemp market in the U. S. was firm enough
but there were no buyers. The exporters were
offering to sell at the following prices: D, 18 cents;
E, 16-548 cents; F, 14 cents; G, 9 cents; I,
12-344 cents; J1, 9-3/4 cents; S1, 13-548
cents; $2, 12-1/2 cents; $2, 10-3/4 cents.
During the first half of the month New
York continued to report the market dull
and sales were few and far between, prices
remaining practically unchanged. During the
last half of the month a fair amount of hemp was
sold in the U. S. and Canada but prices remained
about the same. At the end of the month the
market was steady with sellers offering at the
following prices: D, 17-3/4 cents; E, 16-1,/2
cents; F, 14-1/8 cents; G, 8-1/2 cents; I, 13-1,8
cents; J1, 10 cents; $1, 13-3/4 cents; $2, 12-12
cents; $3, 10-1/8 cents.
The Manila market for U. S. grades was rather
unsettled on the first of the month with exporters
indifferent on account of the market conditions
existing in the U. S. and Canada. Nominal
prices were: D, Pdo; E, P37, F. P31; G, P19;
i, P28; Jl, P2l, Si, P30; 82, P27,'83, P21.
During the first week the market declined sharply
and then recovered a part of the loss. During
the second week a fair amount of hemp changed
hands. By the middle of the month the market
was dull with a few lots changing hands at
D, P39; E, P32.4; F, P29; G, P17.2; I, P26;
Ji, ₱19.4; 81, P28; 82, ₱25.4; 83, ₱19.4.
These prices showed about P2 a picul decline.
During the third week the market was more or
less quiet but prices on some of the grades moved
up. At the end of the month the market was
decidedly firmer owing to sales being made in


New York and the exporters were paying the
following prices: D, P38. E. P34. F, P31;
G, P19; I, P29; J1, P21; 81, P30; 82, P28;
S3, P20. There seemed to be a sudden demand
for the medium grades and prices were on the
average back to the quotations on the first of
the month.
U. K. Grades:—The London market was
dull at the beginning of the monthwith nominal
quotations at: J2, 238; K, E36.10; Li, 236;
L2, E30; MI, E31.10; M2, E28; DL, E27; DM,
E25. During the first week there were some sales
of distant hemp but the nearby positions were
entirely neglected. The second week continued
dull with the market lifeless and as a result prices
declined steadily. By the middle of the month
hemp could be bought on the following basis:
J2, E35; K, E32;Ll, E31.10; L2, E27; Mi, E28,
M2, E26.10; DL, E26.10; DM, E24.10. There
was practically no business and prices showed
a decline of about E3 a ton in the for night.
Toward the end of the month it was apparent
that the shippers were not very anxious to sell
and that only a moderate quantity of hemp was
being offered. This had its effect on both
the U.K. and Continental buyers and as a result,
prices moved up. The market closed with
buyers rather than sellers on the basis of: J2,
E37; K, 234.5; Li, E34; L2, E29; MI, 230.10;
M2, E28.10, DL, E28; DM, E26. This brought
prices back to within El a ton of the prices
ruling the first of the month. However, there
were numerous changes so far as the individual
grades were concerned. The better qualities
were still from El to E2 per ton below the opening prices while the lower grades in some instances were higher than the early prices.
The market in Manila for U.K. grades opened
with exporters paying: J2, ₱17.50; K, Pi6.50;
LI, P15.50; L2, F13.25; MI, P13.50; M2, P12;
DL, ₱11.50; DM, ₱10.25. The market for
the first half of the month was rather listless
but prices move up slightly. Notwithstanding
the heavy arrivals, there was very little good
U.K. hemp being offered here and by the 20th
of the month prices had advanced from PO.50
to P0.75 per picul. During the last ten days


there was very little trading but prices declined
somewhat and at the end of the month nominal
quotations were: J2, ₱17; K, P16; Li, ₱15.4;
L2, ₱12.4; Mi, ₱13.4; M2, P12; DL, ₱12;
DM, P11. However, there was practically
nothing to be had at these prices and hemp from
the better districts could have been sold at from
2 to 6 reales over the prices named.
Japan:—There was a steady demand for the
usual qualities from the Japanese buyers and
they continued to take practically all of the
Y3 from the typhoon districts. It is apparent
that there will not be sufficient hemp from Leyte
to take care of the demands from this market
as production is showing unmistakable signs
of decreasing. However, production is keeping
up in the Bicol provinces and materially increasing in Mindanao.
Maguey:—Prices for both Cebu and Manila
Maguey ruled strong for the entire month and
are out of proportion to the prices ruling for
Manila hemp. Cebu Maguey No. 2 is bringing
₱15.50, Cebu No. 3, P13.25; Manila No. 2,
₱15 and Manila No. 3, ₱14. These prices
cannot be obtained in the foreign markets.
However, the local buyers continue to take
practically all the Manila Maguey offered.
Production:—Receipts continue abnormally
high and the 51,000 bales during the first week
of the month broke all previous records. We
believe the total for the month of February is
very close to a record for production during any
one month. The excess hemp, however, is
mostly damaged fibre from the typhoon districts, particularly Leyte. By the end of March
all the hemp stalks that were blown down will
have been cleaned and then production is expected to decline sharply in Leyte and to a lesser
extent in Sorsogon and Samar. Our own information would indicate that production in Albay
will continue as before. There will be a slight
decrease in Samar and a little heavier decrease
in Sorsogon but not more than 1022. The
decrease in Leyte is estimated to run as high as
502% but we believe half that amount will be
bearer correct. On the other hand production
in south Mindanao will unquestionably increase


There is Satisfaction and Contentment in a glass of cold, frothy
DaleDilsen
Brewed by
SAN MIGUEL BREWERY


STANDS ALONE IN ITS
100 0 ORli
its immunity from every trace of
microbic life and earthy deposits
TA
and its RADIO-ACTIVITY which
renders it of inestimable value in
stomach and intestinal disorders.
A Glass of “TANSAN" after each
meal is a sure preventive of “INDIGESTION.


-SPECIAL NOTE—
“TANSAN" is on sale all over
the Island, however should any
difficulty occur in procuring it—
Remember it can always be
obtained from the
Sole Distributors
F. E. Zuellig, Inc.
Manila — Iloilo — Cebu —


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


March, 1929


  


35


sufficiently to offset the loss of hemp from the
other provinces and since the Mindanao hemp is
of better quality, the total value of the crop will
increase rather than decrease.
Freight Rates:—There is no change in rates
on hemp since the last report.
Statistics:—The figures below are for the


period ending March 4, 1929.


1929


1928


Manila Hemp


Bales


Bales


On hand January.


158,452


139,632


Receipts to date..........


318,153


230,533


Supply to date..........
Shipments to—


476,605


370,165


U. K..................


49,983


74,176


Continent..............


24,068


28,987


U. S............... . . ..


96,140


55,622


Japan............ . . . . ..


80,530


47,148


All Others......... . . . .


6,264


9,836


Local Consumption.......


6,000


10,000


262,985


225,769


FEBRUARY SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


New York Market
(Spot): The depression
which characterized the
American sugar market
in previous months con8
tinued during the month
under review. Prices
further declined to the
1-15/16 cents c. and f.
(3.71 cents 1. t.) level.
While the market was
steady at the decline
during the first half
I
LA
of February with parcels of Cubas sold at
m 1-31,32 cents c. and f. (3.74 cents 1. t.)
2 cents c. and f. (3.77 cents 1. t.), it became
weaker with no disposition to operate during
the latter part of the month when prices reached


the level of 1-15/16 cents c. and f. (3.71 cents
I. t.) for present shipment of Cubas. At the
close of the month, the market was steadier but
without change in prices.
It is the consensus of opinion that the present
depression is due to the large supplies of new
Cuban sugar crop, as shown in the following
statistics for the week ending February 25, in
comparison with the figures for the corresponding
weeks of the two previous years:


1929
1927
1928
Ton
Ton
Ton
229,964 233,000
224,590
Receipts.....
83,828 123,000
Exports...... 127,894
Stocks. ... . . .
718,920 709,706 820,000
Centrals work175 169
163
ing.... . . . .
Totals:—
Receipts..... 1,263,372 1,025,445 1,452,500
Exports...... 614,193 498,820 -720,000


It is believed, however, that the proposed
legislation increasing the United States sugar
tariff, if enacted, will have a stimulating effect
on the sugar market for the second half of the
present year.
The visible stocks in the U.K., U. S., Cuba,
and European statistical countries at the end
of February were 5,289,000 tons as compared
with 4,751,000 tons at the same time in 1928
and 4,489,000 tons in 1927.
Futures:—Quotations on the New York Ex

change during February fluctuated


as follows:


High


Low


Latest


March,......... . . . .


2.01



1.85


1.91


May................


.... 2.09


2.00


2.03


July................


.... 2.16 2.07


2.11


September...... ....


..... 2.18


2.13


2.15


December...........


..... 2.25


2.19


2.20


January, 1930.......


.... . 2.24


2.17


2.20


Philippine Sales:—


—During the r


month t


under


review, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the
Atlantic coast—afloats, near arrivals, and for
future deliveries—amounted to 23,000 tons at
prices ranging from 3.71 cents to 3.90 cents
landed terms, as compared with sales amounting
to 75,000 tons at prices ranging from 4.14 cents
to 4.50 cents landed terms, during the same
period last year.


Local Market—In sympathy with the depression in the American sugar market, the
local market for centrifugals was weak and dull.
Quotations for parcels for exports ranged between P8.625 and P9.00 per picul in comparison
with last month’s quotations at from P8.625
to P9.06 per picul.
Due to the continued demand from China
there was no change in the quotations for muscovados, i. e. P6.50 per picul on the basis of
No. 1.
Crop Prospect—Milling operationss on Negros are proceeding satisfactorily, there having
been no interruption beyond a 24-hour shut
down due to the excessive rains in January.
As a rsult of the heavy rains and the typhoon
on November 23, 1928, the outturn is not likely
to reach the estimate with the exception of one
or two districts.
The growth of the young plant has been
temporarily checked by too much rain but it
has lately improved with the recent favorable
weather conditions. In general the plantings
have been earlier this year than in previous
years.
On Luzon, grinding has continued uninterruptedly. In some districts the estimates of
some of the larger Centrals may be exceeded.
Good germination is noticeable and the young
cane is in as good condition as it was last year
at this time.
Philippine Exports:—Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for the 1928-29 crop from November 1, 1928 to February 28, 1929, amounted
to tons, segregated as follows:
Metrie Tons


Centrifugals................. .. ... 175,544
2,659
Muscovados............ . . . . . . . . . .
2,343
Refined. ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Total........................ 180,546


Java Market: Although the Java sugar
market was reported dull during the month
under review, prices were unchanged, as follows:
Spot Superiors, Gs. 14-348-P7.73 per P. I.
picul f. o. b.; May Superiors, Gs. 13-344-7.40
per P. I. picul f. o. b.; June Superiors, Gs 13- 7.02
per P. I. picul f. o. b.; July-Aug. Superiors,
Gs. 12-3 4—6.89 per P. I. picul f. o. b.


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM


can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
ail Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Islands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


R


nininigoliiiniiiiibioiooooo


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of MeCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.


MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPC RINE PE AEE  IS PLEASE MENTION THE AM A CHALEL OF COMMERCE JOURNAl


36


  


Maron, 1929


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
E
"SILVER FLEET
Express Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigerated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


 REPP
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
Tel. 2-24-18
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


Mr. MANUEL VALENTIN
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.
244 Plaza Sta. Cruz
Manila, P. I.
Phone 2-61-30


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


GEI
LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
Manila, P. I.
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
Manila, P. I
P. O. Box 1423


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: “SALEFIBER"


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


E
L


n 


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
P26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE


110 P. Faura


Tel. 5-69-44


P. O. Box 1394
Telephone 22070
Ga
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Collections
Investments
Income Tax
121 Real, Intramuros Manila, P. I.


No Irregularities


Society of All Nations, International in
Scope, Civie, Educadional Charitable, Fretemel socal and indusunalA Branch in your Community will help
its progress in every way.
After an existence of six years in the
Philippines, the Burcau of the Ircasury of
tie Fnuippine Government eraminad an
books and records of this organization and
oumd k to be one of tne lov lareo kratermal
and humial atd ocetes vinont irenilar
ita Gr anemala.
Red Rovers of the World
of the P. I., Inc..
De la Rama Bldg. No. 2—Room 23
Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 1141


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNA


READING YOUR RISKS—
The keen businessman diversifies his investments both geographically and by types, not alone to avoid
possible adverse conditions in some single industry or section of the world, but also to share more widely
in those favorable developments which strengthen investment holding and make them more valuable.


E SUGGESTPittsburgh Hotels Corporation—
5145 Sinking Fund Gold Bonds, due March 1, 1948, yielding approximately................ 5342
Chile Copper Co.—
20-Year Gold Debentures, due 1947, yielding approximately ........ 5145
Cities Service, Power and Light Company—
51422 Gold Debentures, due November 1, 1952, yielding approximately ................... 5.652
German Central Bank for Agriculture Farm Loan—
Secured 65 Sinking Fund Bonds, due October 15, 1960, yielding approximately............ 61425
Columbia Steel Corporation—
First Mortgage Sinking Fund Gold Bonds 5165 yielding approximately.......... 5)25
Norwegian Hydro-Electric Corporation—
Gold Bonds—Series A—5142, due 1957, to yield approximately .......................... 6.1295
Commonwealth of Australia External Loan30-Year 55 Gold Bonds, due September 1, 1957, yielding approximately . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5.1255
General Electric Co., Germany20-Year 625 Gold Sinking Fund Debentures, due May 1, 1948, yielding approximately...... 61422
The average yield on the above list is approximately 65
Full Details On Request


INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION


TIERMANOS —623-ESCOLTA-623


FRANK G
TAUGHWOUT
Biological Laboratoly"
915 M. H. del Pilar
Manila, P. I.
Stool, Blood and Urine Examinations
Special Sunday and Holiday Hours for
Business Men: 8 to 9 a.m.; 3 to 5 p.m.


Weck-days: 7:30 a.m. to 12 m.; 1:30 to 5p.m.


Manila Wine Merchants, Ltd.
Manila, P. I.
174 Juan Luna
P. O. Box 403
Phones: 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for


Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


commended By Leading Doctors


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to be!) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


EN O EENNNN 


Beauty and Economy
Perhaps you have echoed the question of thousands of people
throughout the world, "How can Dodge Brothers produce a car so
good looking at a price so low?”
The explanation is simple: few manufacturers have equal resources
at their command.
Leading designers co-operated to make Dodge Brothers Standard Six
just what it is—the most beautiful car in its price class.
You will feel comfortably at ease at the Standard wheel from the
very start, and driving is so delightfully easy that you need never
worry again about congested traffic, rough roads, steep hills or
sharp curves.
Nor need you ever worry about expense. Dodge Brothers Standard
Six is economical to buy and exceptionally economical to operate.
Dodge Brothers complete line of passenger vehicles includes
the Standard Six, the Victory Six and the Senior Six.


Sole Distributors:
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, Inc.
536-568 Gandara
ILOILO — MANILA —
CEBU
DODGE BROTHERS

A
R
1
E
E

-


IN E
E ME
N5
N
NDING TO ADVERTISEM


RULY


Fiction: “Mr. Alloss, by Henry Philip
Broad.- Folklore: "How the "Tigbalang’
Fought the Waterworks,” by Henry Lewis
Minton; and “Ucudul" by Hans G.
Hornbostel. Poems on the Philippines by
Gilbert S. Perez.—Mehr Licht! Being
Remarks on the Passing of Marshal Foch,
Heads the Month’s Editorials.—Monthly
Features, Special Articles and the
Customary Commercial Reviews


T
E. PHILIPPINES
A. MAGAZINE. PREEMINEN
.IN


Goodrich
de Luxe
The Super Tire
Is practically proof
against all accidents of the road.
It is built to resist
cuts, blows and
bruises.
Ask the Goodrich
dealer


GOODRICH AIR CONTAINERS
Puncture Proof Tubes will get you
there and back without a flat tire


VEEN N ANNNNG ANE TETEN TE AENEAN TNCAN O GIREN IOIA


Apill, 1328


NIORN CRAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


Umwarsally Popular!
Manila

Cigars

A
HOW TO GET 'EM!
Genuine Manila Hand Made Long
Filler Cigars Are Obtainable From
Dealers in Your City Or Nearby!
SURE TO PLEASE YOU. CONVINCE
YOURSELF WITH A BOX ORDER


List of Distributors Furnished on Request


Address:
CHARLES A. BOND
Philippine Tobacco Agent
15 William Street, New York City, U. S. A.


THE COLLECTOR OF INTERNAL REVENUE
Manila, P. I.








2


THE AMERICAN CHAMBEK OF COMMERUE JOURNAn


AP


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM


can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agenta for the Philippine Islands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


DIEDS




Hot Weather Comfort
You need fresh air to enable you to live and
work efficiently and comfortably.
Well ventilated homes, offices, shops and factories turn out the most work or draw the best
trade. The workers work energetically, the shoppers
shop with comfort and without fatigue.
It pays to effectively ventilate your home or
place of business.
Call your electrical dealer
or contractor for information
regarding the installation of
a fan in your home or office


MANILA ELECTRIC CO.
(MERALCO)
134 San Marcelino
Tel. 2-19-11


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigareite Mfg. Co.
31 Tayuman
Manila, P. I.
IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLED!


N EEN NO ANAENTON NLA TE ENAN NO NEIN II


PUBLISHED MONTHLY


Certain Sulu Informalities Corrected


BY
The American Chamber of Gommerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.


Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
P. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, Vice-President
B. A. Green, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
J. C. Rockwel
Kenneth B. Day
Alf Welhaven


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Frank W. Butler
Wm. H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


COMMITTEES


The President has named and submits for confirmation the following Committees:


EXECUTIVE
. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
H. L. Heath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Carl Hess
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
A. Meyer, Chairman
Aif Welhaven
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wilson


FINANCE
J.L. Headington, Chairman
Vm. H. Rennolds
F. W. Butler


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
L. L. Spellman
M. M. Saleeby
PUBLICATIONS
. A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Bennett
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, ChatrW. I SuAN


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, Chairman
V. Butler
J. R. Wison
HOUSE
B. A. Green, Chairman
J. R. Wilson
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
G. P. Bradford
L. E. Nantz
INVESTMENTS
Meyer, Chairman
P. Ki. Cavender
B. A. Green


John Hackett of the Mindanao Herald, pursuing his habitual pioneering for progress, applauds Colonel Stimson’s appoitment of James R.
Fugate governor of Sulu. In a manner of speaking, according to Hackett,
Fugate has brought home the bacon in Sulu, and that alive, kicking and on
the hoof. Of course, in Sulu, it isn’t really bacon at all. In Sulu, land of
the proud Mohammedans, the swine runs wild and is contemptuously left
to remain forever in a state of swinish nature: to break trail at will, scurry
down into the branch, trouble it with his tusks for all get out, and show
himself to be the deil’s private sedan, preford model, all he wants to: the
Moros of Sulu leave the swine that makes the bacon religiously alone.
No, it isn't the bacon that’s been brought home by the wily shift in the
gobernatorial chair at Jolo. It’s the beef. And there may be, later, a
good deal of beefing about it.
It seems a lamentable fact that the stalwart subjects of Sultan Hadji
Mohammad Jamalul Kiram have not, all of them, that fine sense of discrimination between their own and other chaps’ chattels that ought to be
presumed to be an ingrained attribute of character in disciples of the Prophet. Briefly, Suluanos will sometimes steal. Such is the naked (or at
least partially and somewhat scandalously nude) truth. Stealing, a very
informal practice, has always been eschewed by civilization—if for nothing
else than on grounds of inconvenience; it is inconvenient for the husbandman to lie down at night in the comfort and enjoyment of that which is his,
only to awaken in the morning to the realization that what is his has been
purloined by another. Even if it is a matter of no greater consequence than
harem inmates, still it is often annoying. Much more so when it enters,
as it seems to in Sulu, into domestic and local commerce. Even if one go
back a long way, he will find it took a good deal of skillful writing to rehabilitate Jacob in public repute when he acquired Esau’s patrimony by almost
almost .. .well, it was nearly getting something for nothing, call it
what you will.
It was the more execrable, too, for being done to one of the tribe, instead of to an outlander who might have been fairer prev. And that’s the
low-down on the informalities complained of in Sulu. Your Suluano will
steal from another Suluano in the same way he was wont to steal, not so
long ago, from his credal enemy the Christian. That is to say, he will steal
up in the night to an unsuspecting rancheria and steal away again with all
he can hastily lay his stealthy hands on.
To his peculiar genius as a thief, he finds cattle lend themselves—
cattle and carabaos. Such chattels, in a land such as Sulu, both transport
and sustain themselves. Surreptitiously slaughtered, they and their hides
are readily vendable in Sulu markets. They also make good marriage
dowers and presents, and burial feasts. Left to breed and bear, they stock
wisely isolated pastures. It is a regrettable truth that the untutored acquisitive faculties which, on the American plains, led to the branding of mavericks and the inducement of twins in one’s own heifers, to the bereavement
of one’s neighbors’ cows, is acutely manifest in rural Sulu. Though east
is not west and the twain may not meet until the promised divine audit and
physical inventory is made, cattle rustling is cattle rustling in Sulu just as
it was in the days when it provoked wagon-tongue justice in the Panhandle.
This vice of cattle rustling is reported by Hackett to have been the
most popular outdoor sport in Sulu when Governor Fugate took office


THE NEW FORD TUDOR SEDAN
₱1,975.00 CASH
(Ex. I:


For Economy


BECAUSE of its advanced mechanical design, the New
Ford is extremely economical to operate and maintain.
The New Ford is easy on tires. Light and flexible yet
sturdily built, it has unusual “roadability.
"IT PAYS TO BUY A FORD'
Decide to Buy one Today—Easy Terms
May be Arranged
"After We Sell We Serve”
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY CO.

ILOILO
BACOLOD


ENEL RESAELREON THE AMERICAN CH ALAF.


IN RESPANL


MERCE JOURNAL


4


THE AlVIEReA SrlaimpEl Or


a few months ago. The wholesale robbing of
Peter’s pastures to benefit Paul’s had grown
to be a nuisance often provoking manslaughter
and sometimes cold-blood murder. In the
absence of pistols and Winchesters, the kris and
kampilan, excellent meat spits, were adroitly
wielded in the cause of vengeance.
Then too, a thief can kill a little now and
then in his own behalf: if a raid has been planned
and a rural houscholder is found unseasonably
wakeful, a deft stroke to the midriff will often
prove to be a sufficient soporific. Altogether—
that is, taking one thing with another, especially
cattle and carabaos—law and order on the
jungle border in Sulu were not, until Governor
Fugate’s advent, all that good manners and right
conduct might have dictated. Something was
rotten, allegedly, and it was far this side of
Denmark and not much beyond the immediate
environs of Jolo.
And how has Governor Fugate expunged
from Suluano conduct what Hackett describes
as the cattle-stealing industry? Why, very
easily.
Last August, when he was acting Sulu governor, he gathered all the best people of Sulu into
a conclave which they call down there a bichara.
There, some plain talk established distinctions
among the guests. Some, in the opinion of their
host, might be better than others, and even these
others no better than they should be, but all
were capable of manly renunciation of objectionable conduct and of going straight in future.
To go straight, Governor Fugate proposed to
give every man a chance—up to January 1,
this year. “Every holder of a stolen animal
who turned it into one of the government pounds,
established in various parts of the island (of Jolo),
would not be prosecuted unless he repeated the
offense, in which event he would be soaked to
the limit.” After January 1 the probation
period would expire; "a determined campaign
would be started by the authorities to recover
stolen animals, many of which had been definitely located, and to punish the thieves.”
At such words, the assembled Suluanos looked
askance, and some were really worried.
The result seems to have been that about half
the cattle and carabaos in Sulu once more informally changed hands; men found that the night
had restored to them animals long lost, and
taken from them other animals which they had


seized in iust reprisal; so that accounts were
squared all round in hundreds of cases. Many
cutthroats voluntarily gave themselves up for
trial, and Hackett thinks their number includes
the last Sulu outlaw, who has been the standing
joke of Manila newspapers for decades.


That is the passing of cattle rustling in Sulu,
if you care to believe so, and it doesn’t take into
very thorough consideration some of the dogmatism of Governor Fugate’s immediate successor,
ex-Governor Carl M. Moore, now of the Indian
bureau in Washington. After all, Moore too
was an old hand in Sulu and a man of pretty
keen intelligence and quite cool nerve. His
dogmatism was roads and bridges now followed
by the dogmatism of the letter of the law—not
that it ought to be inferred that Moore neglected
the efficacy of the law. But it appears to have
been his experience in Sulu, as it certainly was
American experience on the cattle plains at
home, that means of transportation and of
getting readily about tend mightily to correct


border informalities and to make settlers out of
men whom easy means of rendezvous and escape
tempt into a roaming thieving daredevil life."
It is certainly cheering to learn of the instant
apparent success of Governor Fugate, but maybe
there will be backsliders among the good people


of Sulu, who will return to the wiles of the defenseless border, until the Sulu jungle is made
accessible by more roads and bridges. There
seems just one way to rid a country of border
characters permanently, and that’s to obliterate
the border. It is hoped that the new administration really begins where the Moore administration left off, that what has been built is not
destroyed or abandoned but only added to and
continued in use for the public weal of one of the
world’s last and most stubborn borders. Hackett avers that livestock in Jolo is now as safe
from being stolen as it would be in the backyard
of the senate president’s Pasay home. That is
encouraging. So are roads and bridges.
—W. R.


A Gala Day in Jolo


The Revolt of Youth
By RAFAEL PALMA,
President, University of the Philippines.


One of the many persistent problems of the
day is that which refers to the new manners and
customs of youth. Among the young men of
today there is noticeable a sort of rebellion
against certain standards of conduct and habits
of action generally accepted and firmly believed
by past,generations. On numerous occasions,
,our pedagogues have remarked, in more or less
censorious vein, that our youth have stampeded
from their wonted bounds, and have become
ungovernable and disobedient; that they


have lost their cherished attachments to the
home, and their age-old respect for their parents
and elders has become a thing of the past; and
that, totally unsubiected to the discipline that
comes from religious and moral training, they
are daily becoming the victims of disbelief and
immorality. Adherents of the old system of
education have endeavored to attribute the
so-called licentiousness and disorderly conduct
of modern youth to laical education which, according to them, has prostituted all that was


good in the old system.
Between the youth of today and the youth
of yesterday, there is undoubtedly a difference
in mentality, brought about not only by the
type of education but also by the social and
economic conditions of the times. The young
man of yesterday was trained to conform absolutely to established dogmas and precepts.
He was not taught to assert and to talk; much
less to discuss with his parents and teachers.
From the very beginning he imbibed in the
school a tragic version of life. The axiom that
“learning enters with blood” was adhered to
with Puritanic persistency and severity.
remember that in the little public school where
I studied in my teens, my teacher used various


Retail
Wholesal
sine American Drug
Importers
Agents
NPI

-O.
BOTICA BOIL
MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
We have been selling drugs for 98 years


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OUR


imuna ot yanesament for enferent ends:
ne m lisk with a handle,
"* O
n ci the hand) for
ikn
A
proficiency in writing
" ."4,llo:
....2  1ine si e of the times, and a
TR who could not recite
wen their assignea iessons by memory. At
times when thee teacher was in ill humor, the
key-ring, the inkstand, or any object within
his reach, would rend the air with the heads of
the poor students as targets. It never occurred
to us then that this was not the best system of
instruction. As a matter of fact, the more
severe and exacting the teacher was the more he
was liked by the community, because it was said
that the youngsters turned out to be more witty,
more quick, and more intelligent. To some
extent, the system was vindicated by results.
The fear of instant punishment insured on the
part of exceptional students a faultless imitation
of the letters and numbers of the printed models
of Iturzaeta, and when it came to conjugating
the irregular Spanish verbs in their various
modes and tenses, the ability to do so always
evoked admiration and surprise. In the secondary schools, under the direction of religious
orders, no instruments of torture were employed,
but the youth was subjected to a similar stern
discipline. For forwardness and little misdemeanors, they were required to extend their
arms in the form of a cross, or to perform the
“dip in the well exercise," or kneel before the
class. Besides, they were required to hear mass
daily; recite prayers at the beginning and end
of their classes; confess and take communion as
often as possible, especially during Lent; time;
and take part in processions and church festivals.
Prizes were offered to reward not only scholarshipbut also good behaviorand external demeanor.
In the university, the student-was-left-more, at
ease, even with respect to religious obligations.
The practice of taking communion was only
required once a year. Outside of this no supervision was exercised over the scholarship of the
students,—the studious and the “heater" had
their way. Repetition of a subject in which
they failed year in and year out was allowed.
Expulsion from school was unknown except for
violent disorders within the class-room and for
offenses committeed against the person of, the
professor. There were no longer prizes to
stimulate studiousness and good conduct. The
quizzes were few and far between because the
classes were jammed to the limit and the professors cared little for the daily progress of their
students, expecting the “show-down” in the
final examinations.
The aims and objectives of the whole educational system were evidently to inculcate and
force virtue through religious discipline, and to
subordinate knowledge and information about
the world and Nature, which were considered of
temporary and transcient character, to the
concerns of the eternal life, of the expectations
and splendors of the other world.
This system yielded the good results that were
expected of it, while our country remained sequestered from the rest of the world and the
necessities and ambitions of our people were
limited. The structure of society was based onthe uniformity of religious dogmas and the morall
and social code which controlled our daily life.


Nobody dared to disagree with the precepts
contained in these codes or examine whether
they were good or bad; they were accepted as
irrefutable truths, and whoever departed from
their observance was sure to suffer social ostracism if not more severe penalties. However,
our contact with the outside world and Irocerr
progress, and especially the events during the
Revolution, and the consequent transfer of these
Islands to the United States, wrought radical
changes in our perspective and outlook on life.
The rise of human dignity, coupled with new


In the avenues of intellectual research
are to be found many opportunities
for bringing those of us who are living
in the Philippines into pleasant contacts one with another; not precisely for
the sake of accord, for we don’t stress
harmony of views and conduct as much
as the government does, but for the
sake of understanding the other fellow--knowing him better and learning
how and of what he thinks; and to
what purpose. For this reason we
were delighted to come upon a recent
address by President Rafael Palma of
the University of the Philippines, on"
such a vital subject, the reaction of
Philippine young folks to modern
times, as to deserve being printed in
full in our pages. This we herewith
do. And by the way, if your children
are approaching their university period,
it might not be unwise for you to consider the institution which President
Palma presides over. Our son took his
freshman and sophomore work there.
One of two American boys, his relations
with his classmates and the faculty
were all that could be desired, from
the beginning; and he was excellently
instructed in all the courses he took.
There are many indications that the
University is under the best direction
it has ever had, and that it is, as a
whole, a very efficient institution of
higher learning.—ED.


standards and modes of living, has created a
less austered view of life and is leading toa
process of reformation in the core of our family
life and to-a-spirit of restlessness-and revolt of
youth against aged norms of conduct and of
action.
To this result has undoubtedly contributed
the new system of education which permits
self-discovery and development of individuality
and brings about a sense of responsibility, in
contrast with the old uniformity of beliefs and
practices and the acceptance of the absolute
authority of the parents and teachers. Mhe use
of corporal punishment in the instruction of the
child has been eliminated and in its place warning, suspension and even dismissal have been
introduced. In the various grades of our system
of public instruction, the attention and diligence
of the students are attracted by objective methods and by a variety of courses and activities
which break the monotony of mental exertion.
The optional courses, the specialization, the


neglect of the classics and the study of modern
languages are the product of the new conditions
of our modern life. Mt is no longer desired to
recite the lesson by memory, the main aim being
to determine whether the substance of the
printed page has been assimilated. No dogmas
and moral precepts are imposed, but the principles of good manners and right conduct and
civies are being taught, to give a practical notion
of the nature of the relationship which a citizen
has with himself, with society, and with his
government. The school is considered as a
reproduction, in miniature, of the community
in which he has to live. UIn the colleges and
universities, especially, the student societies and
fraternities and the so-called extra-curricular
activities place within the reach of the student
a reasonably sufficient practical training so
necessary for his membership in actual social
life. VAs a part of this training, athletics and
physical education and even military science
and tactics are required, calculafa
cunte
young men with the spirit of tean aaapa 
 Fe.r
fit them to survive in the arduouexistence. ,
(To my-mind, the principal distinet
able between the one system and ..r
in the view of life and in the philosep
back of it. WWhereas education in
guided by the theological concer th
world and undertook to reform l.n ace.
ance with a certain pattern that
to have come by heavenly revel san, in co
day, education simply prepares  a
tempting in so far as possible to
ditions surrounding human exis
Ni
the education of yesterday was
feeling tof Diyinity, today it is

feeling of humanity. In the pann
was considered as a period of ti. -uba o
better life, and a knowledge of tho ngs tiat
surround man was not so essential as a behavior
which would please God in this life and inake
man deserving of the rewards of the eternal
life. Now education trains for life on this earth;
it helps man to understand deeply what life is
and what can be done to harness the varied
forces of Nature in the service of mai, to de"
mine what are those subtle and invisible la
that govern the mysterious actions of individi
and of societies, and to know how man’s cont
over Nature can be enhanced.  In the light
these differences, it may be inferred, with son
truth, that a spirit more materialistic th
before is pervading the present system of ea
cation—in its workings and consequences; but
at bottom the idea of God has not disappeared,
but it seeks God more at close range in the
depths and grandeur of His works, instead of
considering Him as an unknowable and unknown Being living in a distant region, divorced
from the world and from its institutions/
This new philosophy of education ig not as
bad as it may seem to those who have acquired
the habit of looking at things from the viewpoint of conservatism and the maintenance of
the status quo. It is only a new in
I
of God and His designs toward:

modern conception is that God is
of Nature or of man; that He is ii a
lives with us, and although His Ki. 
sann
(Please turn to page 11)





EA
E
MOTOR OILS AND MOTOR GASOLINE
—make any car run better
Standard Oil Company of New Yo E



RESPONT!RS. PA ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE   OF CCMMERCI 4


“Mister Alloss”
By Henrr Pililie BroAd


In the regiment from which he had retired
after five and twenty years of service, he had
been called Walrus, on account of the hirsute
adornments on his florid ball of a face; and in the
soft palaver of the Filipino, Walrus had become
Alloss. As Mr. Alloss he was known to every
man, woman and child in barrio Santa Maria,
where he made his home. Three times a week
he would go down to the post exchange, three
miles away, to make his purchases at the army
stores. He would trudge down the dusty,
coconut-bordered road in his old khaki suit and
battered Stetson, a basket swinging from his
arm—as unlike his Philippine surroundings as
could be imagined.
They always took him the better three-fourths
of the morning, these visits to the post exchange.
Not that he did not start early enough; he set
out regularly at seven, but progress to town was
not easy. From their nipa huts the Filipino
mothers would nod to him and smile, and he
would stop at one dwelling or another and
inquire into little Serafin’s condition whether
the chills and fever had gone down, and how wee
Mariquita had spent the night. Sometimes
Lady Marta, the well-to-do widow, would
beckon to him. Laboriously he would ascend
the steep bamboo stairs and have a look at
little Anita’s English composition. More than
once it would be: “Them ideas are not bad at
all, Anita. But them letters!” And his pudgy
freckled hand would trace a model letter, to the
voluble admiration of his numerous onlookers.
Then down into the street once more, and
from many a dilapidated abode that could not
be called a house, and yet was a real home, a
small tot would scuttle forth, and another and
another, as innocent of garments as on the day
of their birth. He would stop in his lumbering
gait and talk to the smallest and dirtiest of them,
stroking with his sunburned hands the straight
black hair, patting the small brown faces with
flat little noses, the while digging into the


recesses of his khaki coat where lemon drops
apparently generated spontancously. Then he
would wave to someone whose shack was set
far back in the coconut grove that bordered the
road, too far to go for a chat. So he would
make a loud-speaker of his two hands and shout:
“Hello, there, Mariano! How are them nuts
coming on?”
It would be nine o’clock by the time he reached
the exchange. Nearly always, too, there were
some officers’ ladies there and he had to wait,
but that did not bother him. He had a way of
greeting the ladies, removing his hat with one
hand and receiving it with the other as it described a sweeping downward curve, and the
ladies liked it, for they always smiled. And the
quartermaster would allow him to have a look
at the new stores. He would feast his Irish eyes
on the tin-foil wrapped bacon, the pyramids of
tinned goods in colorful wrappers, and the
delicious glow of the oranges and apples.
He would make his purchases, chat a little
with the sergeant add up and go. Once only
had he had a little difficulty, and that with a
new quartermaster sergeant, just arrived in the
islands and therefore knowing it all. Looking
askance at Mr. Alloss’ stock of goods, he had
said: "Now, Sergeant Walrus, tell me, what in
blazes do you do with all them things vou get
here? Six cans of milk again today! Why,
man, vou had twelve last time! Day before
yesterday, that is!”
“You should worry, young man! I pay for
it, don't 1? My United States Army pension’s
as good as the next fellow’s, eh?” He had taken
the heavy basket from the counter, and was
making ready to go. But the other was not yet
tisfied.
sati
“You are registered a single man, Walrus.
So don’t you tell me you use all the milk yourself, not saying anything about the other things.”
Mr. Alloss put down his basket and looked at his
officious interlocutor who went on: “Im under


the regulations, you know! We must check up
on people like. .like you, Walrus! Tell menow,
what do you do with them things? Sell 'em, eh?
Sell 'em to the civilians?'
Anger shot through Mr. Alloss. Then he
calmed down and put a hand on the trim, chevroned sleeve of the young man. "You know
damn well I don’t even sell a t5othpick! Never
have. The Captain knows, and that ought to be
enough for the likes of you! Want to be smart
with ine, ch?
The other shrugged trim shoulders: “Still,
that does not tell me what you do with all the
stuff, you old codger!"
Mr. Alloss slowly picked up, his basket.
“Well, if you just got to know...
“Sure would like to know!”
“Listen, then: It’s for my children!”
The other man roared: “Now, Walrus, that’s
the best I ever heard! Your children! And
you a single man! Walrus, for shame!”
Holding his sides, which seemed in imminent
danger of splitting, he asked between spurts of
laughter: “So you have children, Walrus?
And how many have you, say?”
"Fifty-three of 'em, Sergeant, fifty-three!”
Adding, as he closed the door: “And plenty
more coming!”
If Mr. Alloss’ progress had been slow in the
morning, it held no comparison with his progress
back from the post exchange. First of all, he
wended his way to the market. It was a flimsy
bamboo-and-iron structure near the seashore
where, in their wooden stalls, Filipino women
sold their wares. He knew all the women,
especially the older ones, and they hailed him
with undisguised delight.
“Ay, Mister Alloss! Que tal, Mister Alloss?”
He would shake hands with them, talking to
them in a queer jumble of a language that had
once been Spanish. Then he had to listen to
Lady Ramona’s whispered complaints about
her son-in-law, who abused her so; to Lady
Amalia’s detailed particulars about her latest
grandchild’s laborious advent. More than once
he scratched his bald shining pate during the
conciliabula with the rest of them, pondering


Good Shoes for
all the Family


PRHIRTY Years of shoemaking
in the Philippines is the record
on which we base our bid to supply
HIKE shoes to every member of
your family.


HIKE SHOE FACTORY
Style Creators
Manila, P. I.
286 San Marcelino


When
Touring
in these islands it is wise to
guard yourself against cholera, dysentery and those
deadly diseases that are
contracted through drinking
impure water.


THE 1009% PURE
natural water


is available everywhere!
It is guaranteed free from every trace of microbic life or
hearthy deposits.
Its radio-activity has earned for TANSAN the name of a
preventive against stomach and kidney disorders!


BEWARE OF IMITATIONS!


Sole Distributors:
F. E. ZUELLIG. INC.
ILOILO
CEBU
MANILA


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


solutions of their troubles. Then he would
select his vegetables, buying from one today,
tomorrow from another, so as to cause no ill-feelings among them. But bananas he invariably
purchased from Lady Stanislawa.
Stanislawa! The very name conjured up
youth and freshness and he saw himself again,
a trig young warrior, just come from the homeland, and Stanislawa, the brown beauty! Those
wonderful days! But the years had slipped by,
unmercifully, as years have a way of doing, and
Stanislawa, if still brown, was no longer a beauty.
But that had not kept her from raising a huge
family, by two Filipino husbands, and she and
her earthwhile lover had remained good friends.
That and no more; for unlike so many of his
former companions whom the Islands had retained, he had remained single. He knew the
people, he liked them; he had of his own free
choice made his home among them; yet at the
thought of marrying he had balked. He was
not the marrying kind, anyway, he reasoned;
it would never do.
At a side booth, after a hearty chat with the
lady of his youth, he would purchase a dozen or
so native gingerbreads of the fanciest shapes,
fat little pigs with pink-icinged snoots, horses
with flags in place of tails. That would be just
the thing for Carlito, who had a touch of t. b.,
or for Sebastian, the lame boy, or for poor Filomena with the hare lip. Fifty-three of 'em?
Why, there were more than twice that many
in the barrio now!
He would pile the dulces on top of the already
over-flowing basket, or stuff them into his gaping
pockets. Then, sweeping his hat to the women
in the stalls with the same incongruous yet
captivating grace as he had to the ladies in the
post, he would move on.
Home? No, not yet. He had to take a drink
first, over at Johnny’s bar. A glass of beer, in
this hot country, would not do anybody any
harm. So, with the basket pulling heavily at
his arm, he would make for the gaily-painted,
two-storied frame building at the corner, push
open the door with his knee and get his glass
of beer; one, sometimes two, never three. Too


much money. He would sit and chat with the
elderly owner of the place, or with a couple of
sailors who were making a day of it while their
vessel was in port. At last, wiping the foam
from beard and mustache with the back of his
hand, would finally stalk from the barroom and


Mr. Alloss returns from market


trudge homeward.
The nearer he came to home, the lighter grew
the burden. The tots would scuttle forth from
their dwellings again, a little less naked than in
the morning, and their young voices shrill with
excitement and expectation, would cut into the


stillness of the fiery hot forenoo.
“Hello, el Mister Alloss! Helle
He would plant himself before thel
legs
“Hey, there, Pedro! A apple for the 1
she’s got the beriberi. Here, young Marg.,
a orange for you!” To another: "Say, Lu
that sore sure ain’t looking right good to me.
Come and get some zinc ointment.”S
"Ah, Lady
Maria!" to a buxom young woman who was
spreading out some baby linen on a hedge t
dry "and how is the new baby? Wait a minutThe pudgy hand would delve into the fastness
of the basket and hand the young mother two
or three scarlet-labelled cans of milk.
Thus it would always be, on Wednesday,
Monday and Friday; and noon would not be far
off when he got home.
Home was the wooden cubicle he had built
himself, of packing cases, covering the “Stow
away from boilers" and the "X.X. Brand Soap”
with a color worthy of the luscious surroundings.
The house stood flush with the road; age-old
mango trees swayed dignifiedly behind it. It
was not a grand home—oh, no—just two rooms,
one that held his narrow army bed, his army
locker, and an old aparador for his clothes, then
the smaller room, his company room, as he
called it, with oil stove and table so ingeniously
attached that he could cook and eat without
getting up. There was also the ice chest in this
room, and under the table the round padded box
for Sally, the cat. For Sally’s benefit, too, the
square small opening at the right of the door
ethat permitted her to come and go as her felin
fancy directed.
One morning late in May, when he returned
from town, Mr. Alloss became aware from a
distance that something was amiss at his house.
Sally was wailing pitifully from within. Small
wonder, he found. Sally’s little exit had been
obstructed, someone had placed a board against
it from the inside. Kittredge, surely, or Denniston—up to their tricks! That some poon
asses could not take care of a monthly check
Each time they came into town from their littl
(Please turn to page 12 col. 2)


Luzon Sievedoring
Co, Inc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Phone 2-16-61
Port Area


New Shipments of


Albums
Blank Books
Time Books
Memo Books
Clips
Waterman’s Inks
Paper Fasteners
Thumb Tacks
Carters Inks and Paste
Diamond Inks and Paste
Signet Inks and Paste
Higgins Inks
Envelopes
Inkstands
Papeteries
Penpoints
Pen Trays
Colored Pencils
Tablets


Numbering Machines
Paper Plates
Pins
Stamp Pads and Rubber
Stamp Ink
Liquid and Rubber Erasers
Acco Fasteners and Folders
Photo Engravers Glue
Mucilage
Hydraulic Fountain Moisteners
Boston Pencil Sharpeners
Desk Glasses
Special Waterman’s Fountain Pens
Work Organizers and Distributors
Rulers
Ticonderoga Pencils


Philippine Education Co., Inc.
101-103 Escolta
Manila, P. I.


Wholesale and Retail Departments -
Tel. 2-21-31
Tel. 2-35-37
Stationery Department


If there is anything you need in the way of Artists,
Surveyors, School, Office, or Printers’ Supplies, give us a ring.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNA


nding $7,000,000 Monthly With America


na, P. I., March 23.—Customs figures
eleased show that every month last year
 Philippines bought from America manufactures valued at upward of $7,000,000; from the
world as a whole the islands bought to the tune
of $135,000,000 during the year, and their
urchases from America are 62.2%, or $84,500,00
the year as a whole. Thus America now
joys less than 243 of the purchasing trade of
ne Philippines; the Philippine tariff, which
iverages about 20% ad valorem, does not prevent
a great deal of buying from Europe and Japan.
Here are a few of the countries from which
the Philippines buy:


United States.......


.. $84,500,000


Great Britain.......


5,638,000
** *


Belgium............


1,500,000
* *


France............ . .


1,564,789
* * *


Germany............


4,624,951



Switzerland.........


1,657,775
*A


China......... . . . . .


6,559,744
*  *


Br. East Indies......


3,002,338
**


Dutch E. Indies......


3,035,135



Fr. East Indies......


2,401,348



Japan...............


... 12,935,876


Australia............


... 2,433,780


Australia, not a leading manufacturing country, sells the Philippines chiefly beef and coal.
Twelve more countries trading with the Philippines sell them less than a million’s worth of
goods a year, respectively. But in pesos, half
the value of dollars, the islands bought more
than a million’s worth last year from each of the
following, Spain, the Netherlands, and JapaneseChina.
Single items in the purchases the islands made
last year which each totalled more than a million
dellars are: rice, flour, bread stuffs other than
flour, automobiles, other vehicles, chemicals
and drugs, coal, cotton cloths, other cotton
roducts, eggs, electrical wares, fertilizers,
iber manufactures, fish, leather, meats, dairy
products, crude oil, gasoline, lubricating oil,
ruits and nuts, rubber manufactures, machinery,
ron and steel, paper and books, silks, soaps,
obacco and cigarettes, vegetables.
Other items coming to more than a million
pesos, but less than a million dollars, are: auto
parts, cacao, chocolate, etc., coffee, precious
stones, porcelain, glass and glassware, hats and
caps, nonelectrical instruments, matches, minor
oils, paints and varnishes, perfumery and cosmetics, liquors, wood and rattan manufactures,
voolen products.
Some items bought chiefly or principally
rom the United States are pretty large: Flour,
5,325,000: automobiles and parts, $5,028,000;
otton cloths, $20,117,000;other cotton products,
18,018,000; electrical wares, $2,185,000; fish
roducts, $2,201,000; fruits and nuts, $1,645,-
O; rubber manufactures, $2,325,000; dairy
pducts, $3,765,000, petroleum products, $10,-
).000 in round numbers; tobacco and cigaret$3,101,000. And possibly silks should be
cluded, about $4,000,000, as a great deal of
nerican silk goods sells in the islands in comtition with oriental silks.
Of course America is the chief customer of the
hilippines, as she is their chief merchant and
anufacturer. She gave $116,000,000 to the
slands last year for their products, and from all
their other customers they received $39.000,000
to make a rough approximation of the exact
figures.
Here are a few of the countries which bought
from the Philippines last year:


United States. ......... $116,000,000
6,972,000
Japan..................
7,896,000
Great Britain...........
3,504,000
China........... . . . . . . .
3,154,000
Germany...............
5,091,000
Spain............ . . . . . .
2,703,000
France............. ....
1,678,000
British East Indies.....
1,398,000
Belgium................
1,466,000
Netherlands............
1,523,000
Italy.......... . . . . . . ..
1,348,000
Hongkong..............


No other country bought from the islands
luring 1928 as much as a million’s worth. Amerca’s purchases were chiefly fiber, sugar and


coconut products, the last being copra, coconut
oil and desiccated coconut meat. In value,
the import-export trade of the islands in 1928
was $289,711,444, exceeding that of 1927 by
$18,285,887, an increase of 5.5%. Per capita it
was an increase of $1.50; imports outvalued those
of 1927 by $19,000,000, but exports fell slightly
below the value of the exports of 1927, the price
of sugar especially being quite low.
Another important phase of the trade to the
general reader is the shipping it involves. What
is the nationality of the vessels taking so many
products from America and other points in the
world to the Philippines, and carrying such heavy
cargoes away from the islands? Of what the


Paradise
I drifted into Rosario
Last Saturday
Night,
And in one of the cubicled
Cathayan cloth marts
I saw
Old parchment faced
Tan Gon
Toying with his sweat-grimed,
Ebony balled
Abacus
And listlessly clip-clapping
The profits
Of another day.
And I remembered
The wedding feast
Years ago
In the provinces
And I knew
That mellowed friendship
Could risk
Familiar queries.
How is the wife, Tan?
He turned to me
With that mirthless,
Heart sick
Laugh of Oriental
Grief.
“You no hear?
Too bad! too bad!
She gone to the hell
And she leave me
Alone
With nine kids.”
Alone,
With nine kids.
And the wife
Hopelessly
Beating her hands
Against an unseen
Impenetrable
Wall,
Haunted
By heart-breaking
Terranean memories
Which refuse to die
Even
In ParadiseOh, the subtlety
Of Oriental
Jests!
Manila, May 10, 1927.


islands bought, American vessels carried cargoes
valued at $61,229,879, of which $18,500,000,
nearly, was from the United States. Of what
the islands sold for delivery abroad, American
vessels carried cargoes valued at $75,526,739,
of which $67,500,000, nearly, went to the United
States. British vessels were about the only
material competitor, the imports they brought
to the islands were valued at $48,916,732, and
the exports they hauled away at $49,228,163.
German ships brought the islands imports valued
at $9,155,199 and hauled away exports valued
at $5,201,458. The corresponding figures for
Japan are 86,017,771 and $14,107,139 respectively. Considerable values are in the mails,
which in bulk pass between the islands and the
United States: imports by mail were valued at
$3,650,380, and exports at $5,605,332.


Sarangani Bay
I did not love Rudyard
But I liked his verse
And many were the times
When I sailed away
Across the Seven Seas,
But that night
The southern monsoon
Groaned and moaned
In Sarangani bay.
Between the lightning flashes
I could see
The kneeling palms as they prayed
Their unending orisons
To the moon-starved
Celebes sea.
So I closed the windows
And I thought that I was
Alone
And I opened the book
And put on my heavy
Tortoise shell
Glasses.
But they did not stay on
And they slipped and slipped
And dropped as I nodded
And dreamed of the Moulmein pagoda
In far-away Burmah.
Then it was that I saw
The flash
Of the two-edged
Campilan
Mirrored on the dark green surface
Of the flask of native gin
On the table.
Then the light went out and...
Darkness...
As my head rolled over
The open book of verse
And the crimson viscid lake
Spread itself slowly
Over the pages
And on
And over
The Road to Mandalay.
Lanao, March 1, 1927.


Two More Philippine Poems by Gilbert S. Perez


Danish, Dutch, Norwegian and Swedish ships
regularly call at Philippine ports and participate
in the ocean carrying trade of the islands, and the
Spanish mail line counts in the commerce with
Spain. American vessels do not carry all the
goods America sells the islands; of these goods
last year the amount carried by British vessels
was valued at $30,000,000, and Norwegian vessels


It was many years ago, Senor—in 1877, to be
exact—that the great Don Sebastian (Don
Sebastian Jube, a noted Spanish engineer) came
to the bondok for the purpose of carving in the
solid rock of San Juan del Monte, this great
chamber of waters which you have just seen;
so the people of Manila might have pure, fresh
water during the time of drought. I was very
young then, Senor, yet I remember that day
as if it were but yesterday.
The people were greatly worried over Don
Sebastian’s project; for, they argued, if it were
God’s will that the people of Manila should
have fresh water during the season of dryness,
other than that of the great river, which they
had used for centuries, then why had He not,
in His omnipotence, caused such a receptacle
to occur in his own way? Or why had he not
caused springs of pure water to flow in convenient
places about the city? And perhaps the people
were right, for several times those who have
drained and cleaned the great chamber have
found the skeletons of dead men, who were
doubtless thrown into the water by the angry
tigbalang. At any rate, you will admit, Senor,
that had God so willed, he could easily have
supplied Manila with pure water himself, and
saved all that great labor and expense, and
erhaps the lives of many unfortunate people
s well.
The people were much worried, and many of
them refused to help with the construction
of the huge chamber; for it was believed—and
his belief later proved to be well founded,
nor—that the building of such a receptacle
uld offend the spirits of the bondok. The great
k crest of San Juan del Monte is the home
the tigbalang. "Tis said it was constructed
these spirits at the beginning of the world.
nu there were other evil spirits, Senor, the
iatanda sa punso, which infested the trails and
ootpaths. “You know not of these evil spirits,
enor? Strange! Then will I tell you of the
ybalang and the matanda sa punso, Senor, so
it you may realize the dangers faced by the
uve Don Sebastian, and all who helped him in
le construction of the great chamber.
The tigbalang, Senor, sometimes appears in
e form of a great dog, with a long red lolling
gue, but usually he shows himself in his
wral form, that of a very tall, thin creature,
man, half beast, with most extraordinarily
hin legs, and long ears like those of an ass;
ce also favors that of the horse, although
certain human features at times. It is said
ometimes the legs of the tigbalang are
g that the total height of the terrible
e is more than four times that of a very
n; but those I have seen were not more
rree times the height of a man.
e spirits do not kill men outright, Senor:
en they have successfully cast their spell
human being, they lead him off into the
ss of the wood. Losing his bearings, he
s helplessly through the jungle. When
ll entirely beneath the spell, they never
but wander on at the call of the tiguntil they die: Some say that those
le thus are eaten by the spirits, Senor; but
I have no proof, and I incline to the belief
is a mere superstition. Seldom indeed
n overcome the spell of these evil ones,
ever except in cases where the tigbalang

tr
¡se mtk sprits
  B"62


carried another three millions’ worth. All this
was offset but little by the shipments to Great
Britain and Norway by American vessels, or
from those countries by American vessels to the
Philippines. There’s still a gap between what
America sells and buys overscas, and what
vessels of her own nationality are carrying
for her.


about the size of a large dog. Their hair sometimes grows so long that they resemble great
balls, rolling hither and yon, in the darkness
menacing the pedestrian with their great round
fiery eyes. They change shape with ease, and
often the front feet become hands, 'with which


they hurl missiles at those with whom they are
angry.
It is a peculiar fact, Senor, that these bits
of earth and stones, hurled by the matanda
sa punso, have never, so far as I know, actually
touched those at whom they were thrown.
Usually they go whistling past one’s head, or
fall nearby. I have heard that should they
actually strike the person at whom they were


, the result


bear


tion; but a


now


nor, and I


incy


re story tesr


not


put this i.


lany


strange things have I seen in the bondok of San
Juan del Monte.
Like the tigbalang, the matanda sa punso
have a language which, so far as I have learned,
no human being understands. True, there once
lived a man here who claimed that he had talked
with the spirits of the bondok, but it is well
known that he was a notorious liar, and his wife
is belicved to have been a witch. Many of the
matanda sa punso have I seen rolling about the
footpaths in the darkness, and menacing me
with weird mouthings and their terrifying
eyes; but when I have attacked them with staff
or bolo, they have invariably escaped with
incredible speed and agility. And as they fled
they looked like very fat sheep. “Even thus,
Senor, I told the story of the evil spirits to Don
Sebastian; and then, as now, I spoke only of
the things I have seen with iny own two eves.
Now I shall tell you of Don Sebast.
He was a very great man and very wis,
generous and proud; and terrible was ) .
wrath. He stood bigh in the favor of tl. :otain General, and the Director de Agu.s e


had a knowledge of the spirits of the air, and
of the stars, and of the water, and of the earth,
and he feared nothing. Ah, he was a great
caballero, Senor. He also knew much of magic.
as you shall learn.
So great was his influence that desr”
displeasure of the tigbalang and th
sa punso he succeeded in gathering :
force of laborers to aid him in carving
chamber in the solid rock of San Juan d
How many, Senor? Perhaps ten ti
Some of them worked by day, others 1
the night.
(P'-ase tuen to page 14)


o””
Cy
h
How qe ligbalang Fought the Waterworks
FRANK LEWIs MINTON
This is the story of the excavation and building of the “old reservoir” in San Juan del Monte, as told
by Juan Javalan, one of the few laborers still living who were employed on that great project. His wife,
Aquilina, and an old friend, whose name the writer has forgotten, contributed several bits of forest lore.
In order to bring the scene more vividly to the reader, I have used as nearly as possible the style of the
narrators.


The Old Parish Church Apostrophises
By VERNON J. SnaPP


Stand and look at me. Ponder. Well may you wonder. But do not think me dead. Think
of yourself as you are, dreadfully young and giddy. My walls are stone, they will perish only
with the hills.
A typhoon took my roof. Then my bells were taken from me and placed on those pillars of
wood—pillars the ants will gnaw down. Worst of all, puny men of this puny age have built a puny
structure of nipa palm and bamboo inside me—and they call it a church! How dearly they must
love their god, that they build such a temple to him!
Where are the worshipers who once thronged through my doors? Where are the children?
For of such is the kingdom of heaven.
There they are, romping out of school over my neglected plaza. They are saturated with the
idea of progress, imbued with the myth of change. But the truth they get is only confused discussion, and their understanding is the understanding of the present only.
At those buildings and at those builders, I scoff. For I shall see them waste into the mud out
of which they have come, and die with the men who made them.
And the wise shall speak of them, and say, "Art thou also like the church the Spaniards buik?
What, no?”
Thy walls, O school, shall also be covered with cloying vines. From thy corners shall the baliti
grow. In thy deserted portal shall spriny up a woody growth. Thou shalt not be inhabited, nor
resorted to from generation to generation. Neither shall the American teach in thee, nor shall the
Filipino learn from thee of life. But the wild birds .
" about thee, and vines shall hide
thee from view. Thy gable shall be the haunt of bats. Trees shalt erawd against thy fallen walls.
For thy time too shall come. Thy days shall not be prolonged forever.


MEHR LICHT!
If a final touch were needed, then, in Foch’s death, it has been supplied,
to demonstrate that science is driving the ghosts of glory from the field
of arms. On Flanders fields behold the regimented hosts of men too young
to die. Behold them swept away. The fields are fairer where they pour
out the last full measure of patriotic devotion. But Marshal Foch, who
commanded ten million men engaged in five simultaneous battles along
a front of three hundred miles in 1918, when he was already sixty-seven,
lives on as the master strategist—to die of senility ten years later, as prosaically as any citizen Jacques in the humblest arrondissement. The
great memorials of his career are not of his death, but of how he, already
an aged man, could send hundreds of thousands of men to death here, and
equal numbers there, to hold his lines and write a page or two of history
in the weird annals of mankind. The ensuing peace rankled exceedingly
Veterans of field and forum fell into lugubrious disputes as to who caused
the war and who really brought about victory. The World War therefore
fell short of success as a war ending war and making democracy secure.
Hence war we shall have again, sculptors may as well prepare pedestals
now for heroes who will soon claim them for their effigies. Nevertheless,
the day will dawn when their chisels will have a more imaginative theme
when they deal with Mars, and when heroes of steel and iron and t-n-t
will be prt to rest in the classics with Jove and his javelins, Caesar and his
chariots, Alexander and Bucephalus.
Humble as we are, yet we dare, in noticing the occasion of the passing
Marshal Foch, master hero of the world’s most heroic epoch of carnage,
to say that war is obsolescent right now; that this world will find other
ways of retaining in youth the attributes of manhood, and so, in the fullness of time, will make war obsolete. To hold otherwise is to despair of
human progress, and vainly controvert even the rules of physics: for as
men continue exercising their faculties in research on the problem of war,
these faculties will expand in scope until they encompass the solution of
war.
Mehr lichi! cried Goethe, and his light will shine to illuminate our dark
ways of life long after the flames of war have been snuffed out. It will
be science that makes war too terrible to endure. The first law of life will
at last assert its privy dominion over the affairs of men, and parliaments
will sit whose envoys sign open covenants worth something more than the
current pound price of old paper: worth indeed the honor of the nations,
felt then to be better preserved in the unbroken word than in the dispatching west of hordes of conscripts. For if France gives Foch a national funeral,
the apogee of the people’s commendation, which he deserves, Hugo had
one, Pasteur had one. To vision war dead by its own implacable hand
is not to dream of Utopia, it is merely to put the bench and the !
law
ler
above the bludgeon and the blunderbuss. The latter
weapons, the former a rational refinement of man’e
V,
ferce is called violence, and begins to be judged
dissipated,” said Hugo, on the centenr:
EN
rational conclusion of a conflict istupenepisode, Foch’s dashing ar
2, who inspired
dous cost. Not so leaon a son of martial
the popular seself that war confronted
France
surn, as the Germans did, rally
hast defense will inevitably be broken.
pher’s cry echoes forever in the human heart,
with the retreating drums. Mehr licht!
WE "TAN" SEE IT COMING
By mandamus, the insular auditor has been hailed before the supreme
court by Tan C. Tee, contractor for seven units of the Iloilo marginal wharf,
and told by the court to certify that funds for the work are available, if
he matter are ministhey are, and sign on the de
rector to say who is
terial, not discretional: it is


the lowest responsible bidder: moreover, and as against what the auubelieved, acceptance of a bid on a job is not, the court holds, a contract.
An offer is made, this offer is accepted, still it is not a contract, and the time
for the auditor to perform his merely ministerial function concerning funds
available for the job, which fact the law enjoins it upon him to certify, is
when the formal agreement, later to be signed by the contracting parties,
is drawn up and sent to his office in proper form for the certificate to issue.
But the court takes occasion to say that whereas decisions of the
auditor are binding on the executive, when not reversed by the secretary
of war, they are not binding on the courts; numerous precedents are cited
and the statement made that by a series of decisions the authority of the
auditor has been materially modified from what it once was. It is, therefore, timely to inquire if the islands aren’t getting away from safe financial
anchorage, and into dangerous waters which they have not sounded and
where pilots will be required. Checkmating the auditor may be a fine
show, but it’s a costly one. Shall we not soon arrive, at the rate we are
going, at the time when special agents will come out to Manila to administer
the proceeds of our government loans, and contractors in their good graces
will come along with them? This, right now, is the humiliating and costly
experience of ten several countries in South America. The difference
between our present credit and theirs is about 50% in our favor. As this
largely comes about through the powers the insular auditor has had heretofore but seems to have no longer, if Congress wishes to do us a friendly
act it will redefine without further delay the powers it intends the auditor
shall exercise. The auditor’s original powers were none too great. The
government that has so radically curtailed them has already written jinis
to its independence of its creditors.
SUGGESTIONS
As soon as the government gets around to advertising the islands, the
tourist traffic will become important. To spend a matter of $10,000 a
year with two or three of the Big Seven magazines—Harper’s, Atlantic,
Review of Reviews, World’s Work, Scribner’s, Century and Golden Book—
would do it. To this end the Ayuntamiento should be converted into a
permanent museum and art exhibit, with its courts, two spacious ones
devoted to orchids and ferns. For a time at least, offices could remair
housed on the upper floor, or part of it, but immediate steps in the utiliza
tion of the lower floor, particularly Marble Hall, should secure this buile
ing forever to the uses of art and history. Functions, such as banquets,
interfering with this purpose should be held elsewhere. Going farther
the government should take a leaf from Java’s ledger and designate
entity to mark specifically historical buildings in Manila, which shot
shen not be destroyed save by official consent. Proper memorial tabl
thould be placed on them. The cooperation of the monasteries should
obtained, that proper historical notes in English inscribed on tablets t
placed in all the monastery churches, the chapel of the Clare nuns, anc
the Cathedral. Fort Santiago might come in on this. Then there’s th
beach question. Manila lacks a first class beach in her immediate en
virons, but has one half an hour away on the Cavite road, where the su
is all anyone could desire and the bottom shelving sand. Here a suitabi
pavilion should be built and a concession let, when thousands of Manilaj
as well as tourists with either no time nor means for Baguio, would patron
the place as one of healthful seashore recreation. There is ample par'
space. Cavite might well share the expense of this project, for the pri'
of maintaining a market there. No wonder tourist ships come and
between daylight and dark, for we keep concealed or only half acc
all the wonders and pleasures we have to offer. This costs us mon
the natural disappointment of many hundreds of visitors. WI
formerly said about Mehan Gardens we don’t repeat. It stands wit
is now added. It is time for the government to be practical abo
tourist trade and the pleasure and comfort and health of the city.
DR. QUEZON
We are able sometimes to disagree with the senate president y
grudging him the doctorate in law conferred upon him by the Uni'
of the Philippines. We heartily congratulate him, and the univers
well. The incident marks another step in scholastic progress here, al
appropriately coupled with similar honors for a woman, an educa
girls, Miss Librada Avelino, founder of Centro Esco"
cannot be gainsaid. They will conduce to the ends
tion in the islands and to men’s and women’s
maters. They at once dignify the institution


chetie interest.
nto uncontrollable sobs
nd stampings of feet,
wri
a
 but remonstrate firmly,
neighbors, child! They
t
hereupon she stopped
er tear-stained eyes upon him
1 hoarsely: “No, no neighbors!
dy
where I am, nobody...
ds joined in pitiful imploraMr. Alloss? Good Mr.
m
yon
st tell me how!” He
r, beside her. She threw
from her shoulders. The
was intense. Then she
 in a broken stammer:
away from home.” He said
ru
gan to stroke her arm.
She was not the first,
aw
away from home! Many
home. He knew. He edged
e
said, "wants me to marry
at
n. .. old Eusebio... and he
be
a't! He beats me, Mr.
at him through eyes splashed
He withdrew his hand
ep
a child! Unconsciously
, ready to fight. And
w, was that brute of
he w
t fit be mentioned?
ry blue flames. “He
He beat my mother, too;
I for more than a year.
arket, not far from Lady
eep
u always buy your bananas.
S, Mr. Alloss.” She put
f to her eyes. “He is
imp
do not know what to do
at he said that I must
use this morning and...
O.
-I could not. I know old
early this morning I
stall in the market and
ed
lloss! You are a good
e no one but Mariano,
boat will not be in until
weethe
wanted to hide so that
till he comes. You will
ely?
he said, scratching his
uncommonly hot in the
y
self with the fringed scarf,
h you, Mr. Alloss. Just
me
il Mariano comes back. Ill
one must know. Oh,
ease! I cannot go
yot
AyEN
lave pity on me, have pity
I hid in the trees.
n had gone down
mI
shing, I ran in here."
en you come in?'
"E
for her answer.
He surely was in
at on the locker,
lexi
thick drops
 white brow.
do for the poor child?
an Wg
head for ideas.
y room,
1 o
il stove; like
g ignored
ulong, and
ng
e
e said when the
stove got quiet. Eat first, and the thoughts
e trooping, someone had said once. “Here,
erican chow. Come, it
na, this is good
will do you good.” She fell to with the easy
appetite of the young. But Mr. Alloss was far
too upset to eat. He kept on scratching his
glossy bald pate and wondered and wondered
how the devil he would get out of this.
For under no circumstances must she be seen,
either at his house or coming out of it; under no
circumstances. Mr. Alloss knew what he meant
when he laid no claim to sanctity. Ha hanad na
one had seen her come in, he ho
Lord! Now it was up to him see .
one saw her go out.

FTISAMAER
8
IN RESP


ue beard
nd reps ex. t; and with a twist of his plump
red the loor. The lock creaked and
n ted, it had been unused for years. But
ed it must be; someone might drop in,
L histon, Kittredge, a neighbor; he could take
no chances.
At the tiny sink she was standing now, cleaning up after the meal, placing pots and pans on
their shelf on the wall. She had removed her
scraf and the gauzy hempcloth of the tight
bodice more revealed than concealed the youthful
form. The firm shoulders, spanned with glowing golden silk. The tiny curl on the round,
strong nape. The arms, dimpled and young.
Mr. Alloss standing there by the door saw her
now as she really was. No, no longer a child—
a young woman. In a flash he saw that he must
not remain here any longer; and in the same flash
he saw a way out of the dilemma.
Not a saint, Mr. Alloss was yet a man of
honor.
With a swift motion he took from its nail


the battered Stetson hat, gra
u. CM perADIV
from the back of a chair. Ou.
haps from sheer perturbation, he picked up the
now empty market basket. She, intent upon
her work and otherwise too much engrossed in
her own matters, took no notice of him, and he
had to go to her. Very lightly, very tenderly he
touched the plump shoulder. She spun around,
facing him with surprise. “Ihave to go to town,
girlie,” he said, eyes fastened on the Stetson in
his hand “I. . . I forgot . .. I have an important
engagement.” But she looked at him, uncomprehending. So he said it once more, and
slowly her eves began to fill. He patted her
hand and made her listen to him as he rambled
on in a husky, subdued voice: “Be sure no one
sees you when you come out of here—except
Mariano. He knows me, you say? Well, I’ll
write him a letter. He will understand."
He wiped his forehead. How hard it was to
make her understand! “So you see, little
woman, you stay here . . stay right here! And
leave the door well locked! Two days and


Mobiloil Prices Increased
20 Centavos Per Gallon
Effective April 1, 1929
The prices of crudes from which Mobiloil
is manufactured have been advanced seven
times, approximately 33)4%, during the past
twelve months. This, combined with the higher
cost of producing the New Mobiloil by improved
refining processes, demands a slight increase in
the retail prices of the various grades.
The New Mobiloil has resulted in service
performance that has created a most favorable
impression with motorists.
Considering the fact that a 42-gallon barrel
of crude oil yields only 4.3 per cent (approximately 2 gallons) of high-grade lubricating oil,
Twenty Centavos per gallon is a moderate
increase indeed.
GARCOng
VPDDTRA
Mobiloil
Mahe the chart yowr guiss
The World's Quality Oil
ACOOI OIL CONa


ILOTLO


NEW YORK, U. S. A.
MANILA



SS MENTE


MBEl


rong; then
wi 16.
“And. .. ana, he sputtered as she wrung his
hands in gratitude, “here is chow for you—
enough; and on the shelf are some magazines
to look at.”
“But what about you, Mr. Alloss?” She
queried as he drew nearer to the door. "What
do you mean—you go away?”
“I must! I absolutely must!”
Before him, under the scorching midday sun,
lay the road; and nowhere a sign of anyone.
They were all taking their siestas. Blessed
siesta! They would not see him go to town at
this inordinate hour. He did not want anyone
to know that he was not also taking his siesta.
Safely in town, he first went to the post office.
Slowly, painfully, unobserved, he wrote the


let r
mailedit,-
way for Johnny’s bar. For sha.
honorable way to get out of the dil.
would get drunk—gloriously or inglorious. It
did not matter. Plenty of beer and n je
tuba would put him just where he wanted ! e.
He’d remain there all afternoon; and in he
evening, when the sailors would come on shoreleave, he would start a fight. Easy enough
with the beer and the tuba in him. He would
make it a lively fight, they would take him to
the police station, and he would refuse to be
bailed out even if his barrio friends, hearing
of it, were financially able to offer bail, which he
much doubted. So he would have to spend
the night there two nights, this being Saturday.
Mariano would be back on Monday.
It worked fine.



.
Fought the Waterworks
How the ligbalang"
(Continued from page 9)


But the laborers soon lost courage, for every
night they were harassed by the matanda sa
punso, and frequently the tigbalang appeared.
Many were the strange and frightful happenings.
The laborers began leaving, surreptitiously at
first, and then openly. Don Sebastian grew
very wroth. I, Senor, never lost faith in him;
so great was my admiration for him that I would
have faced death in his service. Juan Jaralar
is not a coward, Senor; I was young then,
the hot blood of youth and adventure was in my
veins. Besides, Senor, it is doubtful if the wrath
of the spirits could have been as bad as that
of Don Sebastian.
One day Don Sebastian called me to the
creat house at the edge of the bondok where
he then lived, and I sat facing him on the veranda even as I now face you, Senor; and after
he had spoken of other things, he said to me:
Juan, do you trust me?
"Absolutely, Don
Sebastian,” I answered.
“But there are those who do not, eh?”
“They are afraid of the spirits."
He nodded, and for a long time was silent;
lost in contemplation of the great difficulties
which faced him. Finally he arose and looked


at me frowningly, and I could feel the power of
his spirit as he spoke.
“And you, Juan, are you afraid?”
I knew not what to say, Senor. Of course
every sensible man is afraid of evil spirits. One
would be a fool to deny that. And, anvway, it
was useless to lie to Don Sebastian; for by looking in a man’s eyes he could tell whether or not
he was speaking the truth.
“It is well known that there is danger, Don
Sebastian,” I said. Then I arose and looked in the
great man’s eyes, and he knew that I would not run
away like those others. Laying a hand on my
shoulder, he said: “Juan, you are a brave man.
Ah, Senor, I know not his exact meaning to this
day, but that was the proudest moment of my life.
“Come then, Juan,” he commanded, "and tell
me more of these evil spirits, and of how they
frighten my laborers."
And so, there on the veranda of the great
house, I told Don Sebastian of the anger of the
spirits of the bondok and how they were attacking
the laborers at night, and how they were determined to avenge themselves upon those who
were destroying the great rock of San Juan del
Monte, which has been the home of the tigbalang


 Suing of tiin
spirits would bring misfortune ithe chhurand even the children’s children oi all who wero
engaged in the carving out of the chamber
For the evil spirits never forget, Senor.
For a long time after I finished telling Don
Sebastian of the evil spirits he sat silent, and I
wondered if he, too, was afraid of the tigbalang;
but at last he arose and made the sign of the
cross, and I could see that he was not afraid.
Then he addressed me, saying: "Juan, I do not
fear these spirits. They will not harm me, nor
those who help me carve the chamber in the
rock. Heed you well my words. Tomorrow,
after the siesta, there will occur a rainstorm,
and a bolt of lightning will destroy that tree."
He pointed to a huge sampalok tree which
stood at a distance of some fifty meters from
the house.
“Go you to the laborers and tell them of my
words; tell them that I do not fear the evil
spirits. Say to them that the evil spirits are
jealous, but that they cannot harm us, because
this project is pleasing in the sight of God. An
tell them that the destruction of the sampale
tree is the sign by which they may know tha
good spirits, more powerful than those of th
bondok, are helping us in our work."
So I went to the laborers and told them th
words Don Sebastian had bidden me. Man
of them scoffed, saying: “How can Don Seba
tian, being but a man, foretell the time an
place a lightning bolt will strike? If he can o
this, then he too must be a sorcerer, or witch.
But I explained to them that the good Don
bastian had but prayed for the lightning
strike the great sampalok tree, and that
fulfilment of his prophecy would be merely a
sign that God was pleased with the work in which
we were all engaged.
There was much muttering among the laborers, but their curiosity was aroused, and they at
last agreed to stay and see if the words of cur
master came true, and if so, to continue ti
work.
Don Sebastian went down to the sampalok
tree at sunset, carrying strange looking bags,
and candles. Far into the night he knelt pray

MRSS RAIL


REDUCED


Effective April 15, 1929, this Company will reduce its
rates on Fresh Vegetables when handled on Express trains, in
less than carload lots, from second class to third class, or a
reduction of about 19 per cent in the transportation cost.
TEA RALROADCONANL


RTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNAI


Mis sions in Old "Distrito del Princip


The old San Juan reservoir which figures in the
story concluded below has become antiquated, with the
development of Manila’s modern water system, but
remains of peculiar historical interest.—The grilles cap
the ventilators.—The large building was, in earlicr years,
the offices of the water administration.
ing beneath the tree. Many of us watched him
from a distance, but none venture near, for they
were afraid that perhaps he, too, was in league
with evil spirits. Finally, at a very late hour,
we all fell asleep. In the morning the laborers
all gathered about the plaza of the temporary
village, and anxiously awaited the rain and the
lightning bolt which our master had promised
as a sign. And as truly as I sit before you,
Senor, at midday clouds began to appear. At
about the fourth hour in the afternoon, the rain
began to fall, and there was thunder and lightning. Then, suddenly, a great sheet of flame
shot up from the sampalok tree, and there was a
deafening explosion. The great tree was thrown
high in the air, and torn intofragments. And
though most of us were much frightened, we
did not run away, but fell to our knees and
prayed. Then the great Don Sebastian came
out and, kneeling in the rain before the great
house, gave thanks to God for the sign which
had restored the faith of the people.
Thus was the confidence of the people in Don
Sebastian reestablished and made absolute. Those
who had left, returned to their work; still constantly harassed by the tigbalang and the matanda
sa punso, they continued steadily, until at
last, in the year 1883, their task was finished.
The great tube was laid from the foot of
the chamber down to the fountain of Carriedo,
in Manila. Then pure water from the mountains was let in until it filled the twenty-four
galleries of the great chamber, and the work of
the great Don Sebastian was done.
There was a great fiesta in Manila, a fiesta
which none of us who were employed by Don
Sebastian will ever forget. There was a very
magnificent parade, Senor, headed by the Arzobispo and the Gobernador General. The Arzobispo himself turned the spigot of the fountain, and blessed the pure water as it sprang forth,
the water which was ever to supply the people
of Manila in the seasons of dryness.
Ah ves, it was a proud day, Senor. The
great Don Sebastian sat in the carriage with the
Director de Aguas,—there were no automobiles
then, Senor, and our master made a speech, and
praised all of us who had helped him build the
chamber. There was plenty for all to eat and
to drink; we all gave thanks to God. Much
honor was conferred upon the Director de Aguas
and upon Don Sebastian.
Thus, Senor, was built the great water system
which should really have been called the Aguas
Don Sebastian, bet which was named the Aguas
Carriedos, in honor of a great man who died
long ago, and who left money to pay the expenses of the work. The people of Manila
should thank Don Sebastian, rather than this
other man, for only he could have succeeded in
completing so great a task. But many strange
and frightful things have happened in the bondok
since the completion of the Aguas Carriedos,
Senor. The evil spirits are still angry, and they
still strive to avenge themselves upon the descendants of the builders of the chamber of
waters, who destroyed their home. And of
these things also will I tell you, Senor, some day
when you have an hour to waste in listening to
an old man’s tale. They shall be all true tales,
Senor, for I do not beleve in the superstitions
of the ignorant folk; and I tell only of the things
which I have seen with my own two eyes. Adios,
Senor. May you walk with God.


Of Baler, in the old political division of north,
eastern Luzon called the Distrito del Principewe talked last month, telling of the vain siege
the Spanish garrison sustained there long after
the change of sovereignty over the islands had
occurred. The journey with the Franciscan
mission priests may now be continued through
the other towns of the district.
Casiguran.—Founded by Fr. Blas Palomino
and his companion missionaries in 1609. First
parish priest, Fr. Pascual Serrano, 1616. Administration ceded to the Recollects, 1658, “because of the great scarcity of religious in our
province of St. George the Great,” Father
Huerta says, our readers all understanding, of
course, that to the Franciscans the Philippines
are the province of St. George. Returned to
the Franciscans by the Recollects, 1703. Situated on the east coast of Luzon at Cape San
Ildefonso, mountain border of Isabela on the
north, Dipaculao on the south, Casignan south

west and the Caraballo range west. The church,
ledicated to San Antonio de Padua, the great
healer, is of mixed materials. Good timber
abounds.
“It is not easy to estimate the area of land
pertaining to this pueblo, surrounded as it i
(Huerta wrote in 1865) with infidel inhabitant
which is the reason why few explorers havisited it. But all the religious, whether fe
or many, have penetrated the jungle in an effo
to reduce to the Christian faith the infidel tribe
and all affirm in one accord that these mou
tains so generously irrigated by numero
streams, produce all that may be produced fre
the most fertile lands in the world. The co
is a secure harbor even for vessels of the deepe
draft, and the entrance to the harbor is in
wise dangerous of navigation.”
The rich region which Huerta thus describes
still remains but little developed, but unquestionably it cannot be long before its variation


Make More Money—Put
I hese Machines On The Job.


Macleod Batch 9-Minute Concrete Mixer


Modern conditions require speed.
Man power is slow and expensive.
Macleod Hoist and Concretemixer
will handle your heavy loads and
mix your concrete quickly and economically.
Send for Complete Information
Macieod oz Co.


Iloilo


MANILA
Cebu


Davac


Aacleod Hoist


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION


R OF COMMERCE JOURNA


of soil,
probable
ninc-al resources
will, in conjunction
with its salubrious clinate, attract the atention of enterprising
rmers and planters.
esently, luring the
rious traveler, the
ole region islittle adnced from the primal conditions which
Franciscans found
re in 1609, only
years after the
nding of Jamesm.
)ipaculao.—Founded
1719 by Fr. Sebastian de la Madre de
Dios, who was then
the parish priest at
Baler. Patron, San Jose. “Enjoys a cool and healthful climate and
lands suitable for crops of all kinds. It is supplied with water from numerous perennial springs, pure and crystaline. Several times, the missionary fathers have contrived to build churches of bamboo and palm,
which only lasted while the fathers remained in the pueblo; as soon as
hey absented themselves even for a day, the people themselves tore the
burches down.” Fr. Jose de Esparragosa gathered 300 people at the
isslon in 1851, but they did not remain there after he was called away
 other work, and the mission was again placed under the jurisdiction of
he parish of Baler.
Why should the people of such a rich region so sparsely inhabited,
have cared to settle down in little pueblos? They cared rather to fish and
hunt, as men anywhere would have under similar circumstances.
Huerta speaks repeatedly of the abundance of game in the mountains
ind the excellence and abundance of fish along the entire coast.
Casignan.—Founded in 1753 by Fr. Manuel de Olivencia; erected into
parish in 1761, with Fr. Francisco Ferreras as priest. “It is situated in a
nall valley eastward of the Caraballo de Baler, on the banks of the large
ver which gives it its name."
Patron, San Vicente.
So closes the account of the missions in the Distrito del Principe, Baler,
asiguran, Dipaculao, Casignan, with total inhabitants of but 2,957 in
865, and only 690 tribute payers.
Between this district and Laguna bay, was created the Distrito de la
yanta, in 1856, from territory theretofore pertaining to Laguna. It
cluded the island of Polillo. The sea was its eastern boundary, Tayabas
as on the south, Laguna on the west. The Franciscan missions were
Polillo and Binangonan.
Fr. Esteban Ortiz raised the cross aloft at Binangonan de Lampon,
but Fr. Blas Palomino was the founder of the pueblo, in 1609, and the first
parish priest. From 1658 to 1703 Binangonan was under the Recollects,
then it was returned to the Franciscans. Baler is on the north, the island
and town of Polillo on the east, Mauban on the south, and Siniloan 20
miles across the mountains to the southwest. The pueblo is built on the
banks of the Agos near its confluence with the Pacific opposite Polillo.
The common means of communication with neighboring towns, all
stant, is by sea; in calm weather, Polillo is reached from Binangonan in
ght hours; land ways, in 1865, were confined to the single precipitous trail
ver the mountains to Siniloan, 24 miles away “To reach Mauban it is
ecesealy te — by sea (the distance is 60 miles) and the voyage is verv
tangerous or quite impossible during the period from October to March
that of the northeast monsoon, constantly lashing the Pacific coast)-
o reach Baler (the distance here is 81 miles) to the risks of the coastal
royage are added the necessity to make no intermediate stops, because of
he infidels inhabiting the region.” So it is an error to suppose the friars
eglected to venture into the remote and isolated parts of the islands.
ather it should be said that they went everywhere it was possible to go,
id they established and maintained missions in places where the task
is all but hopeless.
Huerta records Binangonan as primarily a grazing and forest region;
lere are many varieties of palms, rattans and edible roots, and game
ounds.
Polillo.—On the island of that name, opposite Binangonan de Lampon.
ade a parish in 1635; in the hands of the Recollects from 1658 to 1703;
atron, San Jose; church and parish house of stone. “The jurisdiction of
he pueblo is extensive with the island, which is quite mountainous, with
le Malolo valley cutting through the center.” Products are of many
arieties, the mountains are heavily forested and yield hardwoods, rattans
d bamboos. In Huerta’s time the cultivated lands were producing rice,
rn, sugar cane, cotton, cacao, coffee, fruits and legumes. Industries were
ree, farming, fishing and hunting. The market towns were Mambulao
id Paracale, Camarines Norte, where truck, timbers and rattans from
olillo were exchanged for gold dust.
Next comes the Distrito de Burias, comprising Burias island, where
'tolonel Stimson went on the Apo to enjoy the last politico-piscatorial
p he made in the islands. (He -aid he wished to persuade Speaker Roxas
o give up trolling, for the rod aLuzon is on the north and east,
Masbate south; the straits are 
miles wide. The surface
f the island is quite broken. Mo
the center. Up to
ns utilized
845 Burias was reckoned uninhab
as a place of rendezvous; it was th.


The Manila Archdiocese
The Archdiocese was established as
a Diocese in 1581 and as an Archdiocese
in 1585, and has been in continuous
existence since that time. It includes
the city of Manila, seven provinces and
a part of two other provinces comprising a total of 9,276 square miles. It
has a Catholic population of 1,450,000
a larger Catholic population that that
of the Archdiocese of either New York
City or Chicago. Within the Archdiocese there are 188 churches and 62
colleges, academies and schools with
15,300 students. Among the educational and charitable institutions are
the University of Santo Tomas, established in 1611, Santa Catalina College for Girls, founded in 1698, and a
hospital, San Juan de Dios, founded in
1596.


Precision


Efficiency


Courtesy


ELLOTRIO LTCTA
Al LOWCSSA


For lighting homes, haciendas,
centrals or small towns


SASARS


10 KW
115 VOLT


Call or write us for information
concerning lighting units
Philippine Engineering Co.
Sole Distributors
936 Raon, Manila Tel. 2-23-05
P. O. Box 786


RESPONDING TO ADVERI


ON   


The Manila Stock Market During March
By W. P. G. Elliorr


Generally speaking, the close of the month
witnessed a healthier financial tone than was
apparent at the end of February. To begin
with, the shortage in money referred to in our
last issue has practically disappeared, and banks
are now all buyers of foreign exchanges, instead
of sellers, indicative of the liberal cash reserves.
The Tariff.—The status quo remains unaltered.
The advance guard of the Philippine mission to
fight the question of tariffs and all restrictions
on importations of islands products has already
left for Washington, and it should be gratifying
to all concerned here to note the sympathetic
interest being displayed by so many chambers of
commerce and trade organizations in the U. S. A
towards the Philippine side of the argument.
Such bodies as the Merchants’ Association in
New York, the American Exporters and Importers Association, the Los Angeles Chamber of
Commerce, and others have all gone on record
as vigorously opposing the Timberlake resolution and other restrictive measures against
Philippine products.
Customs Receipts.—The gross customs collections for February this year at all ports of the
Philippines amounted to P1,671,992.06, an
increase of P94,380.67 over February of last
year. But the internal revenue receipts for all
borts were P241,345.82, against P407,501.56
for the corresponding month in 1928, a crop of
₱166,155.74.
Stocks and Shares.—There was a steady business in all sections of securities, with the exception of sugars, which are completely neglected,
and sales aggregated 21,600 shares.
Banks.—Hongkong banks were placed at
$1292 to $1285 and values have declined to
$1260. Mercantile Bank’s changed hands at
₱P44 and China Bank’s at P87, with sellers asking P90 for large lots. Bank of P. I. are wanted at P165. The Chartered Bank have recommended a dividend for the past half-year at


the rate of 14% p. a., free of income tax and a
bonus of ¿-7643 per share, free of income tax.
E40,000 is set aside to meet contingencies and
E186,656 carried forward.
Insurances.—Unions of Canton were traded in
freely at $387 and Hongkong Fires were placed
at 3800. Filipinas, Insular Life and Philippine
Guaranty are firm, buyers at P3,100, ₱310
and P3i0 respectively.
Sugars.—Trading in sugar shares was exceptionally dull, which is not surprising, in view of
the depressed state of the industry. The old
issue (P1000) Pilars went at par; these are now
split un into P100 certificates. Pasudeco’s
were taken at P45 at which more can be had.
The Hawaiian Philippine Company have issued
their report for the vear ending 30th September
1928. The net profit for the year was P1,013-
667.42, which was P617,323.20 less than the
previous year. Surplus at P3,979,461.39 is
now about equal to capital stock, P3,948,560.
Carlota’s were sold at P235. Central Luzon’s
at P150 Malabon’s at P30 and Tarlac’s at P170.
The Malabon company declared a 10% dividend
for 1928.
Plantations.—Polo’s are now held at P500
and the plantation paid a 5% dividend for 1928.
Pamplona’s are wanted and P85 would probably
be paid. Prospects for both these plantations
are said to be very good.
Industrials.—There was a large turnover in
La Urbana 8o liberadas, at P200 and Philippine Education preferred were taken at ₱103.
The Isuan corporation announced that they
have deferred payment of the semi-annual dividend on the 7% preferred stock until some later
date. They have spent during 1928 the sum
of P156,000 on advertising and P39,000 on new
plant and machinery. They look for increased
business for some time and remind stockholders
that as all dividends are comulative, this semiannual dividend will be paid in addition to all


future dividends.
Mines.—There was again a fair buying interest
shown in these mining shares. Benguet’s
changed hands at the advanced price of P2.75
with still buvers. The company had a successful year, finishing up with a net profit of P1,236
074.16. Balatok’s were traded in on a larg
scale at P2.40 to P2.45, and at the close ther
are no further sellers. Prospects for this con
pany seem bright; a clean-up of P82,000 u
reported for 17 days operation. The shareho'
ers at the annual general meeting decided
postpone till the next meeting the proposition
merge with Benguet. Itogon’s on small tra
sactions were placed at ₱10. This company
also has good prospects, operating profit for
1928 being ₱149,163.25, compared with
₱42,442.02 for 1927.
Bonds.—The demand continues for all first
class bonds. During the month fair quantitie
of Tarlac’s 8% were placed at par, and a largparcel of Carlota’s 8% changed hands at ₱1,020
plus interest.
New York Market.—As we go to press, cables
in from New York report the stock market there
collapsed, with call-money pushed up to 20%,
and heavy waves of selling orders pouring in
from all over the country—sales reported over
eight million in one day. Prices appear to have
dropped 10 to 30 points, although a partial
recovery took place later. This state of affo:-
has been looked for some time, and specul:
who have been caught in the avalanche hay
only themselves to blame. Until the marke
shakes itself free from the effects of the churning
process now going on, the only sensible course
appears to be to look on and stand prepared to
reenter the market later on at a lower and safer
basis. Undoubtedly, there will be lots of goc
bargains available shortly. Buying outrigh
for cash has recently become a fashion in Ner
York, especially with small investors, and suc
purchases increased 100% in 1928. This
partly accounted for by the larger margins no
required by brokers.


HE VVIE EMRESS OF TEMOfiO


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE
QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


CANADIAN
14-16 CALLE DAVID


PACIFIC


STEAMSHIPS
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN CHAMP


OF COMMERCE JOURN.


Davao Damned With Neglect


William H. Gohn, pioneer and prosperous
lanter of Davao, has been up to Manila, and
he Journal has been in conversation with him
pout the port situation there. The situation,
seems, is very discouraging and costly; the
vernment’s flare of anxiety to build Davao a
r for ocean steamers has subsided until it
ms by way of dying out altogether, as it has
eady reached that dwindling degree of real
erest manifest in the repetition of assurances.
"Some three years ago,” Gohn told us, “construction of a concrete pier was begun at Davao.
portion of the pier approach about 9 meters
vide and 90 long has been completed; it is about
20 meters off shore, and as an aid to shipping is
ractically useless except in the loading and unading of lighters. It connects with shore by
means of the portion of the old wooden approach
still standing, and a contract has been let to
replace this wooden structur with a stone causeway. The contract period s 40" days, and work
began in January. The causeway partly completed, out will have to come the wooden structure, the use of the approach will be stopped;
after four years of waiting, when this causeway
s completed we will only have an approach
o a projected pier extending into 32 feet of water.
“If the pier including the head were completed
it would be none too large to accommodate
e shipping this year, estimated at 350 tons
aily.
“Various technical objections are made to
going ahead with the work. One is that even
if there were a pier at Davao ocean vessels
couldn’t use it during the southwest monsoon.
have never known a time when the harbor was
o rough for an interisiander to tie up at the old
ooden pier, provided the pier was not too rotten
 hold it. It is also said that the harbor would
lt in around the new pier so much in a year or
vo that steamers could no longer dock. The
d wooden pier was built in 1909, when there was
depth of 19 feet, and today the depth is 15
eet; silting has amounted to 4 feet in 22 years.


“It is generally believed the public works
bureau has done everything possible to advance
the port works at Davao, but has been blocked
in its effoits by politics and wire-pulling. Small
launches of from 5 to 15 tons capacity numbering
upward of 30 ply Davao gulf the year round,
and the Luzon Stevedoring company tow lighters
around the coast with small launches. All these
small vessels load and unload at the wooden
pier the year round, often work day and night.
If such small shipping can use the pier, interislanders and larger ocean ships could surely
use a new substantial one.
"Davao requires a pier for her growing commerce. Interislanders have been severely criticized for slow and inefficient service, but they
are so many years in advance of the poit works
in many important harbors that the goverpment
ought not be too severe until it catches up with
them.
‘The total overseas trade of Davao in 1928
was P13,752,805, of which P927,255 was imports and P12,835,550 was exports. Thisought
to show how important a good pier at Davao is
to Manila.
“Davao’s production of Manila hemp last
year increased 63% over 1927; it amounted to
38,000,000 kilos and was 22% of the islands
entire crop. To the value of P11,683,750 it
was shipped overseas direct or on through bills
of lading. Davao’s copra pioduction last year
increased 51% over 1927 it was 6,900,000
kilos of which 5,656,564 kilos valued at PI,
063,675 were exported direct or on through bills
of lading. Timber and lumber exports, a new
indastry in Davao, totalled 4,345 cubic feet
valued at P80,210. All other exports were
valued at P7,915. Davao, in overseas trade,
is the fourth port of the Philippines by a wide
margin. The expectation is that our hemp crop
this year will be 25% in excess of that of 1928,
and the copra crop 35% over that of 1928.
Although the hemp market was unusually low
during 1928, still Davao registered a favorable


trade balance of P11,908,295.” In other words,
Manila is interested in Davao’s getting an
adequate pier to the extent at least of this 12
mullion pesos, which, not spent for imports directly from overseas, is nevertheless spent. But
provide Davao a good pier, and soon she will
be buying by the 20 million instead of 12.
It ought to be possible for a Manilan to visit
the provinces and not be ashamed of the manner
in which they are being neglected. Gohn
invites attention to the fact that the Davao
resident pays all the excessive cost of a pierless
harbor. Cargoes are frequently water damaged,
and the interislanders are subjected to heavy
claims; and cargoes are carried ashore on men s
backs, which causes losses and delays of sometimes 3 or 4 days. “The Davao producer, who
is the consumer of imports, must bear all the
expense caused by the lack of portworks, whether or not is incoming or outgoing cargo. The
expense on a bale of hemp, including the freight
differential, is P1.20 at present."


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By M. D. ROYER
Traffic Manager, Manila Railroad Company


The following commodities were received in
Manila February 26, 1929, to March 25, 1929,
both inclusive, via Manila Railroad:
1929


March
206,625
Rice, cavans...........
516,768
Sugar, piculs...........
360
Tobacco, bales..........
131,500
Copra, piculs...........
Coconuts.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,725,800
318,600
Lumber, B.F...........
Desiccated coconuts, cases........... 16,810


February
272,500
584,752
240
186,100
2,186,800
434,700
20,664


Then there’s the Scotch couple who,
expecting the stork, moved into the
country, where there is R. F. D.


 you lack pep and energy—
you are dull and listless—
a you cannot concentrate

It s Your Movel
The fault may rest with your diet, if so
Discard those heavy indigestible meals and
(1) Eat sparingly of meat—
(2) Let fresh vegetables and ripe fruit form the bulk of your diet
(3) And, above all, drink plenty of rich nourishing
BEAR BRAND
NATURAL MILK


The Ideal Milk for the Tropics—
being the sterilized product of the
world’s finest cows fed on the
verdant pastures of Emmenthal
Valley, Switzerland!


SOLD EVERYWHERE IN
LARGE AND SMALL CANS


The
Bill


Timberlake
Will Pass......


AWAY


So . . . . . go ahead and enjoy


RODERIBOINS
SCOTCH WHISKY


There is a lot of real pleasure
in it.


Served at the bar.


KUENZLE & SIRElFr, Inc.
Exclusive Distributors
Tel. 2-39-36
343 T. Pinpin


RESPONDING TO ADVF


SEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


--omely Virtues
To this department come from time
to time accounts of incidents which
have happened elsewhere than in the
Philippines; they tell of little tragedies
that ordinary attention to life insurance
would have averted, and we are going
to use some of them because they are as
applicable here as they are in any other
part of the world. But it is by no means
necessary to go outside the Philippines,
or even outside Manila, to turn up the
dire consequences of the neglect of
insurance. Example:
A man died recently in Manila with
whom things had been going the wrong
way for some years. His ordinary
assets were encumbered, the clean-up
went to his creditors. He had had
insurance, but payments were behind.
His dependents were left with nothing
at all. This man’s circumstances were
such that he might have kept up his
insurance; no doubt he intended to get
round todoing it; he was in robust health,
there really seemed plenty of time; but
there was not plenty of time, an acute
intestinal attack carried him off within a
few hours after the first symptoms
appeared. His policy was examined.
It was still in force!
The hazards of existence are casual,
fate a quixotic power. The main point
in life insurance is to keep it in force.
Plainly the purpose of it is to circumvent fate. It can and will do this,
when kept going. It is an excellent
means of saving, but its homely virtue
of sheer protection is what makes it
insurance.


Meet premiums when due.


Once a premium-due notice to a
conscientious policy holder in Manila
went astray. It was the second notice,


on Life Insurance
too—the last that would be sent. Maybe the mails were at fault, maybe something in the office. Anyway, at the
proper time the man was told by the
company that the time had gone by,
the policy had lapsed. But he was
told at the same time that there was a


provision whereby he could be reexamined by a physician and reinstated at
the old rate; that is, the policy could
be revived. He lost no time in having
this done. But what a risk! everything depending upon another physical
examination. This he was fortunately
able to pass. Suppose he had not


been? Having experienced this
call, he made better arrangement
is now notified by telephone as wa
by card. There seems to be no le
of detailed attention to which reh
insurance companies will not go
order to keep policies in force
policy holders in unbroken enjoyr
of the protection they have sought.


Sometimes it pinches to meet pre
miums, but it’s similar to rememberin
Mother’s birthday—it gives you a lo
of satisfaction. More, the just concei
it gives you adds an element to you
reputation that the actual money put
into premiums could never bestow.


the nest Coast Life insurance Lompany
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
Kneedler Building
Manila, P. I.
Telephone 2-36-74


The Insular Life Assurance Co., Ltd.
MANILA, P. I.


ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans onrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
P
FOR ABOUT 131.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.
Call or write for particulars to:
HOME OFFICE
C. S. SALMON
4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
3rd Floor, Gaches BldgPlaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 115
P. O. Box 128
P. O. Box 734, Manila
V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


Leaving the payment of premiums
in the charge of another than yoursel;
places him vicariously between yourse”
and your family. And maybe he doesn"
think as much of that family as you do
Called hurriedly out of town, a mar
left the payment of his premium to his
partner, who, not vitally interested,
allowed the days of grace to expire.
The policy was impaired, could not be
reinstated: ill-feeling between business
associates, anxiety at the aggrieved
man’s home, new insurance at the
higher rate for a more advanced age.


Husband:—"What would you do if I
should die and leave you?”
Wife:—"Leave me how much?”


He:—“I haven’t seen much of you
lately, what’s been the matter?”
She:—" can’t wear an evening dress
all the
e, can I?”


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN CHAM


OF COMMERCE JOUR


Moon Will Hide Sun’s Face May Ninth


sun which warms the earth, quickens the
n the planted seed, and ripens the harvest,
therefore a beneficent god, will engage in
and death struggle with celestial demons
ig the afternoon of May 9. Such is a
ring belief among remote and primitive
les of the Philippines, who know nothing
t eclipses and have not heard of the one that
ning on May 9, when these peoples, acng to man’s ways with things he does not
rstand, must ascribe the phenomenon to
natural causes and do all in their power
ive the devouring demons away from the
-as on similar occasions their forefathers
done. They must beat upon gongs and
s, rally their warriors, and menace the
on with their weapons. They must make
r allegiance to the sun manifest, that he and
cohorts may take heart and escape the
iger ere the moon swallows him up; and so it
come to pass, and the moon, frustrated,
I retire from the combat ignominiously. Joy
Il reign in mountain villages, where the medite will have been made, and the sacrificial
ist will be spread and the wine jar patronized.
iere will be ceremonial dancing, and thanksving to ancestral spirits who will obviously
ve aided in the triumphant rout of evil spirits.
as will be chanted, sagas exalting the sun’s
tle power, fecundity and procreation. There
be a grand holiday and tribal rejoicing.
uch is rural credulity, which will be surprised
o activity at 3:30 p. m. May 9, mideclipse
ce as Father C. E. Deppermann, S. J., writing
Cultura Social, quotes from Father Miguel
lga’s manual on the subject. But science
ponds differently, thanks the moon for getg in the sun’s way for a few minutes, and
ceeds to make the most of its opportunity to
ver new secrets of the universe and verify
r ones. We quote:
The darkness of night approaches in early
ernoon, the sky and landscape are garbed
strange colors, even the animals are uneasy,
nile chickens go to roost. It is getting cooler;
range, quivering, ripple-like shadows are seen
 flit in bands across surfaces that are white.
monster shadow, like that cast by a thunerstorm, comes rushing on with awful speed
thousand miles per hour... No, we are not
escribing the end of the world, only the comig of a total eclipse of the sun. Behold, the
ast vestige of sun is now disappearing, with
its so-called Bailey Beads, the effect of light
een through the irregularities of the moon’s
imb; now only a narrow circle of red fringes
he dark moon, it is the sun’s chromosphere;


and outside this, in startling contrast, is the
pearly whiteness of the corona, glowing with
about half the brightness of the full moon,
while first and second magnitude stars with
the planets become plainly visible. It is an
inspiring sight. If your vantage point be
elevated, you may even see the brightness still
hovering around the horizon, from place where
the sun still reigns. Scarcely have you time
to realize the wondrous event, when again come


the tantalizing shadow bands, then the first
fleck of the sun, looking for all the world like
a gleaming diamond of which the ring setting
is formed by the sun’s brilliant atmosphere. But
the brightness soon dazzles, you withdraw your
eyes, and the eclipse is over, while the attendant astronomers already begin to think about
packing their instruments and to dream about
home in distant lands!
It is indeed a spectacle to fill the mind of
man with awe, for ‘the heavens and earth are
filled with God’s glory,’ but yet on the other
hand it may beget some confidence in the powers
of mind and its triumph over mere matter.
For it should be remembered that even in the


. of the ancient Chalde:.
knew that eclipses were natural puenomena,
occurring in cycles of eighteen years and some
eleven days; t. e.,they knew that if an eclipse
occurred at any time, they could expect another
at the end of this period, the so-called Saros.
The usual number of eclipses in a complete
Saros is about seventy-one, and several series
of these are going on at the same time, so that
eclipses are fairly frequent at some place or
other on the earth.
“The exact calculation, however, of the time
and place of totality for a given eclipse is quite


intricate, but with our present day knowledge
of the orbits of the earth and moon relative to
the sun, what is to the layman a surprising degree
of accuracy can be attained.
“So sure are astronomers of the correctness
of their calculations that they will travel half
way around the world to a little out of the way
corner of the earth, set up their instruments in
a very definite position, and have all their preparations made for a very definite minute on a
very definite day, with physical certitude that
the eclipse will be observed as planned, provided
that: Oh humiliating reflection, the fly in the
ointment of the proud calculations of man!
provided only that the weather be propitious!
So many variables control the elements of the
sky that a little cloud, hardly 'bigger than a
man’s hand’ can unexpectedly spoil a half year’s
patient preparations. Sunny California frowned
at the wrong time and ruined one eclipse; stormy,
wintry New England smiled at a propitious
moment, and blessed another.
“But why do astronomers take all these chances? Not surely for aesthetic, but for scientific reasons. Eclipses afford opportunities for
still further refining and defining the orbits
of the moon and of the earth. They permit
the photography of stars whose light on its
way to us just shaves the sun’s disc; the bending or non-bending of this light from its straight
line course is a test of Einstein’s general relativity
theory. They allow the solar corona to be seen
and studied for its exact nature is even yet full
of tempting mysteries. Then there are spectroscopic measures to be taken of the light from
various layers of the sun’s outer shell, observations of the curious shadow bands that flit
across the earth’s surface at beginning and end
of totality, meteorological changes during the
progress of the eclipse, effects upon atmospherical
electricity, upon the transmission of radio signals,
etc., etc.
It is interesting to note, however,
that, though the problems are still very numerous that seem to require the actual eclipse time,
still one after another of the phenomena at first
thought capable of being studied only then,
have by man’s ingenuity yielded to daily scrutiny. Excellent examples in point are the daily
examination of solar prominences, those gigantic


REPUTATION


has been built through service on the road—not
by extravagant claims. We say nothing about
DUNLOP Tires that is not fully substantiated by
DUNLOP Performance.
When you ride on them you know that all the
claims made for DUNLOP are facts. Try
DUNLOP next time and prove it for yourself.


First is 1888—Foremost Ever Since


Oavo
The Largest and Most Complete Stock
of Drygoods in the Philippines
If you need silks, linens, cottons, or
notions you can serve yourself best
by choosing from our large stocks
We also carry haberdashery, and
make men's suits and shirts
Manuel Pellicer y Co., Inc.
Phone 2-11-06
44 Escolta, Manila


RESPONDING TO ADVI


EMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


—sues of fia
face, and just la 'ly the photograpny or the
corona in broad dablight by means of infra-red
light.
“What of the present eclipse? It is really
going to be a' good one, with a long duration
of totality, the maximum being about five minutes, seven seconds; but in the Philippines it
will range from about three minutes fifty-four
seconds around Palawan, to three minutes
twenty-eight seconds near Siargo Island. San
Jose de Buenavista and Iloilo in Panay, Catmon and Sogod in Cebu lie near the center of
the path of totality. At Cebu, Cebu, and Tacloban, Leyte, the eclipse will also be total but
the duration shorter, since these places are
nearer the southern and northern limits respectively. Capiz, Panay, is just north of the
northern limit, while Surigao, Mindanao, is
just south of the southern limit. At Manila
and Zamboanga about ninety per cent of the
sun’s disc will be obscured, at Aparrionly seventyseven per cent. Mideclipse will occur about
3:30 p. m. (Philip. Standard Time), but the
moon starts to obscure the sun one and a half
hours earlier, and finally leaves it near fortyfive minutes past five o’clock.
“Where are the various eclipse parties from
different countries going to be stationed, and
what do they expect to do? It is still a little
early to state exactly, but the following will
give some idea of present plans. In Sumatra,
a Dutch expedition expects to take spectrograms of the chromosphere and corona, and
to study the solar radiation near and through
totality; a German expedition will study the
Einstein shift already mentioned; an Australian party will consider the outer coronal spectrum. Two British expeditions will go to
Kedah and Siam, both to study the Einstein
effect and the coronal spectrum. Two German
expeditions favor Siam for spectral and photometric work.
“One American expedition is heading towards
Sumatra, while Italian, French and even Russian expeditions are planned, with sites not yet
definite.
“Who are coming to the Philippines?
The Naval Observatory, Washington, which
intends to go to Iloilo.s s k erheir program will be astronomical. In connection
with them, the local naval wireless experts intend
to study wireless signal fading across and in the
totality zone. A German expedition from the
Hamburg Observatory will station themselves
around Catmon or Sogod in Cebu to take direct
photographs of the inner and outer corona, and
to study the spectrum of the sun’s outer atmosphere.
“What of the Manila Observatory itself?
At present it is planned that Father Selga go to
Iloilo to study meteorological changes during
the eclipse and also the changes in the solar
radiation. The writer hopes to go with the
German expedition to Catmon, Cebu, to take
comparative photographs of the corona in the
red and green light of the corona, and also
spectrograms of different parts of the corona.
In addition, a recording electrometer will be
used to study any variations there may be in
atmospherical electricity during the eclipse. It
may be added that the observatory was also
instrumental in suggesting the plan of studying wireless fading to the local navy men and
amateur radio fans. The observatory’s master
clocks will be connected to the Cavite wireless to
broadcast accurate time signals to help the astronomical parties.
Over in America scientists have taken
advantage of the proximity of Mars and Venus,
to study them. Surmises concerning both are
now better defined, and Mars, more than ever
before, encourages the conjecture that it is
inhabited. It is found that the atmosphere will
support life such as exists on earth; changes in
the surface appearance are ascribed by one
authority to new vegetation. In this wonderful
age of progress in the sciences grouped loosely
under the head of physics, it is a pleasure to
note the esteem in which the Jesuit scholars
who conduct the Philippine weather bureau
(at the observatory which pioneers of their
order founded) are held by their colleagues in


science throughout the world. As this article
has delved into legend, it may as well add a word
of history: Jesuit mathematicians gained imperial Chinese support for their missions and the
Christian doctrine when they confounded the
soothsayers at Peking in the 16th century and


Ucudo! in the Chamorro language
of Rota, an island of the Mariana group,
means, in its not-too-liberal English
translation, Tell it to the Marines!
In other words, You don't mean it;
you are only trying to fool us. The
word was particularly interesting to me,
hearing it often, as I did, in conversations between the natives during my
recent exploration of Rota. 'Then, quite
naturally, when I finally came across the
legend concerning the word, an even
greater interest developed, that of its
association with the prehistoric burials
at the foot of the giant latte stones on
the island and its connection with the
habits and customs of a long-departed
race.
As is the case with most antiquities
of the Mariana group, the legend quite
palpably antedates the period of habitation of the present native peoples.
"On a stormy night many years ago,”
the story runs in Chamorro, "long, long
before Magellan made his voyage, the
principal chief of the island of Satpana
(Rota) lay dying. Around the finely
woven pandanus mat upon which he lay
were gathered the minor chiefs and the
wise men of the tribe, for the great one
had ruled justly and they were anxious
to have him live.
“Long they pondered upon what
should be done to save their beloved


accurately foresold nr eclipse. The emper
thereupon gave them the places which Arab
scholars had been occupying at his court, and
they founded the Peking meteorological station
which is still functioning. They themselves
have a station at Shanghai.


master’s life. All known medicines and
mystic ceremonies had failed, and each
succeeding sunset saw a greater decline.
The great chief was indeed so ill that the
native high priest had ordered that he
be so placed upon his mat that his feet
might face the east—a last desperate
attempt to save him. One must face
the rising sun in order to gain strength,
it was believed.
“Secretly, the ill one’s wife had gathered together his many ornaments of
pearl shell, his polished stone weapons
and his implements in order that they
might be ready to be placed beside him
in his grave beneath the colossal latte
stone. His pottery was also carefully
collected, ready to be broken into fragments and to be scattered over his body
when it should be lowered into the
grave.
“Then, as was the habit of those bold
seafaring men, one of the minor chiefs
left his place among the watchers and.
at the first blush of dawn, strode towar.
the beach. He looked upon the sky
with a mariner’s critical eyes. As he
glanced in a southeasterly direction, he
discerned a large, oil-polished canoe
approaching the island from the direction of Guhan (Guam). A strong southwest gale was howling over a stormy
sea, and in such weather, he noted,


Atidktit Gun ant Aatiit co.


OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


Ucudo!
By H. G. HORNBOSTEL


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


ily the boldest ol tne bbld would
venture out to attempt the passage.
“The priest at once regarded the
goming of this canoe during such a gale
as a good omen. Presently, it shot
through the perilous entrance of the
reef and grounded on the sand of the
beach, and then out stepped Ucudo,
a chief from Guam, his magnificent
brown body glistening in the rays of the
sun as he saluted the chiefs of Rota.


“Upon being told of the great chief’s
illness, the stranger expressed his sorrow and asked permission to be admitted to his presence in order, as he said,
to suggest a cure. The people of Rota
were pleased to grant the wish.
“Ucudo sat down near the sick man,
assuming a very learned air and, after
many minutes of apparently deep medisetion, spoke as follows: ‘If you, the
eople of Rota, will allow me to select
he most beautiful maiden of your island
and will allow her to accompany me
into the jungle for three days, I will be
able, with her help, to find certain herbs
that will, I am sure, restore your beloved
chief to health.' The people readily consented to the plan and brought before
Ucudo all the handsome maidens of
their islands.
"From among them Ucudo selected
the most beautiful and asked her if she
was willing to go with him upon his
errand. The maiden looked upon him
and coyly consented. The herbs were
secured, and after three days the pair
returned to the village. It was noted
it the time that the maiden cast many
admiring glances at Ucudo.
“The stranger brewed the potion
that was to restore the chief’s health
and gave it to the priest with instructions. ‘When I pass through the entrance of the reef with my canoe and
I have raised my sail, let your king be
brought forth from his house between


two chiefs and give nim this life-giving
drug. After he has taken it it will only
be a matter of a few hours before he will
again take his normal place among his
people.’ The priest assured Ucudo
that his instructions would be strictly
obeyed.
“During the interview between Ucudo
and the priest all the people had gathered around the two, so that no one saw
the maiden who had accompanied the


Guam man into the jungle, cautiously
approach his canoe and hide herself
under covered bow.
“Several young men helped Ucudo to
launch his canoe, and as he raised his
sail the king was brought forth and
given the potion. But instead of gaining strength he fell dead.
“Then the people of Rota became
enraged and called out: 'Ucudo, man


of Guam! What medicine should we
give to a dead man?’ The answer
came: ‘Bury him or he will have a foul
odor? The men of Rota called back:
"Your advice will be followed and that
medicine will be given to you!”
“At the word of the senior chief they
ran toward the beach, hastily threw
their fighting spears, pointed with barbed points of human bone, into their
canoes and pursued Ucudo. As they


is they sa
the ruaa
“The mombers of the Rota navy had
a tactical advantage over Ucudo in
that, in addition to the driving power
of their sails, they used their paddles,
each canoe being manned by several
men, but they had forgotten their
artillery, and Ucudo had not.
“In his canoe was a basketful of
highly polished and sharp-pointed slingstones. As his swifter enemies approached he handed the steering paddle to
his mate. Taking deliberate aim at the
helmsman of the nearest enemy craft,
he hurled a slingstone with terrific
force, striking the man between the
eyes and killing him. Then for the
next few minutes the slingstones did
their work to such deadly effect that
the men of Rota, realizing that it was
impossible to capture Ucudo on the
high seas, maneuvered so as to sail parallel with him on both starboard and
larboard quarters and well out of range
of his deadly missiles.
“The chase continued until the pursuers and pursued approached the strand
of Letegyan on the island of Guam.
There two canoes of the men of Rota
left their position in line and landed a
few moments before Ucudo and, after


a short tussle, the Guam man was in
the hands of his enemies.
Realizing that he was about to die,
Ucudo said to the men of Rota: ‘We
have had a glorious chase and it takes
good men to catch a man like me. Will
you not grant me one last wish? It
is the custom of my people to allow a
captured enemy to walk 100 yards to
the north and 100 yards to the south
before he is killed."
“This wish they foolishly granted.
Ucudo walked 100 yards to the south
and returned, then walked 100 yards
north and bolted into the jungle along
a trail leading up a precipice.
The
Rota tribesmen followed, but, not knowing the short cuts, were hopelessly outdistanced.
“Ucudo rested at the top of the cliff,
having placed a large boulder ready to
roll down upon the first Rota man to
show his head, but instead of a man he
beheld the beautiful face of his loved
one as she toiled up the steep grade
to join him. Great was his joy and


OF INDIA. AUSTRALIA
CHARTERED BANK
AND CHINA


Capital and Reserve Fund..................... E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor... . . . . . . . . . . . .... . 3,000.000


MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


n
BABCOCK & TEMPLETON, INC.
IMPORTERS—EXPORTERS
PHILIPPINE PRODUCTS
MAGUEY
COPRA
HEMP
FINE LITHO AND PRINTING INKS
Agents for
JOHN KIDD & Co., Ltp.
LONDON
MANILA
NEW YORK
CEBU
SAN FRANCISCO


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - WALTER E. ANTRIM


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Bil 


IVIEKICAN Or


ZER FCOMMERCE JOUR


29


REVIEW OF THE HEM. AARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the
Manila hemp market
for the month of March
with statistics up to
April 1st, 1929.
U. S. Grades:—The
first of the month found
the U. S. market firm
but quiet owing to lack
of buvers. Shippers
were offering at D,
17-3/4 cents; E, 16-172
cents; F, 14-1/8 cents;
G,8-I/2cents;I, 13-148
AA
cents; J1, 10 cents; $1,
13-3/4 cents; $2, 12-1/2 cents; 83, 10-1/8 cents.
The market remained quiet with prices practically unchanged until the middle of the month.
Shippers then commenced to show some anxiety
to get on with business and prices began to
decline. By the 20th sellers were asking: D,
17-1/4 cenis; E, 15-548 cents; F, 13-748 cents;
G, 8-548 cents; I, 12-548 cents; J1, 9-778 cents;
$1, 13-1/2 cents; $2, 12 cents; $3, 10 cents.
For the remainder of the month the market
remained dull with prices gradually declining
and at the close nominal quotations were as
follows: D, 17 cents; E, 16 cents; F, 13-144
cents; G, 8 cents; I, 12 cents; J1, 9-1/4 cents;
S1, 12-548 cents; $2, 11-348 cents; S3, 9-172
cents. Probably a small quantity of hemp could
have been purchased at even lower prices but
certainly any demand on the part of the consuming market would have had the immediate effect
of strengthening the market and advancing
prices.


The market in Manila for U. S. grades opened
firm with sellers inclined to hold for better
prices but a fair amount of hemp was changing
hands at D, P38; E, P34; F. P31; G, ₱19;
I, P29; J1, P21; 81. ₱30;'82, P28; 83, P20.
For the first two weeks all the hemp arriving
found ready buyers and prices moved up to
D, F4l; E, P38; F P32, 6, ₱18.50, I, P28.50,
J1, P21.50; si, P31; 82, P28; 83, P21.50. By
the 20th the market was slightly easier and prices
were from P0.25 to ₱1.00 lower. From then
on the market was ratber quieter and the end of
the month found buyers rather reluctant to take
hemp due to the unsatisfactory selling conditions in America. A few purchases were made
at D P38- E, P35; F, P30; G P17.6; I, P27;
J1, f20; 81, ₱28.4, 52, ₱26; 83, P20. These
prices showed an average decline of about P1.00
a picul during the month.
U. K. Grades:—At the beginning of the
month the U. K. and Continental markets were
firm with buyers paying J2, 237; K, 434.5;
Ll, 234; L2, E29- MI, 230.10; M2, 228.10.
DL, E28; DM, E26. The market eased off
almost immediately but owing to the fact that
shippers were offering very little hemp, prices
strengthened and toward the middle of the
month were up from 5/- to El a ton. A week
later the market was easier and prices were
about 10/—- lower than at the beginning of the
month. The latter part of the month found the
market ruling quiet to dull with nominal quotations as follows: J2, 237; K, E33, Ll, 233.5; L2,
$29.10;M1, 230;M2, E27;5L, 627.10;DM, E24.
It is doubtful, however, if any quantity of hemp
could have been bought at these prices. The
London market closed the last of the month on
account of the holidays.
The market in Manila for U. K. grades was
quiet at the beginning of the month with very
little fibre offering." Shippers were quoting:
12, ₱17; K, PIo; Ll, ₱15.4; L2, ₱12.4; MI,
Fi3.4; M2, ₱12; DL. ₱12, DM. Pil. During
the first week of the month the market was firm
and prices moved up from P0.50 to ₱1.00 a
picul but during the second week prices declined
somewhat but the market regained strength
almost immediately. By the middle of the
month a fair amount of trading was going on at
J2, ₱17.4; K, ₱154; Ll, F15.2,'L2 ₱13,
MI, ₱134, Mz, ₱11.6; DL, Fiz; DM, PII.


During the latter part of the month it became
apparent that receipts would remain heavy and
prices declined somewhat. The holidays no
doubt restricted business somewhat but a fair
amount of hemp was sold during the last week
and closing prices were: J2, ₱17.2; K, P15;
L1 ₱14.67 L2, ₱12.4; MI, ₱13; M2, ₱11.4;
DL, P12; DM. P10.  Some of the grades lost
₱1.00 a picul during the month but on the whole
the average was about the same.
Japan:—The demand from the Japanese
market has been fair but it is apparent there is
more damaged fibre than they are willing to take
at this time. The hemp plants blown down by
the typhoon have now all been cleaned and the
actual production of low grades, specially from
Legaspi, will show a material decline. However, there is a good deal of loose fibre in the
provinces still to be baled.
Maguey:—Prices for both Manila and Cebu
Maguey remain abnormally high. The demand
from the local cordage mills accounts for the
Manila Maguey prices and shortsales in Europe
are no doubt keeping the Cebu market up.
Production:—Receipts continue high and averaged 37,000 bales per week during the month
and the estimates for the next two weeks are at
the rate of 32,000 bales per week. Stocks in
the hands of the exporters are higher than for
some years and undoubtedly the province dealers
and speculators are holding a good deal of fibre.


Immediately after the typhoon it was estimated
that the year would be short anywhere from
150,000 to 250,000 bales. Some authorities
now claim the year’s crop will be slightly less
than 1,300,000 bales while others are equally
confident that production will be fully equal to
last year.
Freight Rates:—There is no change in rates on
hemp since the last report.
Statistics:—The figures below are for the
period ending April Ist, 1929."


Manila Hemp


1929


1928


Bs.


Bs.


On hand January 1st.....


. 158,452


139,632


Receipts to date.........


. 459,494


348,334


Supply to date.........


AA GISAO


157,006


Shipments toU. K.................


78,164


99,631


Continent.............


. 43,925


50,898


U. S..................


. 139,228


50,657


Japan.............. . ..


. 124,862


70,650


All Others............


9,735
*


14,319


Local Consumption....


9,000



15,000


OLONA


310,155


The humorous magazine Life has
grown malicious about the Scotch again.
It turns up the Scotchman who is seeking the woman who always pays!


“North
Coast
Limited"
"Finest”
“the finest train in the world and I have
traveled on all that are worth talking
about"—Samuel Hopkins Adams,
Auburn, N. Y.
“E
Bes?”
L
“equipment the very best, service splendid—a wonderful train"—N. A. Peterson, San Francisco.
TOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between
I the North Pacific Coast and Chicago! Leaves
An
Seattle at 11:00 A. M. for all the principal cities of
the United States. Two days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel is its
diner service. New-style Observation-Club car with deep, restful
lounge—cushioned chairs—library—writing corner—club rooms—
showers—and maid and valet service.
The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos.
Cook &: Son, Shanghai Commercial Ga Savings Bank, or any transPacific steamship company willgladly furnish additional information.


Oswald Crawford, G. A.
50i Granville Street
Vancouver, B. C.


R. J. Tozer, A. G. P.
00 L. C. Smith Bida.
Seattie, Wash., U. S.A.


E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
912 Goveri nent Stroot
Victorr B. G.


NorthernPacificRailway


(352)


"First of the Northern Transcontinentals”


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


AMIERICANN OHAd O


EroL JOu


AApiil,


30


After the Day’s Work


Hitiiiooiooiooiooiooiouooooouoooo


At the Office .....
a hot water bath will actually put new


Commercial Printing is a silent but


powerful messenger, and your letter

life into you. These hot baths


heads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build


are instantly available with one of our


up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.


WATLRTEATERS


Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of MCCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.


which are operated by gas. Hot water is
as plentiful as cold with one of these.
The hot season is here; let us arrange to
install a heater and enjoy its refreshing,
cleansing, rejuvenating showers.


MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


Manila Gas Corporation


Downtown Showroom:
Main Office:


Calle Otis, Paco. Tel. 5-69-34 7 Calle David. Tel. 2-16-43,


MARCH SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


New York Markel.—
At the beginning of the
month, the brisk demand for refined sugar
led to a better tone in
*
the New York market,
resulting in liberal offerings of Cubasat 1-31,32
cents c. and f., equivalent to 3.74 cents I. t.
for Philippine centrifugals. The New York
sugar market weakened
about the middle of the
month owing to the
publication of a revised Guma Meyer estimate
of over 5,000,000 tons for the present Cuban
crop. The market, however, reacted shortly
thereafter, and prompt shipment Cubas changed
hands at approximately the same prices as during
the beginning of March. In the third week the
spot market in New York again slumped due to
accumulation of stocks in storage ports, when
prompt shipment Cubas were sold at 1-15716
cents c. and f., equivalent to 3.71 cents I. t. for
P. I. centrifugals. The abundance of near
supplies in Cuba and Atlantic Coast ports during
the last week of the month under review caused
a further decline to 1-748 cents c. and f., equivalent to 3.65 cents I. t. for P. I. centrifugals."
The number of centrals working in Cuba has
been reduced during the last week of March by
8 centrals, the total now operating being 153.
The visible stocks in the U. K., U. S., Cuba,
and European statistical countries at the end
of March were 6,083,000 tons as against 5,513,000
tons last year and 5,143,000 tons in 1927.
Futures:—Quotations on the New York Exchange during March fluctuated as follows:


High Low Latest
March, 1929..... 1.95 1.88 1.92
May............. 2.05 1.88 1.90
July............. 2.15 2.00 2.00
September........ 2.19 2.10 2.10
December........ 2.24 2.18 2.18
January.......... 2.25 2.19 2.20
March, (1930).... 2.29 2.24 2.24
Philippine Sales:—During the month under
review, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the
Atlantic Coast—afloats, near arrivals, and for
future deliveries—amounted to 62,000 tons at
prices ranging from 3.64 cents to 4.00 cents
landed terms, as compared with sales amounting
to 85,090 tons during the same period last year.
Local Market:—The local centrifugal market
has ruled firm and small quantities have changed
hands at from P8.875 to P9.00 per picul exgodown The muscovado market is weaker
owing to a falling off in the Chinese demand due
to political complications in China. Chinese
dealers are inclined to buy muscovados on the
basis of P6.50 for No. 3.
Crop Prospecis:—Milling operations on Negros
will come to an end in most districts next month.
The outturn will be approximately the Philippine Sugar Association’s estimate of 400,000
tons for Negros, while the estimate for Luzon
may be exceeded.
The advices from the United States are more
encouraging with respect to the enactment of
discriminatory or restrictive legislation against
Philippine sugar at the special session of
Congress.
Philipvine Exports:—Exports of sugar from
the Thilippines for the 1928-29 crop from November 1, 1928, to March 31, 1929, amounted
to 245,951 tons, segregated as follows:
Centrifugals 237,084 m. tons
Muscovados 5,027 6
3,840 
Refined


Total 245,951 m. tons


European Markel:—Advices from Europe are
not encouraging, since the practice established
shortly after the war of utilizing sugar as a


means of indirect taxation by imposing a series
of taxes on sugar has increased its price to
such an extent that it has become a luxury,
resulting in consumption in Europe again declining,
While Europe is still an importer of foreign
grown sugar, notwithstanding the fact that it
produces over 8,000,000 tons annually, from an
authoritative source it is reported that the
imports this year are likely to be less than last
year since there is still a substantial quantity
of hold-over sugars still unsold and that this
pear’s crop will be from 300,000 to 400,000 tons
in excess of last year.
The unexpected increase in yield from Cuba
over last vear and also from Java due to the
wonder PO.J 2878 cane makes the outlook for
prices for the balance of the year far from reassuring.
Java Market:—During the early part of the
month, the Java market showed an improvement, owing to speculators buying near positions
and covering local requirements. This improvement was maintained until the latter part of the
month. The following are the latest quotations:


March-April shipment Superiors Gs...........16-344-
May Shipment Superiors
15
Gs..
June Shipment Superiors
Gs... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 344
July—August shipment Su'pmiore Cs...........15


₱8.96)
8.05 per P. I.
7.40 picul
f. o. b.
7.021


The first estimate issued by the Trust gives
the following figures for the present crop of
Java:
Trust mills, 2,755,000 metric tons; outside
mills, 280,000 metric tons; total, 3,035,000
metric tons.


Hark to Maryanna Jones,
Her life was full of terrors,
An old maid born, an old maid died—
No hits, no runs, no errors.
-Life.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


Sugar.......
Homd.
Coconut Oil....................
.. 
Copra..
Cigars (Number)................
Embroidery ....................
*. * ........
Maguey..
* * ** . 
Leaf Tobacco.....
Desiccated and Shredded Coconut.
* ...
Hats (Number)..
Lumber (Cubic Meter)......
opra Meal...................
Cordage........................
Knotted Hemp.
. *......
ros
3)
Pearl Buttons (G
Canton (low grade cordage fiber).
All Other Products..............
Total Domestic Products.........
United States Products..........
Foreign Products................
Grand Total.


Monthly average for 12 months
January, 1928
ending January, 1929
January, 1929


Quantity


Value


5


Quanitty


Value


5


Quantity


Value


75


64,978,751 ₱10,364,751


34.7


86,170,553


₱14,475,08-


51.8


48,199,192


₱ 8,061,179


30.


13,583,344


4,412,100


14.8


10,959,371


3,743,920


13.5


14,886,359


4,448,518


17.


15,634,642


,157,915


17.a


12,425,693


4,205,018


15.2


12,213,455


4,019,743


15


19,988,650


3,944,775


13.:


,020,548


1,585,584


5.8


,813,053


3,794,868


16,192,798


55
60


.3


14,082,473


623,


1.4


18,424,074


789,25


2.


7,724


1.


760,20


195,933


74,051


O


1,373,921


307,518


1.2


1,428,568


290,5


2,924,019


847.755


2
9


284,544


105,4


O


1,562,280


471,74


1


505,038


1
79,1.


6
O


536,62


198,615


0.8


1,682,103


611,552


116,308


617,842


2.1


2,369


88,191


125,905


601,450


3,55


460,656


1


15,7


508,408


Ls


1-
1,015


477,


1


6,880,302


506,592


1


5,558,326


340,839


6,814,78


9,639


39,958


336,85


1.


145,107


320,632


7,42


1..


73,82.


266,786


0.9


23,436


050


.3


29,08


91,541


0.3


73,8


66,687


0.2


55,198


57,750


O.


68,491


62,661


O


531,053


06,182


0.4


559,781


137,196


0.5


604,219


114,390


O


755,585


2.5


489,975


1.8


824,872


3.1


₱29,630,417


99.6


P27,694,610


99.6


₱26,057,258


99.2


21,926


.4


76,32


O.


115,50:


.4


8,517


13,652


0.1


34,506


0.1


P29,760,860


100.0


P27,784,582


100.0


P26,207,266


100.0


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


Monthly average for


Articles


January, 1929


January, 1928


2 months ending


January 1929.


Value


75


Value


75


Value


5


Cotton Cloths..........


₱ 4,313,272


16.0


₱ 5,143,144


19.2


₱ 3,385,851


14.9


Other Cotton Goods....


1,056,226


3.8


1,328,984


5.1


1,165,209


5.2


ron and Steel, Except


Machiner



2,138,952


1,980,924


7.5


1,883,857


8.3


Rice..
*.....


783,35


6,340


7,780


2.


Wheat Flour.....


395,70


1.5


36,4


82,243


Machinery and Parts of..


1,638,481


6.1


1,495,2.


1,417,642


Dairy Products........


840,778


3.)


2.


597,67


Gasoline...............



2


3.6


se

661,804


3.0


Silk Goods.............


3


693,316


3.


Automobiles............


68.


2.6


29,


3-2


761,37


Vegetable Fiber Goods...


923,5


3.4


3
2,4.


Meat Products.........


810,946


3.0


502,96


Illuminating Oil.......


298,34


Fish and Fish Products..


32,


1.


86,938


367,619


1.7


Crude Oil..............


152,616


58,632


227,0


l.1



Coal.....


193,796


O


76,629


2.6


451,051


2.1


Chemicals, Dyes, Drugs,


BtC......


98,944


1.8


4-


1.7


394,333


1.8


Fertilizers..............


9,110


1.2


2.0


292,69


1.4


Vegetable.............


5,316


1.5


293463


1.6


359,687


1.7


Paper Goods, Except


 
Books.....


569,221


2.2


434,311


1.7


404,682


1.9


Tobacco and Manufac

tures of........



306,958


11


205,703


574,75:


2.6


Electrical Machin
y....


564,618


401,644


22


370,477


1.7


Books and Other Printed


Matters........


215,350


0.8


515,752


1.9


242,525


1.2


Can
and Carriages, Ex

cept Autos..
*


280,532


1.1


59,334


223,253


1.1


Automobile
S


462,084


1.7


39,2


l


55,258


1.1


Fruits and Nuts........


348,664


1.:


384
4
2


259


1.3


Woolen Goods..........


106,001


75


0.6


Leather Goods........


374,878


0


243,813


1.1


Shoes and Other Footware


248,769


2


142,77


.7


Coffee .......


164,037


0.6


139,116


0.6


157,089


0.7


Breadstuf, Excepi


Wheat Flour..........


186,165


158,538


O."


178,259


0.8


Eggs..



170,560


0.6


135,935


0.6


181,594


0.8


and Other
Perfumen


Toilet Goods .........


256,954


183,63


9.8


129,232


0.6


Lubricating Oil.......


152,646


k2


147,902


0.7


195,833


0.9


Cacao Manufactures, Ex

cept Candy..........


184,685


214,229


0.9


149,838


O.6


Glass and Glassware...


216,032


62


178,701


0.8


i71,565


0.8


Paints, Pigments, Var

nish, Etc....
* . .


174,496


142,169


O.


152,633


0.7


Oils not separately listed.


100,566


0.4


112,274


0.5


145,583


o.7


Earthern Stones and


Chinaware.......
:


138,348


130,169


129,000


O."


Automobile Accessories..


281,701


2


169,922


0.8


138,167


0.6


Diamond and Other Pre

cious Stone Unset...


138,801


0.5


49,819


0.3


120,003


0.6


Wood, Bamboo, Reed,


Rattan.............


141,759


0.5


73,067


0.4


108,88-


0.5


India Rubber Goods....


36
"o80


0.5


165


.6


116,583


0.5


a


P


O


337


180,028


O


Matches........... . . . .


51,112


0.2


48,2.


0.2


40


Sattle.................


41,708


0.2


66,211


0.3


2.563


O


Explosives.............


49,569


0.2


102


O.


56,04


O.2


Cement....
*


600


0.2


920


89,178


.4


Sugar and Molasses.....


87,
94


0.3


1,805


8-


80,354


0.4


Motion Picture Films....


34


O.1


50,184


O.


30,418


.1


All Other Imports......


2,668,299


9.9


1,682,094


6. 3


1,883,847


8.2


Total..........


P26,514,049


100.0


P26,277,526


100.0


₱22,605,207


100. 0


PORT


STATISTICS


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN


COUNTRIES


Monthly average fon


Ports


January, 1929


January, 1928


12 months ending


January, 1929.


Value


5


Value


7


Value


20


Manila................


₱39,685,926


70.8


₱37,693,000


69.9


₱32,780,935


65.9


Iloilo................


7,634,228


13.6


10,765,875


19.9


,031,541


14.4


Cebu........


5,450,549


9.7


1,294,205


6,605,563


13.6


Zamboanga............


610,735


1


364,874





562,567


1.8


OlO.


3,245


0.1


56,513


O.1


106,668


O.4


Davao...........


1,790,410


3.2


666,939


1.2


162,237


2.8


Legaspi................


849,816


1.5


220,708


0.2


562,962
*


1.4


Total.



P56.274,909


100. 0


₱54,062,118


100.0


₱48,812,474


100.0


CARRYING TRADE


IMPORTS


Monthly average for
Nationality of Vessels January, 1929
January, 1928
12 months ending
January, 1929.


Value


25


Value


75


Value


5


American..........


....₱11,319,158


43.6 ₱11,872,162


45.5


₱10,093,531


2.3


British.............


.... 10,084,952


3


9,671,668


37.0


7,544,3.


4


Japanese...........


719,448



1,099,940


.1


984,063


Dutch.............


781,40
*


i


79,711


3.2


644,38


German............


1,438,112
*


5.6


1,493,051


5.7


95
1,5


Norwegian.........


132,954
.


9


3.2


Philippine.........


7,81
* *. 


O.)


268,637


0.9


157,206


Spanish............


236,32
 * ..


O.8


409,588


..5


172,06


Chinese............


178,799



0.6


43,074


O.1


4
71,34


0.3


Swedish...........


0,09
*


13,62


annish..........


346,277



1.6


13,442


Csechoslovak......





1,340


French............


247,650
*.


O.8


35,639


By Freight.........


.... 25,812,996


98.3


25,738,522


98.0


11,991,023





By Mail..........


691,053



1.7


539,014


2.0


614,184


2.7


mml


20.514,049


100. 0


26,277,536


100.0


22,605,207


100.0


EXPORTS


Nationality of Vessels


January, 1929


Monthly average for
January, 1928
12 months ending
January, 1929.


Value


25


Value


6


Value


35


American..............


₱17,781,365


59.6


₱15,984,895


57.2


₱11,930,060


46.


British............. . . . .


5,417,723


18.4


7,078,955


25.4


8,081,195


31.


Japanesc..............


1,592,452


3.6


1,752,693


6.4


2,563,98


6.1


lerman................


842,373


3.1


753,257


2.9


36,994


.6


Norwegian.............


73,590


0.5


523,135


Spanish................


101,201


Dutch.................


656,090


2.4


297,115


1..


512,881


Philippine..............


946,184


.4


82,570


0.2


146,28


0.8


Chinese................


33,547


0.4


,799


Swedish................


1,388,800


5.0


464,5:


1.9


French.
.. *.


4,88


annish............


1,500,838


5.3


295,219


1.3


By Freight.............


28,844,162


96.


27,341,084


98.5


25,201,413


96.0


By Mail...............


916,698


3.3


443,498


1.5


1,005,853


4.0


Total.


P29,760,860


100 0


P27,784,582


100 O


P26,207,266


100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for
months ending
January, 1929 January, 1928
Countries
January, 1929.


Value


2


Value


70


Value


25


United States........


..₱40,604,743


2.6


₱41,014,659


75.9


₱33,927,669


68.9


United Kingdom.....


1,512,644


2,112,347


3.9


2,259,548


4.7


Japan...............


3,099,814
*


3,153,64


5.9


3,308,082


.8



hina.
* *


1,564,719
* 


1,338,6


1,718,646


¬


french East Indies...


90,531
* *


9,083


481,32


Germany ............


9
1,245,94
* *





1,246,43


1,213,080


Spain..
*


1,773,0
* 4


3.


313,8


0.6


936,350


2.0


Australia....
* * ** 4


8
576,38


606,848


1.1


508,619


1


British East Indies...


1,119,455
*


8i4,510


684,2-


Dutch East Indies....


604,116
 4


541


1


51,93:






France...............


1,349,933
* .


2.4


O.C


14,


Netherlands..........


335,467
* .


0.6


242,855


O.


14
338.


6.


Italy .
* *  *


318,95.
* 


O.6


188,598


0.3


333,643


Hongkong............


141,817
* *


0.2


220,549


0.4


286,78


O.


Belgium........... . .


389,859
*


490,935


0.9


479,92


Switzerland..........


261,112
*


275,0


.5


285,821


o.


apanese-China.......


78,26
* *


263,433


O.


5,591
1


Siam................


47,660
* *


30,50


2,49


Sweden..............


45,367
* 


0.1


85,801


96,685


Canada..............


108,470



0.2


114,096


105,875


Norway..............


25,612
 *


66,625


O.1


77,399


0.2


Austria................


16,73


18,00:


Denmark.......... ..


38



0,990


O.1


34,281


o.


Other Countries......


230,857



0.4


140,624


0.3


304,121


0.6


Total.......


..P56,274,909


100.0


₱54,061,118


100.0


₱48,812,474


00. 0


92


THE AIVERICAN OHAMDER Or COIIMERoL JOURIAD


Apill, 1943


HE ANN


SPREADING YOUR RISKSThe keen businessman diversifies his investments both geographically and by types, not alone to avoid
possible adverse conditions in some single industry or section of the world, but also to share more widely
sin those favorable developments which strengthen investment holding and make them more valuable.
WE SUGGEST

Pittsburgh Hotels Corporation—
5122 Sinking Fund Gold Bonds, due March 1, 1948, yielding approximately.......... ......
53425
Chile Copper Co.—
20-Year Gold Debentures, due 1947, yielding approximately ........... 5142
Cities Service, Power and Light Company
5143 Gold Debentures, due November 1, 1952, yielding approximately................. 5.652
German Central Bank for Agriculture Farm Loan—
Secured 65 Sinking Fund Bonds, due October 15, 1960, yielding approximately .............
Wo
Columbia Steel Corporation—
First Mortgage Sinking Fund Gold Bonds 5165 yielding approximately . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....
5142
Norwegian Hydro-Electric Corporation—
Gold Bonds—Series A—515, due 1957, to yield approximately .......................... 6.1292
Commonwealth of Australia External Loan—
30-Year 55 Gold Bonds, due September 1, 1957, yielding approximately . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5.12522
General Electric Co., Germany—
20-Year 65 Gold Sinking Fund Debentures, due May 1, 1948, yielding approximately .......
SVAo
The average yield on the above list is approximately 622
Full Details On Request


INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION


RIU HERMANOS —623-ESCOLTA-623


FRANK G. HIAUGHWOUT
Biological Laboratory
Manila, P. I.
915 M. H. del Pilar
Stool, Blood and Urine Examinations
Special Sunday and Holiday Hours for
Business Men: 8 to 9 a.m.; 3 to 5 p.m.
Week-days: 7:30 a.m. to 12 m.; 1:30 to 5 p.m.


Manila Wine Merchants, Ltd.
174 Juan Luna
Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones: 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho u s e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


Recommended By Leading Doctors


NOW'S THE TIME!


Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake
L. 5.73.06


Nature's Best Mineral Water


SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to bel) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Nowl


HEENO O NNN N ENEN TE EN  N


DODGE BROTHERS
NEW SENIOR SIX


This brilliant New Senior is a truly
great Six on every score by which
fine motor cars are judged.
Its long, low, sweeping lines reveal
a freshness of conception—a touch
here, a curve there—that captures
the very spirit of tomorrow.
Moreover, the New Senior is bigger,
faster and in every detail finer than
its worthy predecessor. The car is
much longer and roomier; the seats
are wider; the interiors more luxurious and comfortable, the appointments and color effects more captivating. And complete fine car
equipment is provided.


The skill and integrity of Dodge
engineering are further revealed in
the smoothness, the silence and
velvety flow of Senior power, in the
car’s amazing pickup, and dependable
ruggedness.
See it today and drive it. Your
Dodge Brothers Dealer will be proud
to have you test it for get-away,
flexibility, pull on the hills. and
every other vital phase of quality
performance. And you will agree
with him that the Ne Senior is
Dodge Brothers’ masterpiece!


Sole Distributors:
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, Inc.
536-568 Gandara
MANILA — CEBU
ILOILO —
DODGE BROTHERS
MDTOR EARS


IN RESTONDING TO ADVERTISENENIS TLEASE MENTION TNE ANERICAN CRAMEER OF GOMMERCE JOURNAL


ULY


Looking Back to Dewey. The New El
Dorado. The Coconut Industry. Poems
by Gilbert S. Perez. Editorial: The Proposed Court of Appeals, A Suggested
Alternative. The New Health "Drive”
10,000 Hectare Pineapple Reservation in
Bukidnon. -Hollywood Whoopee in Manila.- -Monthly Features, Special Articles
and the Customary Commercial Reviews


A  MAGAZINE * PREEMINENT


THE * PHILIPPINES


TABACALERA


The word "TABACALERA"
on a cigar is just as significant
as the word "Sterling" on silver


Your tobacconist
will gladl y
supply y ou


Goodrich
de Luxe
The Super Tire
Is practically proof
against all accidents of the road.
It is built to resist
cuts, blows and
bruises.
Ask the Goodrich
de aler


GOODRICH AIR CONTAINERS
Puncture Proof Tubes will get you
there and back without a flat tire





LENE V ANVETENEEE TENTEN TE MENENUENEE G ENEEENEEO


May, 1929


  


1


They’re
His
Weakness


Universally Popular!
vaniia
O
Cigars


HOW TO GET 'EM!
Genuine Manila Hand Made Long
Filler Cigars Are Obtainable From
Dealers in Your City Or Nearby!
SURE TO PLEASE YOU. CONVINCE
YOURSELF WITH A BOX ORDER


List of Distributors Furnished on Request


Addr ess:
CHARLES A. BOND
Philippine Tobacco Agent
15 William Street, New York City, U. S. A.
Or
THE COLLECTOR OF INTERNAL REVENUE
Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OUR


  


May, 1929


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM


can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders inease ofoperation andlowcost ofupkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
agatc la tie anipohe iauak
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


E
MAK


Over 100,000
Passengers
Carried Daily
By
MERALCO
Street-Cars and Busses


A High-class
Advertising Medium


A. B. TIGH
Advertising Manager


Telephone
2-19-11


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette Mfg. Co.
31 Tayuman
Manila, P. I.
IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLED!


N ENNO O AN ENAN  NCANVOEN GNO O GEE


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
The American Chamber of Gommerce


Thirty-One Years After It Made History
Oh, dewy was the morning, in the month of May,
And Dewey was the admiral at Manila bay;
And dewy were the Regent's eyes, those orbs of royal blue—
And do we feel discouraged? I do not think we do!


OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.


Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
Yohn W. Haussermann, Vice President
B. A. Green, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
C. Roctwel"
kebuci E. Bay
Alf Welhaven


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Frank W. Butler
Wm. H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer Chairman
H. M. Cavender
H. L. Heath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Canf Hes”
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Al Walra
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wilson


COMMITTEES


FINANCE
I. L. Headington, Chairman
Wml. H. Renmnold,
FW. Butier


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
L. L. Spellman
M. M. Salecby


PUBLICATIONS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Bennett"
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, Chairman
W. J. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, Chairman
V. Butler
F."
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
B. A. Green, Chairman
J. R. Wilson
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
G. F. Bradiord
L. E. Nantz
INVESTMENTS
2. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
 A drr


Walt Mason, Kansan, speaking, in the Emporia Gazette, the jingle
that all America was soon singing, thirty-one years ago this month, in
celebration of a marine engagement which has a special significance in this
city, off whose shores it was fought between Montojo and the Spanish fleet
and Dewey and the American. Dewey was first a hero, then married and
forfeited his popularity; and went down to Charon’s ferry with the retired
men and became an effigy on a pedestal and a chapter in world and national
history. He was a prudent and courageous commander, a man always
half at sea on land duty and in diplomacy, it would seem—with hardly any
faculty for posing and getting along well with the press, which is not altogether, if at all, to his discredit.
He had asked for the Asiatic command he had wanted to manage
the business which he saw looming at Manila, and he was gallant and
humane in carrying out what he undertook. His victory in the bay, May
1, 1898, led naturally to the blockade, which led to the military occupation,
August 13, 1898, which culminated in the acquisition of the Philippines by
America and the undertaking on her part of the political experiment she is
still engaged in—in the typically uncertain and desultory fashion which
characterizes her during periods when she is not stirred up nor provoked
to summary measures.
More may be said with historical accuracy of Dewey, when the venture
is finally brought to conclusion. This much may be said now, Dewey’s
achievement revived overseas-mindedness in America: the idea still struggles against the immensity of the American hinterland, but it is at least
rooted in the universities, perhaps even in the high schools, and it will
probably survive and eventually annihilate national provincialism. Similarly the Philippines are affected: they are now quite conscious of America,
they are commencing to be aware of the orient and of the world generally.
Then it surely may be said that Dewey sounded the sunset gun of their
oldtime isolation and medieval somnolence.
Americans justly esteem George Dewey, the Vermont youth who,
plans for West Point miscarrying, chose Annapolis and a career on the sea.
Nor does Spain have cause to honor Montojo less—the man who,
knowing his fleet outclassed, proffered what resistance he could. With this
man, many Filipinos, true to the traditions of Manila men, shared heroism
with Spaniards. Montojo’s fleet was salvaged by the Americans in 1903,
and when the ships were repaired and recommissioned they went into active
service, notably in the Yangtze patrol, where they are just now being
replaced. But Montojo sunk them, Dewey only damaging them, in the
battle. Montojo did not await the final coup.
‘Their ports and compartments opened to admit the green water of
the bay of Manila,” says a record contemporary with the raising of the
vessels, "and carrying many of their crew with them, the Spanish fleet
in Asiatic waters went to the bottom. . .. At a disadvantage impossible
to overcome, the Spaniards did not wait for the inevitable defeat and capture but anticipated the Americans and destroyed their own vessels!
“After five vears of oblivion underneath the waters, the vessels have
been raised to the surface through the genius of an American wrecking


Ford Model "AA” Trucks
for Immediate Delivery!


P TEW SHIPMENTS arriving this month
Nmake it possible for us to offer immediate delivery on Model “AA” Ford Trucks.


PLACE YOUR ORDER NOWI
Easy Terms May be Arranged.
“After We Sell We Serve”
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY CO.
MANILA
Bacolod
Cebu
Iloilo


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


4


  


May, 1929


company, and the truth disclosed. The Spanish ships of war do not bear
the mark of one American shell near or below their water lines... For
several vears after the American occupation no attempt was made to raise
the sunken Spanish vessels, although they impeded the free navigation of
Cavite bay. Finally, however, the government advertised for bids for
raising the vessels. Four companies in all undertook the work and failed."
One of these was a Chinese company, another a Hongkong company.
Captain C. F. Garry, oldtimer in such work, and Captain Couden of the


navy are the men who succeeded. "According to the official reports of
Admiral Montojo the vessels were set on fire by the shells of the American
squadron, and were afterwards scuttled by his orders when resistance was
impossible.”
The company which raised the ships was the Philippine Salvage Association, John Macleod, president, Captain Garry, manager. Admiral
Montojo’s watch was found on his flagship, the Maria Cristina, salvaged
to be converted into a collier.


Time to be Getting Philippine Paintings


The art which finds expression with brush and
canvas underwent a long eclipse with the end of
the old regime and the advent of the new in the


his subjects with that pleasant dreamy soul
which is their heritage.
At leisure, look his work over. It is well
worth having.
Fernando Amorsolo was graduated from the
Philippine School of Fine Arts in 1914 and is now
an instructor there. He first exhibited in 1908
and has been drudging away evepy since, lately
finding customers, chiefly Americans, for his
product. He probably has not attained his
utmost height in expression: he fancies the
individualism of Chinese and Japanese pictorial
art and thinks Philippine art may eventually
acquire a racial distinction. His effort in conjunction with his better known colleagues in
Manila to establish a society of artists failed
for lack of funds and public interest. It was
too early. But he is yet in his prime, hope lies


quires observation of people in everyday life;
so you see the creative desire actually exists.
Rivera was about to be pensioned to Europe
when the Americans came, which ended the
plan. His Fisherman of Tondo received second
honors at St. Louis; he has enjoyed first honors
in local exhibitions, including portrait painting
in the Carnival competition of last year. He
advocates pensioning only mature artists to go
abroad, and thinks the youthful ones too much
inclined to enjoyment and wasting opportunities.
He believes artists could be advantageously
employed in the beautifying of Manila. And
pray why not the provinces, where youth might
well receive other esthetic inspirations than
unkempt plazas and glaring tin roofs?
Jorge Pineda does lithograph subjects to keep
rice in the pot and fish in the ulam, but hankers
for landscapes and plans some day to give all
his time to them. They are nowhere more
abundant and inviting than in these islands, he


Rivera y Mir
Lighting Up
Philippines: there is a vacuity, almost, of thirty
years between Luna of the Spanish period and
Amorsolo of the American. There is also,
between the subjects these men choose, the
natural contrast to be expected. But that is a
theme apart, to be gone into a little more before
comment is ventured. It is enough to say here
that Fernando Amorsolo chooses typical Philippine subjects, those of the commonest observation of everyone: a peasant girl, a rural scene,
a cochero. Admirers are commencing to acquire Amorsolos, and it is time they did so.
He does more than depict the likeness, he imbues


The Ferry


ahead. He produces prodigiously.
There are enough of these youngsters doing
occasional really good pieces to support the Art
Store on Rizal avenue, which is quite worth a
visit any time.
Another ambitious artist is a connecting link
between old times and new, Vicente Rivera y
Mir, who plans introducing action study in the
fine arts school next year, a course which re

Fernando Amorsolo


will find studies on every hand. Thus a number
of artists are beginning, and no one may predict
how far one and another of them will go, now
that the government displays intermittent
symptoms of interest and the painters who have
proved worthwhile are commencing to have
customers. The movement is timely. Something is taking hold on the people with a tonic
effect, and it ought to be recorded.


CAPTAIN CALVO
Premier Filipino
aviator used—


N GO
EA
MOTOR OILS AND MOTOR GASOLINE
ON HIS
MANILA—APARRI—MANILA FLIGHT


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


May, 1929


  


Gigantic Bukidnon Grant for Pineapples


The Law in the Case
Upon recommendation by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Governor-General may,
by proclamation, designate any tract
or tracts of land of the public domain
for the establishment of agricultural
colonies; and although the disposition
of the land to the colonists shall be
made under the provisions of this
Act, yet while the Government shall
have the supervision and management
of said colonies, the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources may
make the necessary rules and regulations for the organization and internal
administration of the same.
The Secrelary of Agriculture and
Natural Resources may also, under
conditions to be established by the Legislature, turn over a colony so reserved
to any person or corporation, in order
that such person or corporation may
clear, break, and prepare for cultivation the lands of said colony and establish the necessary irrigation system and
suitable roads and fences; but final
disposition shall be made of the land
in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, subject, however, to such
conditions as the Legislature may
establish for the reimbursement of the
expense incurred in putting such lands
in condition for cultivation: Provided,
That the Legislature may direct that
such land so prepared for cultivation
may be disposed of only by sale or
lease.—Act 2874 Section383.


The Philippines are to have a brand new farm
industry, pineapples in Bukidnon. Yes, sir.
Arrangements have been effected with the
Philippine Packers Association, local subsidiary
of the California Packers Association, and the
Alunan plan is to be tried in northern Mindanao
for all it is worth. No half-way measures go.
The company already has a seed plot of 150
hectares or thereabout, on which pineapples are
growing, and the government, on its part, has
set aside a reservation of 14,054 hectares. This
is 35,130 acres, 35 times the area the land law
allows to go to a single farm corporation. It
is in fact a very respectable area, as farms usually
go: it is the equivalent, of 54 sections of land
more than a township by 28 full sections and
a little to spare.
This is another of the wonderful ventures
which took form during Colonel Stimson’s
governorship, which is being carried out now.
It is one of those things in which the Stimson
administration felt itself so right that perfect
frankness with the public seemed unnecessary.
If the press learned much, it said little enough

there wasn’t much airing of the plans. Colonel
Stimson found a great deal of public opinion
here, he says, and he displayed a wholesome
respect for it by doing many things in a quiet
effective way which didn’t attract its attention.
This is one of them.
But the actual proclaiming of the reservation
has been done by Governor Gilmore. The
agriculture undersecretary, too, has been vicegerent for the secretary, who is in Washington.
But the great names associated with the innovation are those of Stimson and Alunan, in
the executive branch; and those of the advocates
of the amended corporation law, in the legislative.
As history is being dated, it is well to
record this fact.
Much skepticism prevails, but if the scheme
succeeds it will establish a new and extensive
farm community in Bukidnon and afford employment to thousands of families. La Vanguardia, not among the scoffers, applauds the
scheme in its issue of April 25, sees in it relief
of the peasantry from hunger, political emancipation for the islands, and the means of diverting the stream of emigrants from Hawaii and
the western States to the uncultivated lands of
the islands.
The plan is very simple. As ascertained
thus far, it is this: Money will come from the
packers association, that is, from California.


Filipino settlers, farm-school graduates preferred, will take up claims of 144 hectares each,
such a tract being 360 acres or a half-section
and a 40-acre pasture over. Paying for this
land, the settlers will be granted titles from
the government. Each settler, working with
hundreds of tenants or hired men, will seed his
land to pineapples: the packers association furnishing the seed, money, etc. When there is a
harvest, the settlers will sell their pineapples
to the only buyers, the packers association,
which will erect a huge factory, can the pineapples, and ship them all over the world.
This, in the rough, is the scheme which will
put into pineapple cultivation, very soon, such
a large slice of Bukidnon lands lying along the
Agusan river. Alas, that there should be doubters!
Nevertheless, there are men of experience
who feel that the settlers will tend to fail of
their ambitions, and that the land will tend to
fall into the hands of the pineapple corporation.
As to this and a number of other possibilities,
only time can tell. In Hawaii the same interests
have about 6,000 acres. The largest company,
the Hawaiian Packers Association, owns an
island and had last year an output of upward of
three million cases of pineapples from 22,000
acres. That employs many hands. So it may
be seen that when 25,000 acres are in pineapples in the Philippines, many hands will also
be employed here. A brand new industry.
Yes, sir. In the making.


Fishermen of Tondo
Rivera y Mir


Retail
Importers


pine American Dry.
CO
BOTICA DOIE


Wholesale
Agents


MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
We have been selling drugs for 98 years


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


6


  


May, 1929


Hollywood Whoopee in Manila


Goodness, gracious! Here are gorgeous temles rising aloft on every hand and the choicest
business blocks, and to what cult? Who are
their vestals, what their oracles, who their high
priests? One is the Lyric, another the Rialto
another the Ideal, another the Savoy, another
the Columbia; and skirting the very plaza of
Sta. Cruz parish church are three more, the
Tivoli, the Majestic, the Palace. Their names
give them away, are indeed catchy notices to the
public that here are spectacles to see; and all
night long their vigils are aflare, so that the dark
is turned day and a livid light thrusts back the
arc of shadowed heaven. For all this splendor,
how many worshipers: what votive gifts to furnish out such shrines.
Yea, truly spoken. In the parlance of the
times, it’s all good business.
The cult exploited in these handsome piles is
a profane cult, e’en a vulgar one: the cult of the
Hollywood movies—the circusses, if not the
bread, of a democracy resurgent and eminently
up and coming all over this populous world.
It’s a force to be dealt with; and tariffs, an expedient denied to moralists in the Philippines, seem
not to be sufficient to keep it down. Up it
bobs in England, South Africa—everywhere.
And where it goes, gaudier and gaudier temples
rise in its popular honor: none is so poor but
to do it reverence, to turn a familiar phrase
about.
Moralists worry, but the crowd laughs and
goes to the show. Even France, nursemaid of
drama, wants Hollywood importations cut about
60%, with reciprocal arrangements for French
films in America; and Il Duce is worried in Ita
This Hollywood movie—it’s almost an avangel!
In South America particularly, members of the
substantial class who have always boasted they
were the state but who have looked back too
much toward Europe, sit in their clubsand deplore
the Hollywood movies and the degradation of
the times. They wonder what will happen to
countries as eager as theirs to applaud the tricksters of the screen, who contrive such prodigious
exhibitions. We have these pessimists in Manila,
too.
Their anxiety harks back, of course, to periods
when the theater—from which they don’t distinguish the screen, apparently—boded no good
to the gods of things as they are when the theme
on the boards was one to crowd the galleries.
Why can’t people shun the movies and patronize
musicals and applaud the pageants of their
betters, or sit quietly at home of evenings and
read Guest, Kyne and the author of Riders of the
Purple Sage in the original? The answer is,
people don’t have to! That answer explains,
does it not, the new Lyric, peerless among Escolta
(Main street) buildings?—and the Rialto, similarly dominating in its spacious beauty on Rizal
avenue? More will come. Be not surprised
if the Savoy dons new architectural garments
(and its vaudeville girls don fewer and scantier),
or any of the rest.
Yes, there really is an evangel of the movies;
it is not blasphemy to say so; and neophytes of
native peoples easily pleased, make their nightly
pilgrimages to the box offices. Why? What is
the charm, the mystery the promise? Where
is the lodestone hidden? Wherein lies the oracular
power of the picture puppets? Foolish questions, if one is at all crowd-minded. Every
picture is a delphic promise, mystic with possibilities to every beholder.
Hollywood movies, anyone may observe, are
of, for and by the crowd: they are the celluloid
version in manifold of an allocution uttered at
Gettysburg by a mystic who came up from the
crowd and whom the crowd will never cease to
venerate: “of the people, for the people ...
Lincoln felt for the people, the Hollywood movies
flatter them; wide though the contrast, the
primary concern of the statesman was, and that
of the picture star is, the people. Mavbe Lincoln would have enjoyed the movies, he did enjoy
what went for them in his day and vicinitycamp meeting, county fairs, barbecues. He
was exceedingly fond of the theater, too. The
Fletchers in buskins, the Johnsons in socks, of
his day, were his friends; and he was both a
student and patron of their art.
His career is a super feature for the filins.


The rail split ter who made good in such a glorious
way!
One may question Hollywood’s ethics easier
than he may its psychology, which is quite
irreproachable. The crowd, which Hollywood
proposes to please as a good business proposition, is made up of underdogs. Ain’t it the
truth? In the Hollywood movies, naturally,
the underdog always comes out on top. But


The Lyric is cooled and ventilated indirectly by
means of these false windows 


lordy, intransigents! fear not if he does. His
triumphs are always those of copybook uprightness. The crook is always either caught and
publicly disgraced and punished, or made repentant by adversity; the Hollywood movies always
flicker out the admonishment, Honesty is the
best policy. In them, cruel authority, parental
or what-not, is always defied until it comes to
its senses and moderates its severity: the eloping
couple is forgiven, the erring wife had good and
sufficient reason—beauty, for one thing!—and
the effeminate son turns out at last the real pride
of the family, one whom Dad is glad to acclaim
a chip off the old block!
Far from there being anything subversive
in such preachments, they are a positive public
good; they reach the discouraged ego of adolescence (and fellows down on their luck) with
stimulating pluck and hope just when they need
this illusion most; and they don’t hurt anyone
who is already plentifully supplied with what
they offer. Hollywood movies are a cult of
nonquitters and nonwelchers. Their forest
rangers are not only handsome and heroic, they
are as devoted to the trees they guard as the
Author of the forest himself is. They have a lot
of mean cowboys, but their coleagues who are


Gee, ItMakes ASonnet!
The movies first of all are popular,
Their dairymaidish whimsies
woo the crowd
That feels not humor till it
laughs out loud
At wit, quite witless unless
ocular,
That comes to be, in shadow,
jocular—
Like oldtime crooking of our
uncle’s fingers
Twixt light and wall made
shows whose memory lingers,
Of prankish shades with bodies
globular.
In brief, the movies recapitulate
Our childhood years, of all our
years the best
Remembered in our grown-up
primeAre you too proud tonight to sit
you late,
When to the show you’ve hurried with the rest,
To see a tale unreel of once
upon a time?


loyal to the ranch always baffle the rougues in
the end. Hollywood movies discover shining
virtues beneath rough exteriors, but the crowd
knows of Exhibits a-b-c in support of cases like
this. Hollywood is strictly for property, and
usually bestows a generous portion of it on one
or more deserving young couples before the
fadeout shows the hero and the heroine in each
other’s arms.
Work hard, keep your wits about vou, make
good and win a lovely girl’s true love (or a handsome man’s)—that’s what the Hollywood film
copybook says over and over again: the old story
that never grows old! Demoralizing? Why
Hollywood movies are no more demoralizing
than the boss’s announcement of a raise in one’s
salary; or, on nearing one’s vine and fig tree in a
row of tenements, the smell of a hearty supper
and the song of a comely wife. They’re not at
all demoralizing; they’re exhilarating, rejuvenating; they are cheer leaders. They are somewhat rough on traditions, a new cult replacing
an old one, but there is nothing in them but
what encourages men (of the crowd) to work
hard and buila good homes, to which they retire
early and sober, and women to adorn those
homes and comfort those men with their adorable and indispensable presence, when, and as
long as, they are appreciated in them. Hollywood life may be on the loose, but Hollywood
movies are as orthodox as a stump speech on the
lowa hustings.
So that explains, partially, the prosperity
of the movie business in Manila. It is somewhat
confounding to the theory that east is east and
west is west and never the twain shall meet, but
that is just a theory, and the movies are very
positively a fact. They say we’re to have even
the talkies in the new Lyric. Fine! Out atBinangonan recently, some little boys guided
us up Monte Calvario, where a cross was planted
and in returning one of them slipped and started
tumbling down hill. But, with a proud exclamation,—Douglas Fairbanks!—he righted himself and fell into step again. Inquiry prompted
by the incident revealed a surprising village
familiarity with the stars that made Hollywood
famous and are keeping up her professional
repute. Names were murmured: Clara Bow,
Greta Garbo, Lilian Gish, Aileen Pringle, Buster
Keaton, Charlie Chaplin, Harold Lloyd. They
are the Americans best known in Binangonan,
if not the only ones, Chaplin among them. But
is it so bad? It isn’t. It isn’t even unique.
It’s natural, has innumerable analogies in history and is quite all right.


May, 1929


  


U. S. Cuts Island Mortality More Than Half


Well, we’re in for it
again—another energetic
spinster has been visiting
our islands, she wants some2
thing done about them,
something respecting
health. Her name is Sally
Lucas Jean.
Tall, well
poised, cultured to her
finger tips, the fire of a
3
4
consuming cause in her
brown Maryland eyes, her
"Fido, have you had imperious will will be
obeyed: things will be done,
more things than have been
done heretofore, respecting health. Besides,
she has left a valiant lieutenant behind, right
in our midst and on a two-year contract—Miss
Edna Gerken: who hails from Kansas and is as
persistent as a prairie settler or a Kansas
breeze. Spinster, again—irrepressible in trimming the tapers of civilization.
The single-blessedness of these ladies is not
cited derogatorily, but only to explain them.
Talk to either of them, or rather, listen—they
soon persuade you: they are devoted, as a mother
to her child, to the careers they have espoused,
and the islands are to benefit from the fact.
Miss Jean is a health education consultant, the
only one in the United States, if not in the world;
she is the pioneer in a profession her own talent
created. Miss Gerken has been associated with
her in this work elsewhere, and has now taken
on with the Philippine government for two years.
Miss Jean is secretary of the health education
branch of the world federation of education associations; as such, she is familiar with what is
being done in health education throughout the
world; she describes what has been done here as
marvelous, whatremains to be done as stupendous.
She’s a mistress of ready palaver, what southern
girl isn’t? Besides, she has to be—she has to get
Her oar in first and set the stroke: she has to


lead peoples and officials along with the enlightening and encouraging word.
But she finds in Manila another efficient spinster, Miss Elvessa Stewart, head of the home
economics division of the education bureau,
whom she praises as Miss Stewart deserves to
be praised. “Why!” she exclaims, “We find
so much to build on! So much that we would
have recommended is already done! Miss
Stewart is a remarkable woman, not half enough
appreciated in Manila, I’m afraid. I could
place her where she would
get four and five times
as much as she is receiving
here, she is so capable."
Now, it’s mighty pleasing
to meet an itinerant expert
such as Miss Jean, and have
her say such worthy things
about an oldtimer in the
civil service here. For
dp most perdiemists—may they
be called that?—seem to
"Now wash
feel that their principal
your teeth!" duty is to deprecate everything that has been done
here in their line, particularly everything
done by an oldtimer and regular encumbent.
Miss Jean proposes to tear down nothing, but
to build on the marvelous foundation she finds
already in position for the super-structure. The
job is, health education. It involves coordination of the health service with the education
bureau; and with the agriculture bureau, especially with the research work of Mrs. Sherman;
and with the science bureau in many of its activities. It seeks approval from the press, the
free use of column space; it counts upon hearty
cooperation from community leaders, from the
governor general and the senate president down.
It expects sufficient funds, which have been
promised. It relies upon right examples being
set, of which it has been assured.


To what end? To the end that children generally will be better cared for in the Philippines,
that men and women will maintain higher standards of health—that lives shall be prolonged and
the yearly mortality rate reduced.
Isn’t that an old story to you, oldtimer? How
often have vou heard it, first from Doc Heiser
and Dean Worcester, always from the missionaries, now from these embattled spinsters. For
more than twenty years the domestic science
teachers have been harping the same chord.
All right, what if they have!—what if the tune
is old? You too, on occasion, have gone about
the provinces with a kit of medicine amongst
your dunnage; and you yourself, a hardboiled
hombre, have stopped and told a worried tao
woman how to care for her fevered child. Don’t
deny it, there’s nothing shameful in it. Besides,
it’s nothing you could help: the journalist who
visited the Philippines and returned to his paper
to say that all Americans in the islands are missionaries, struck a stout nail square on the head.
Theyre different kinds, that’s all. But it is the
pride of all of them that the islands' population
has doubled from natural increase alone, during
the past thirty years. They also hail insular
champions where superiority depends upon
physique or involves healthful living.
Actual accomplishment will fall
short of Miss Jean’s
and Miss Gerken’s
expectations: Miss
Stewart may not
A
be equally sanguine.
But there will bepogres in the tast
of educating girlsto be more intelli"Now don’t go licking
gent mothers: to
all-day suckers!"
provide really
wholesome meals
as housewives, to contrive a diet for children
between the ages of 1 and 5. For here is
where, it is understood, emphasis will be placed
—on the diningroom regimen and the dietary
of children.


your vitamins?”


The fault may rest with your diet, if so


Discard those heavy indigestible meals and
(1) Eat sparingly of meat—
(2) Let fresh vegetables and ripe fruit form the bulk of your diet
(3) And, above all, drink plenty of rich nourishing
66.
BEAR
BRAND
NATURAL MILK


The Ideal Milk for the Tropics—
being the sterilized product of the
world’s finest cows fed on the
verdant pastures of Emmenthal
Valley, Switzerland!


SOLD EVERYWHERE IN
LARGE AND SMALL CANS


Luzon Stevedoring
Co., Inc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Port Area
Phone 2-16-61


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


8


  


May, 1929


Balderdash! one is tempted to say, seeing
scarce any change in household customs among
the people. But there is change. When America began, mortality in these islands was more
than 50 per 1,000 yearlv. Now it is just over 20.
Literally, therefore, millions of lives have been
prolonged. This phase of American culture
has taken hold of the people in a remarkable
way. It isn’t a vain spinterian notion. Miss
Jean expects that beriberi may be conquered in
five years; it now claims 20,000 victims a year,
mostly children. Malaria causes 24,000 deaths
a year; it’s depredations can be minimized by
simple household precautions—a matter of
health education. Tuberculosis is increasing,
it takes off 30,000 persons a year; yet it is an
easily preventable disease; everyone has it,
that is, gets it repeatedly, but proper diet and
hygienic measures throw it off. The number of
deaths from it in Manila yearly is 2,000. Many
are children. Yet Dr. Rebecca Parish at Mary
J. Johnston Memorial hospital (whose name
ought never be mentioned in Manila save with
a benediction)has nursed back to health the most
stubborn cases—withathe help of her untiring
staff.
Miss Jean was here three months; she had only
her expenses from the government, and she has
gone to China and Japan, on her way back to
America, on similar missions. Miss Gerken is
of course on salary; she’s a Belo girl among the
several Belo boys on the payroll. Miss Jean’s
suggestions, made after wide travel in the islands, merely to observe, have been reduced to
memoranda and conference talks, and lectures
she gave prior to her departure. In the light
of them the health education course in the education bureau will be revised, and it is understood
she will make a biennial visit to keep in touch
with what is being done.
Lives are still literally wasted in the Philippines, children are still the victims by thousands,
of parental ignorance. Poverty intervenes exceedingly, to prevent even the care that uninstructed mothers know how to give. Total
deaths are 230,000 a vear. Take Occidental
Negros, for example, that feudal principality
where one would expect better things; for it is


Colonel Stimson’s beau tdeal among the provinces, whence he drew the barons to head the
agriculture department. Its population is
400,000; its deaths are 12,277 a year; which is
upeard of 30 per 1,000 inhabitants and some
50% above the average mortality for the islands.
Other details are regrettable, but maybe giving
some of them will do some good; 2,772 Negros
babies die under one year old; 870more die before
their second birthday arrives; 1,440 more die
before reaching their third birthday; 977 more
die before reaching their fourth birthday; 680
more die before reaching their fifth birthday;
888 more die between their 5th and 10th birthdays, 307 more between their IIth and 14th
birthdays, and 255 more before reaching their
20th birthday. Here are 8,189 boys and girls a
year, permanently disposed of before attaining an
age fitting them to work in the cane fields. It’s
an industrial waste which the celebrated prowess


A new gold strike! On the headwaters of the
Angat river, thirty miles from Manila, where
the roaring stream has excavated through the
mountains the Ipo gulch, through which it
pours toward the sea, they have found upward
of twenty veins of pay dirt! The ore assays
indicate this to be a fabulous strike, even the
ore taken at the surface is high-grade (some of it
so rich that men hesitate to believe), while it is
a proved fact that the deeper mines go in veins
of Philippine ore, the richer the ore becomes.
Some of the veins are very wide, their depth is
not known. Some of them are no more than
arm’s length in width, and their depth is not
known. But break up a piece at random, pan
it, and there is gold. The veins seem to spread
fanwise, and converge fanwise toward a prominent peak. Be not surprised if here be found
an El Dorado.
The discoverers are convinced of it. T.
Euwaki, mining engineer, who knows the Benguet mines—Balatok and Antamok—and knows
the Syndicate mines in Masbate, is the engineer
on this project and confident it is the biggest


of Negrenses hasn’t got round to as yet. It
indicates, besides being utterly astounding,
what obvious talking points there are for health
education.
If such conditions prevail now, what must
they have been in 1898. It’s a task to plug
away at incessantly. The devotion of many
women must go into it. Miss Jean has the
faculty of inspiring them to effort, being so
downright honest and earnest in what she says
and asks for. She has asked the governor, the
senate president, the university president and
many other bigwigs of officialdom to set the
fashion in using unpolished rice at their own
tables. They have meekly promised to do so!
Thus she begins the assault on beriberi. Five
years hence. . . well, who knows? The women
marshalled, and they know what they want. It
would be a rash prophet who would say they
won’t get it.


strike made thus far in the Philippines. He
thinks it may prove to be the biggest gold mine
in the orient; he will not be surprised if it runs
half a billion dollars. How busy he is! How
excited he is! With his geologist’s hammer,
his panning outfit, his transit men, scouting
about on the hills—finding new outcrops, new
veins, and staking new claims!
The gold already in sight will pay all the expenses of developing the mine and return dividends besides. The road being built for the
Metropolitan Water District, gives access to the
mine site with only the addition of a short spur.
Even if this were not available, the site would be
comparatively accessible. Here every fortuitous
circumstance combines in a most romantic
discovery.
George Cushing, who made the discovery,
found that the very boulders in the river are
gold, running $7 to $10 a ton, well above the
minimum for profit.
All things in the Philippines being sui generis,
there has been no gold rush. Manila has been


Ipo Gulch Thirty Miles From Manila Is El Dorado


(6
Whew!
But it’s hot”!
So everybody says everywhere during this season
of the year—and they will keep on saying it until they
seek relief in the refreshing and steady wind from—


Robbins &: Mvers Fans
Telephone us about ROBBINS & MYERS
Fans. We’ll deliver on the run. We sell all kinds
of these grand breezers.


ELMAC, INC.
MANILA"
PHONE 2-35-33
627 RIZAL AVE.


For
Comfort


TOR office and street wear this
model is a favorite with most
men. Roomy, neat, well designed
and made of fine materials throughout. See them at any HIKE
store. Wear a pair for comfort.
HIKE SHOE FACTORY


Sty le Creators


286 San Marcelino


Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


May, 1929


  


9


spared that anguishing experience, that terrifying excitement under which the preacher leaves
his pulpit, the saloon kecper his bar, the professional man his desk, the clerk his weary
counter, the truck man his auto wheel, the
plumber his extortions, the Magdalen her parlor,
the washerwoman her tub, and high and low
and rich and poor go secking gold. So it would
be in western Amcrica, and the pen could not
describe it. But in the Philippines, in the very
environs of Manila, nothing of this occurs.
The story is read in the newspapers, and discredited!
Even the first story, Frank Sherman’s, in the
Bulletin, takes pains to say that the bonanza
has already been covered by claims already
filed with the government.
That wouldn’t stop them in America. They
would get as close as they could with their
claims; they would stake everywhere, and hang
on ... and hope. In Manila, they don’t. They
don’t play fortune that way.
Whose is the new gold property? It belongs
to officials and employes, Americans and Filipinos, of the Atlantic, Gulf and Pacific Company, Wm. J. Shaw, president.
The property was discovered by George
Cushing, tunnel foreman on an A.-G. & P.
engineering job for the water company. The
engineering company is tunneling under the
mountains for the water company, from the
proposed dam site on the upper Angat to a point
this side of the mountains, a distance of seven
kilometers. The hither tunnel head is at BictiIpo, the thither at Ipo. Last year a foreman
on the Ipo end was needed, since they are tunnel¬-
ing from both ends, and Cushing got the job.
He took Mrs. Cushing out there with him.
They are just a young adventurous couple, and
she stayed there, maintaining for her husband
a cheerful home. Their cottage is far down the
mountain slope; it perches on the bank of the
Angat just above high water, and the scene is
up and down the river. Mrs. Cushing could
sit at her window on holidays, and see her
husband prospecting down the gulch.
It is a pretty place, but lonesome if you hanker
for the company of your kind. If you are like


Mrs. Cushing, it is a paradise: all the pets you
want, all the flowers from the wild hills, and the


P. I. Gold Exports


1899.................. $ 2,426,655
5915
1900........... . . . . . . .
9,100
1901..................
222
1902..................
100
1903....... . . . . . . . . . . .
6,335
1904..... . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,598
1905...................
5,760
1906........... . . . . ...
93,824
1907.......... . . . . . . . .
217,250
1908............. . . ...
247,597
1909........ . . . . . . . . . .
154,430
1910........... . . . . . . .
189,953
1911.............. . . . .
1912........ . . . . . . . . . .
570,212
818,362
1913....... . . . . . . . . . . .
1,210,482
1914....... . . . . . . . . . . .
1,305,991
1915........... . . . . . . .
1,493,559
1916..................
2,350,552
1917.......... . . . . . . . .
936,869
1918..... . . . . . . . . . . . . .
971,576
1919..................
1,171,943
1920..................
1,330,688
1921...... . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,450,429
1922..... . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,681,605
1923...... . .. . .. . .. ...
1,736,932
1934..................
1,938,962
M
1,941,555
1926...... . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,600,134
1927........ . . . . . . . . . .
1,809,870
1928..... . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Totalin 30 years..... $27,093,300


In getting the Philippines, the United
States paid Spain $20,000,000. Here
it is, with interest, from some of the
mineral lands of the public domain
which the payment covered. This
gold went to U. S. mints.


anag ag nag Nag aan anl Ng TOg a
flashes silver as it tumbles along its rough course.


It washes and washes at the boulders. There
is placer gold in its sands.
Cushing is a mechanical engineer with mining
experience, and mining blood in him; his is a
family of miners. He hails from the American
west, but was educated in New York City, at
Columbia. He has mined in the United States,
Mexico and South America. This is not his
first big strike, but it is the first that gives opportunity for development. He learned persistence
in the mining game from British principals he
worked for in the United States and Mexico;
he admires the British for their staying qualities
in the game. He is a lithe, weathered, keen
prospector—the type they call gambarinos down
in Mexico. (For this happy-go-lucky Mexican
miner, Cushing has great respect.)
With his dog and his hammer and his panning
kit Cushing has the habit of prospecting the
soil wherever he happens to be. And before
he went to Ipo he had had experience of Philippine mining in Masbate and Benguet. The
lore to be had from the science bureau on the
subject, he has of course got into his mind.
Mining texts and English classics divide honors
on his bookshelves. He was, then, the ideal
man for Ipo. The boulders began telling him
things first; the direction of the stream, the lay
of the hills, told him more. Every opportunity
was devoted to the gulch, and the first vein
found, afterward the first of dozens of claims,
was preempted in honor of his wife. She is a
good partner; he met her in Los Angeles, maybe
before, maybe after he did his bit with the U. S.
Marines in the World War; and to marry him
she went to a port down in Peru, where passengers are put into chairs and landed like cargo.
They have knocked about in out-of-the-way
places since.
Cushing kept his employers informed of his
discoveries. Then Euwaki, the mining engineer,
was sent to Ipo, then the claims were taken up,
each in the name of an official or employe in the
A.-G. & P., and the next step will be a stamp
mill, with Cushing in charge. The Ipo Mining
Co., Inc., has been organized, with President
Shaw at the head of it. That is the story of
(To bottom of page 11)


ling table water.
One glass of this delicious natural mineral water
taken regularly after each meal will soon imbue
you with the self-same sparkle and rim that has
made “Tansan" the “King of all Table Waters”!
AVOID IMITATIONS—INSIST ON “TANSAN"!


and a real
thirst -quencher—
There is
satisfaction
in ev er y
glass of
delicious


MaleDilsen
Brewed by
SAN MIGUEL BREWERY


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


10


  


May, 1929


Supreme Court and Projected Court
of Appeals
For some time past a project has been under consideration in our
Legislature for the establishment of a Court of Appeals, and this movement
took the shape, in the last session of the Legislature, of an Act which failed
to receive the approval of Governor General Stimson. The public at
large has as yet manifested little or no interest in the subject, owing no
doubt to the consideration that the matter is primarily one where professional legal experience is called for and to the further reflection that, at
any rate, nothing radical can be accomplished by the Legislature without
the approval of the Congress of the United States. In view of the fact
that the bill which failed to obtain the approval of the Governor General
will probably receive further consideration at the next session of the Legislature, we believe this to be an opportune time to direct the attention of
the public to the problem that is being considered and to point out what
appears to us to be the most practical solution of the trouble with which
we are confronted.
The fundamental fact giving rise to the project for the establishment
of a Court of Appeals, is that the Supreme Court has for many years been
overburdened with work, and that its calendars are being clogged with
many trivial cases, which require the time and attention of the court to
the exclusion of matters of greater importance. We are informed that this
court is now disposing of cases at the rate of nearly two thousand
per annum, to say nothing of the thousands of informal orders that
find expression in minute entries from day to day during the active sessions
of the court. It is much to be doubted whether there is a court of last
resort in any other country that is driven at this speed. Needless to say
that the situation is one that requires serious attention from the lawmakers.
The influx of excessive work on the Supreme Court began with the
expansion of commercial activities in the Islands incident to the World War
and was first noticeably felt in 1917; and to meet the incoming flood of new
work on the court the Philippine Legislature, in that year, increased the
number of the Supreme Court Judges to nine. In the first years of the increased business the access of litigants to the Supreme Court was obstructed by the conditions in the Courts of First Instance, where the accumulation of cases was so great that the judges of those courts were unable
to dispose of them. But this condition was cured temporarily by the
creation of new judgeships about eight years ago; and the same remedy
has been lately applied again by the Legislature. The result is that the
Supreme Court, with a personnel of nine, is now receiving nearly, or about,
three times as many cases annually as came upon its calendar when there
were five members of the court to attend to its business. Upon this it is
obvious that, sooner or later, some remedy must be found.
To correct this trouble one or the other of the only two possible courses
must be adopted, that is, the number of the Justices of the Supreme Court
must be again increased or a Court of Appeals must be created to take care
of a good part of the business now coming to the Supreme Court. The
first of these alternatives is the one that commends itself to our judgment;
and as the considerations bearing upon this feature of the discussion are
simple, we shall say what is to be said about it now.
In this connection it is to be borne in mind that the Philippine Legislature has the authority to increase the number of the Justices of the Su
preme Court without the approval of Congress. No Congressional Act
prescribes the precise number of the Justices of the Supreme Court, and in
fact as the court is now constituted the number of Justices at present commissioned is fixed by section 133 of the Administrative Code of the Philippine Islands and by no other authority. The circumstance that the situation confronting us can be relieved by the Philippine Legislature, acting
without reference to Congress, shows that this course is at least practicable, considered with reference to the powers of the Philippine Legislature;
and when its easy accomplishment is contrasted with the difficulties of
establishing a Court of Appeals, the inference must be that the remedy
proper to be now applied by the Legislature is to increase the number of
Justices to eleven.


With respect to the propriety of thus increasing the personnel of the
Supreme Court, the first consideration that appeals to us is that this course
involves the expenditure of less than half the money that will be required
for the establishment and maintenance of a Court of Appeals; for the addition of two members to the Supreme Court will involve an outlay for
their salary and that of their stenographers of only P45,400, while the
salaries of the five members of the Court of Appeals with their stenographers, and a clerk and deputy clerk, as fixed in the companion bill to the
vetoed Act (Sen. BillNo. 159) amount to P101,000. It must be remembered
also that the expenses of the proposed Court of Appeals, as fixed in the
companion bill, do not include anything for the additional subordinate
employees to be authorized by the Secretary of Justice for the new court,
or for other expenses of any sort. On the other hand, if the number of
Justices of the Supreme Court be increased, as suggested, the additional
incidental expense to the Supreme Court will be slight. We are, we believe, in conservative bounds, in estimating the expense of increasing the
membership of the Supreme Court at about forty per centum of the amount
necessary for the Court of Appeals.
In making this statement we do not overlook the circumstance that
the proposed Court of Appeals will have five Justices, while the suggested
increase in the Supreme Court contemplates only two additional members;
and it is of course obvious that five judges can do more work than two.
But when we consider the amount of judicial energy that would necessarily be expended by the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court in determining the questions that must arise over the problem of the jurisdiction
of the two courts and by the Supreme Court in determining the preliminary
question whether, in a given case, it will entertain an appeal, it will be seen
that the effective increase of judicial energy under the double establishment would be much less than would be indicated in the number of new
judges (or Justices) in the Court of Appeals. In other words, with the
establishment of a second appellate court, the two courts will always be
occupied with a series of new problems that are wholly absent while only
one court exists.
The appointment of two additional members to the Supreme Court
would practically assure at all times during the regular terms of the court
the presence of a sufficient number of Justices to permit two full divisions
of the court to operate contemporaneously. As the law now stands, four
members are necessary to constitute a quorum in a division of the Supreme
Court. This means that eight should be present in order to constitute two
divisions. With the membership of the court fixed at nine, as at present,
it happens more frequently than otherwise that one or the other of the
two divisions, and some times both, are short of the requisite membership.
We may here state, by the way, that the court is permitted by law to sit
in divisions for the decision of minor cases only; and experience has shown
that the operation of the court in division supplies a speedy and efficient
means for disposing of the less important cases.
Again, with the increased membership of the court, it can be reasonably expected that in some years at least, and as required by the exigencies
of business, the full court may extend its term for the decision even of the
most important cases beyond the nine months period covered by the regular sessions, but this cannot be easily understood without reference to the
leave privileges of the members of the court, which we shall not now stop
to explain. It is enough to say that although the law now actually requires only nine months of consecutive work from members of the court
who are not on leave, it has for more than ten years been the custom of
the court to maintain a special division for light cases during at least part
of the vacation period; and in one year six members (comprising a quorum
of the full court) worked during vacation for the dispatch of important
cases. Of course when the Justices apply themselves steadily to the work
of the court during the ordinary vacation period, it is but reasonable that
they should have an equal period of relief during some other part of the
year; and the law in fact sanctions this by allowing the time thus served
to be held for future leave. This circumstance supplies of course a strong
motive to the members of the court for extending their labors into the
vacation period, for it not infrequently happens that a member of the
court needs to absent himself from the court during the regular sessions
not only for the use of leave privileges but even upon account of sickness;
and when this occurs it is desirable for the member to have the privilege,
for such it really is, of working during vacation periods.
So far as we are aware the only serious objection thus far advanced to
increasing the membership of the Supreme Court is based on the fear that,
with eleven members, the court would be undesirably cumbersome in the
dispatch of cases coming before the full court. The suggestion is not
without some force, but it fails to take account of the fact that with the
increased membership, and under the liberal provisions of law governing
leave, a more satisfactory distribution of leave allowances throughout the
year can be made, with the result that there would not often be a full at

May, 1929


  


11


tendance of eleven members at one time. The criticism based on supposed
inconvenience of eonducting business with a court of eleven members is
not in our view sufficiently weighty to justify the rejection of the plan.
We shall now say a few words with reference to the Senate bill creating a Court of Appeals, which was vetoed by Governor General Stimson.
At the outset we note that the failure of the Governor General to approve
the bill was based upon the sole ground that the bill did not contain a
provision giving the Supreme Court full power, in its discretion, to review
and correct any decision rendered by the Court of Appeals. From the
wording of the message expressing the grounds of the nonapproval, it
appears that the Governor General was of the opinion that the discretionary right of review by the Supreme Court of the decisions of the Court of
Appeals should extend both to questions of law and of fact. It is to be
supposed that if the Legislature proceeds further with the project, the
criticism made by the Governor General will be met by the insertion in the
billof a provision giving the suggested power of review to the Supreme
Court; for it is scarcely credible that Congress would bother itself about
approving such a measure as this where the bill had been vetoed by the
Governor General.
With respect to this right of review by our Supreme Court of the
decisions of the Court of Appeals, it is obvious that if the Supreme Court
should undertake to review the decisions of the Court of Appeals in all
cases, both on questions of law and fact, the relief to the Supreme Court
would not be sufficient to justify the establishment of the court. But of
course it is not contemplated that the Supreme Court would in fact review
all the decisions of the Court of Appeals. What the Governor General
apparently intended is that our Supreme Court should, in its discretion,
exercise a power of review in particular cases. In this, we presume, it was
intended to suggest a relation between the courts somewhat similar to
that which now exists, with respect to review, between the Supreme Court
of the United States and the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands.
In this connection it will be remembered that the Supreme Court of the
United States has a discretionary power in certain cases to review the
decisions of the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands. But it is not
made obligatory upon the higher court to exercise this power. The result
is that the Supreme Court of the United States considers, as a preliminary
matter in each case, the question whether it will review the decision. Formal opinions are never written by the Supreme Court of the United States
in resolving such matters; and this implies a great relief to the higher
tribunal in the saving of the labor of writing decisions. If the recommendation of Governor General Stimson should be incorporated in the
law, the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands would pass informally
upon petitions for appeals from decisions of the Court of Appeals, and
naturally such applications would be dismissed unless something should
appear in the record which should make it desirable for the Supreme Court
in its discretion to review particular cases. If the court should operate
along this line and entertain appeals only in its discretion, the relief to the
Supreme Court would undoubtedly be great. It should further be observed that if the Supreme Court is given full discretionary authority to
review any decision of the Court of Appeals, this fact will justify, and
perhaps even require a readjustment of some of the provisions of the proposed law limiting the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeals, as for instance,
in criminal cases.
A careful examination of the provisions of the vetoed act shows that it
suffers from other grave defects than that mentioned by Governor General
Stimson; and even if the bill should be so amended as to cure that defect,
there are, in our opinion, other reasons why the bill should not obtain the
approval of the Governor General or of the Congress of the United States.
Into these questions we do not propose here to enter deeply, but a few
words upon one or two prominent features of the bill will not be out of
place.
The cabalistic word Jurisdiction is the name of an abyss of entanglements in which both the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court would
find themselves involved under this bill. The act attempts to define the
jurisdiction of the two courts in mutually exclusive terms. Take the
provision relating to criminal appeals. Under subsection (b) of section
1, of the act, the exclusive appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
extends to all criminal cases in which any of the appellants was found guilty
of an offense for which the law prescribes a penalty the term of which exceeds six years; while conversely, under section 3 of the bill, the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeals extends to all criminal cases in which none of
the appellants was found guilty of an offense for which the law prescribes
a penalty the term of which exceeds six years. In other words, the dividing line between the respective jurisdictions of the two courts is the penalty
fixed by law for the offense. Observe here that the provision does not say
"when the sentence imposed by the trial court involved a penalty in excess
of six years”—which would have supplied a fixed and easy criterion for
determining the jurisdiction. No: the jurisdiction must be determined
by the penalty which the law prescribes for the particular offense. But
the penalty which the law prescribes can seldom be known with certainty
until all the elements of the offense have been analyzed and weighed.
Even in homicide cases, where the penalty normally ranges from twelve to
twenty years, the court may, in consideration of the presence of two or more


JACOB


LEVY


PHILIPPINE HATS


Buntals -: Bamboos -: Calasiaos -:- Balibuntals


Correspondence Solicited


227 Calle David


Manila, P. I.


Cable Address:


“TEXTILES”


mitigating circumstances, reduce the penalty to a very short period, and
under other conditions apply the penalty appropriate to a mere misdemeanor. Until a case has been tried nobody can really know what the
penalty fixed by law for a particular offense is. The consequence would be
that under the proposed bill the Court of Appeals would frequently try
cases only to find that the appropriate penalty was in excess of its jurisdiction, while per contra the Supreme Court would try a similar case only
to find in the end the appropriate penalty was below its jurisdiction.
Legislation having in it possibilities of this character should not find favor
in any quarter. The author of the bill, in defining the jurisdiction of the
two courts, would have done well to have followed the language used in
the similar situation contemplated in section 138 of the Administrative
Code where the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in division is determined
by the penalty imposed by the lower court.
A feature of the bill which seems to us objectionable is that relating
to appeals in contested elections. Under the law as it formerly stood appeals were only permitted to the Supreme Court, from the decisions of
Courts of First Instance, when the contest involved a provincial office.
At the legislative session of 1927, the law was so amended as to permit appeals from the decisions of the Courts of First Instance in respect to the
office of municipal president. Under subsection () of the proposed bill
creating the Court of Appeals the right of appeal in contested elections is
extended to municipal offices generally. Under the existing law permitting
appeals to the Supreme Court in contests over thomce of municipal president, the Supreme Court has been called upon to decide fifty or more
contests over the office of municipal president arising from the election
of 1928. With the extension of the right of appeal to all municipal offices,
this branch of litigation will undoubtedly undergo corresponding expansion;
and if subsection () stands, the Supreme Court in the future will find its
time largely occupied with litigation of this character. It is noteworthy
that the law gives these cases the right of way in the Supreme Court; and
it not infrequently happens that the court must postpone the decision of
civil cases involving enormous interests in order to decide whether one person or another has been elected to a municipal office in some remote province. We do not criticise the amendment of the law so far as relates to
the right of appeal in such cases; but these election cases are precisely a
sort of litigation that should be confided to the Court of Appeals. The
Supreme Court should not be burdened with hearing them. Election
contests do not involve, as a rule, the application of difficult principles of
law. They involve rather the investigation of a multitude of details, such
as the examination of thousands of particular ballots. The proper place
for the decision of these appeals is, in our opinion, the Court of Appeals,
if one should be established.
We proceed no farther with our comment on the details of the act,
since what has been said suffices to show that the project suffers from grave
defects, which are possibly of an incurable nature; and we are thus driven
back to the first alternative, namely, the increase of the number of the
Justices of the Supreme Court to eleven, as supplying the only practical
solution of the problem presented by the congested calendars of that Court.


Ipo Gulch ... Is El Dorado
(Concluded from page 9)
Ipo up to date. But Ipo by no means harbors all the gold there is in the
mineral region of which it is a part. Other strikes will be made in that
region some day, there is scarce a doubt. The very fields vield gold, but
none is found in paying quantities. Yet it is there, and surely comes from
some rich lode.
There is at least half a million gold in the dirt that makes up Novaliches dam, another feature of the new water system. And all along the
way, from the dam toward the city as far as the bridge at the town of
Novaliches, panning the dirt in any weather hole reveals color. But it
is too little to pay. Where it its origin? Maybe in some rich lode, never
discovered by the Spaniards, only known to natives of the region who
have grown old and died. From times unknown placer mining was carried
on by the native Filipinos in this region, until it played out. The
lode, the rich mother lode! Some day someone will find it. A glance at
the list of gold exports accompanying this paper, is enough to show that
gold mining here is but well begun. Where the hidalgos searched in
vain, or found mines of little profit when worked by the methods of the
times, the modern miner goes in with the aid of science and machinery
and breaks loose millions—a large part of which goes back to the country
in wages and becomes of actual value here.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERIISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  


May, 1929


Coconuts Make Philippines $50,000,000 Yearly


ING
A
IC
TS
ne
old
eliable
Pho
rap h
Department ofA
E
K'S


Among a number of things in which the Philippines excel the rest of the world is the growing
of coconuts, from which the meat is taken for
candies and confections and the oil for various
staples from soap to soup stock, margarine for
the table and grease for the pancake griddle.
The same oil makes filled milk, and the glycerine
it contains is an indispensable ingredient of gun
cotton and t-n-t. Philippine coconuts are converted into copra (the dried meat), oil and copra
meal, and desiccated coconut.
In these semicrude forms, Philippine coconuts
are exported in large quantities during every
month of the year, principally to the United
States and Europe. London seems specially
to prefer Cebu copra (that from theport of Cebu,
gathered there from the nearby provinces),
which ordinarily is cured in the sun. The bulk
of copra cured on Luzon is dried by smudge; it
is spread over a bamboo grating over a pit where
a slow fire of dried husks is kept burning. But


some excellent types of driers are being introduced; growers who have installed these produce
a copra which is white and clean and free from
smoky odors.
Ground up, heated and put through hydraulic
presses, copra yields about 63% of its weight
in oil. The cake is left, which, ground into meal
again, makes a rich ingredient of dairy feeds.
When it derives from clean copra it is a nutritious
food for man, rich in both fats and protein. The
glycerine, contained in the oil, about 50, is as
satisfactory as any and is in demand for the
manufacture of high explosives; the United
States has no other such source of glycerine as it
has in the enormous plantations of Philippine
coconuts.
Besides the coconut regions mentioned, Luzon
and the Bisayas, the industry has recently been
extended in northern and southern Mindanao;
on the island of Basilan, and in the Sulu archipelago. Themonthly value of coconut oil export

Put
Make More MoneyThese Machines On Ine Job!


Macleod Batch-a-Minute Concrete Mixer


Modern conditions require speed.
Man power is slow and expensive.
Macleod Hoist and Concrete mixer
will handle your heavy loads and
mix your concrete quickly and economically.
Send for Complete Information
Macleod & Co.
MANILA
Iloilo
Davao
Cebu


Macleod Hoist


E

G TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OL


14


  


May, 1929


What Insurance Should Do for You


The determining factor concerning
your insurance is not so much how much
you own as it is how is your insurance
arranged?
The primary purpose of insurance is
to provide a comfortable living for the
family in the event of the father’s death.
This purpose can only be accomplished
through careful planning.
Your insurance policies can be used
to perform a wide variety of services.
It is the agent’s duty to help you get
the most out of your insurance.
In the first place, every man should
own enough insurance to pay his funeral
expenses and cancel all persona indebtedness. For this reason, a definite part
of your insurance should be payable in
a lump sum.
The amount of this lump sum settlement depends upon your individual
circumstances. The one fixed item that
has to be met is the funeral expense.
The others vary greatly.
If you have a number of personal
debts, your clean-up policy will have to
be greater than the man who isn’t in
debt. Take an inventory of yourself
and see how much insurance you need
for this purpose.
A second important service that life
insurance can best perform for you is
to pay off the mortgage on your home.


No man wants his wife to struggle
with a mortgage after he is gone
You should plan your insurance with
this in mind and designate one policy
for this special purpose.
If you have already provided for the
first two requirements, you should buy
insurance with the idea of providing a
monthly income for your family.
It is unwise for any man to place his
insurance on the monthly income plan


until he has provided a lump sum to pay
his funeral expenses, personal debts
and his mortgage. This would be vio

lating the true purpose of life insurance.
Insurance, like any other commodity,


only reaches its highest value when it is
bought for definite purposes and to
perform specific duties.
Plan your insurance estate. Agents
are always ready to serve you. Don’t
hesitate to ask.
We are all looking for human betterment.
Every responsible man is interested
in the safety and well being of his dependent loved ones.


Doubts and fears arise, at times,
in the most stout hearted, when the
future well being of wife, daughter or
son is seriously contemplated.


pass on leaving his funeral expenses
unpaid, or a mortgage on his home, or
indebtedness against his property that
would deprive his family of their needs.
Every American father wants his
children well reared and properly educated, so that they will grow into useful
citizens and be able to take their proper
places in society. It is one of his chief
concerns to give them their proper
start in life.
All men die young or grow old. The
hazard of growing old and becoming
dependent is just as great as is the hazard
of dying young and leaving dependents
improperly cared for. Consequently,
every thoughtful man is interested in an
old age income. The waning years of
any productive life should be made independent and free from financial worry.
Our Suggestion
The proper forms of life insurance
policies will:
1. Provide your wife with a monthly
income as long as she lives, rear your
daughter in safety and security, educate
your boy and establish him in his business
or profession.
2. More economically and with no
expense, a life insurance policy will provide the funds to pay the expenses of
your last illness, liquidate the mortgage
when you go, and leave your property
free from debt.
3. An Educational policy will, just at
the right time and in the exact manner
that you specify, create for them,
whether you live or die, a fund sufficient to put them through school and
give them their rightful chance.
4. Properly arranged, the cash value


N RESTONDING TO ADVERTISEMENIS FLEASE MENIION TRE ANERICAN CRAMBER OF COMMEROP


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
Manila, P. I.
Kneedler Building
Telephone 2-36-74


No man lives who would elect to


The Insular Life Assurance Co., Ltd.
MANILA, P. I.





ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oansonrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
low interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
FOR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of ₱1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


HOME OFFICE


Call or write for particulars to:


4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 115
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


May, 1929


EE
  


15


of the policies you have kept for the
guaranty and security of your loved
ones will give you at age 60 or 65, a


Young Filipino readers, whom, among its
patrons, this magazine greatly appreciates, are
likely to get little aid from this occasional department in preparing themselves to pass any particular test in English literature. They may,
on the other hand, discover in the department
what is intended to be there—some genuine
assistance in devising a technique of their own
for the acquisition of English forms. To this
end poetry is valuable, and what follows will
contain suggestions based upon a study of
Shelley's Ode to the Mest Wind. This is chosen
somewhat at random, but also because many
readers are likely to have it at hand for convenient reference. In English Poems from
Chaucer to Kipsing it opens on page 209.


One benefits his vocabulary in the study of
poems, by going at them forceps and scalpel
and laying their anatomy bare; that workmanlike
method is the sole one which makes any piece of
literature, selected for study, worth while. If
it is good, why is it good? What parts are good?
Let’s see them. Let’s examine them and familiarize ourselves with them. In what is it like what
we already know of, and in what is it unlike
and novel? Commencing with the very title,
dissect the piece without mercy; after all, your
object is to get out of it what the authorput intoit.
Scan it for imagery. Do you like these
metaphors:
Breath of Autumn’s being; pestilence-stricken
multitudes; wild spirit; tangled boughs of Heaven
and Ocean; angels of rain and lightning; dirge
of the dying year; night, .. . dome of a vast sepulcher; the thorns of life; be thou me, impetuous one!
and the trumpet of a prophecy?
Not bad, some of them? No, indeed; and
yet, one would never notice it in the context,
perhaps—one of them is commonplace, the
thorns of life. See if you, some time, concentrating on some inspiring subject are able to
contrive some novel metaphors in English which
are pat to this country.
Now for downright similes:
Like ghosts from an enchanter fleeing; each like
a corpse within its grave; loose clouds like earth's
decaying leaves are shed; like the bright hair uplifted from the head of some fierce Maenad; if
even I were as in my boyhood; lift me as a wave,
a leaf, a cloud; make me thy lyre, even as the forest
is; what if my leaves are falling like its own;"
drive my dead thoughts over the universe like
withered leaves to quicken a new birth; scatter,
as from an unextinguished hearth ashes and sparks,
my words among mankind.
There are the ten similes in the piece, and all
fine expressions; but one, the second, somewhat


monthly life income that will bless your
declining years with peace and independence.


partaking of the gruesome and likely to provoke,
in ordinary litcrature, the wrath of the editorial
blue pencil. Do ghosts flee from an enchanter,
or has the poet got the cart before the horse in
this? This is not to dare a criticism, but to bear
in mind the preciseness of diction we are after.
There may be a hundred examples to rebuke
his ignorance, but it has been the present scribe’s
impression that enchanters raise ghosts rather
than quict them, at least more commonly;
but since they are enchanters, perhaps they
can raise and quiet ghosts at will—perhaps
sometimes they give way to sudden pique and
drive their ghostly ranks back to the tombs
whence they've called them forth. The point
here is, it is nover essential to take an author,



things, especialy an thing written. "lne
attitude of the elderly lady listening to the
vigorous young curate’s sermon on immortality,
is the opposite of that with which one should
harken to a language lesson: her rapt attention
is her salvation, the curate’s vigor recalls to her


those fleeting times when she felt nearest heaven,
and so revives her longing, while his words
kindle her hope of carly favors from divinity,
companionship with the angels: while the student
of a composition has more practical ends in view
and wishes merely to know the virtuesand defects
of the model he is examining. In short, while
one is studying a piece is not the time to rhapsodize over it; if he really like the piece then he
can memorize it—pocket it in his mind forever.
Which is a good thing to do; easy in our green
years, hard in later ones.
Why ode? What is an ode?
Turn to an authority. Zcitlin and Rinaker’s
Tupes of Poetry is a good one; some such text
as this should be a part of the library equipment
of all secondary schools and colleges.
"An ode,” says this authority, "is a lyric in
which a serious and dignified theme is built up
in a succession of claborate stanzas in a style
of special stateliness. It is the form emploved
when the occasion appears to the poet highly
momentous, arousing feelings and ideas of unusual solemnity and impressiveness.” This
fits with the piece at hand. Let us see how.
What is Shelley’s serious and dignified theme?
His denunciation of an ambitious European military alliance: Shelley was, of course, a liberal.
And has he built up his theme in a succession
of elaborate stanzas in a style of special stateliness? The scribe’s judgment concedes as much.
Does yours? For that’s the question: exercise
your oun judgment, though you constantly
seek to refine it, about literature; refrain from
being nonplussed by another’s seeming erudition.
Do you think Shelley chose nobly, longing to ally
himself with the conquering winds of autumn,
that his thoughts (for the welfare of mankind)
might be driven “over the universe like withered
leaves to quicken a new birth” of freedom?
He addressed the wind as a spirit kindred
with his own; he had to envy it its free and
boundless power, and to lament the “heavy
weight of hours” that chained and bound him:
though his soul would have vaulted worldwide with the west wind of autumn, and tumbled
Europe’s wintered imperial institutions down,
as dead leaves, that their decay should nurture
the sceds of a fresh civilization, yet this aspiring
soul was pent within his physical being: he had
to watch the west wind stream on, and leave
him, a wretched figure, in the little woods on the
banks of the Arno, his coat tails swishing like a
coachman’s, his thoughts in verses never read,
save in derisive mockery, at the royal courts
berated by his ire. He turns from the wind,
momentarily even shields himself from it—he
who would in youth have been the comrade of
its wanderings!—and muses eloquently on the
lines of his poem. For there it was composed,
in the woods that skirt the Arno nearby Flo

IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


PARLE THE D.


It is not high pressure salesmanship—It is not persuasive
advertising—It’s the machine itself that has sold nearly
a million and a half Easy-Writing Royal Typewriters.


EVO


TYPEWRITERS


M


CAMERA
Ilo ESCoLTA"


Phone 2-21-98
SUPPLY


A!
CO M BAmtAPA


Haphazard Studies in the English Language


VO Mlave
The Largest and Most Complete Stock
of Drygoods in the Philippines
If you need silks, linens, cottons, or
notions you can serve yourself best
by choosing from our large stocks
We also carry haberdashery, and
make men's suits and shirts
Manuel r ellicer y Co., inc.
Phone 2-11-06
44 Escolta, Manila


16


  


May, 1929


rence, while the trees bent before the autumn storm, busy at whipping
off their frosted leaves and scattering them into beds beneath which
seeds could winter through until the clarion of the winds of spring
awakened them to growth.
So fell Shelley on the thorns of life. So bled his wistful heart.
Is it not a subject for the sculptor, the painter? Has anyone ever done
it on canvas or in bronze or marble, this poet, bent-shouldered, under
the bereft and moaning trees, dead wind-shot leaves sticking to his
garments? There he kneels, in torturing hope to jot down words that
will “scatter, as from an unextinguished hearth ashes and sparks,...
among mankind"!
So they have been scattered, too; but our concern here is only
technical, to ascertain that what we read is really a classic English ode.
Persuade yourself. Which calls for the reminder that pieces such as
this ode are properly read over several times to make their general
sense familiar, before they are cut up to find what they are made of.
This ode is a month’s study, even for partial mastery of its intricacies
and decent benefit from its phraseology. Thou on whose stream; this
word stream is so commonly applied to currents of water as to connote
them when used alone, but it applies quite as correctly to a current of
air—in the extremity of verse making. The winged seed; this device of
nature needs no explanation in the Philippines, where the wind outstrips
birds and all other agencies, including the agriculture bureau, in distributing seeds. There are also desiduous trees here, whose leaves,
though unaided by frost and ice-cold atmosphere, do acquire the hectic
hues of dead foliage and fall off; so the lines about this phenomenon in
the Arno forest are comprehensible. It is only important to note contrasts, which the student’s intelligence must detect for him. Wind up
a study of the piece with a glossary of all the unfamiliar words, for they
are all of current repute in the language; round this out with lists of
synonyms and antonyms.
Lulled by the coil of his crystalline streams, in reference to the Mediterranean’s swirling lazily about the isles off the Floretine coast, may
mean, we know in these islands, just what it says and not necessarily
what the note in the textbook says it means. That is, the sea is normally
coiling and circling about, turned here and there by the shore, and its
waves broken down to gentle rhythmic undulations. There is no compelling reason to assume that Shelley uses cotl in its obsolete sense
meaning notse or tumult; and especially is this so since there is no lulling
effect in noises and tumults. Nor would the sea be asleep amid them
and dreaming of the buried cities in its depths.
Personification of the Mediterranean, a sea, as masculine is a unique
privilege forbidden us in ordinary speech; while we remain unable to
write odes, we must correctly keep our seas feminine and our oceans
masculine.
What was currently transpiring in Europe when Shelley wrote the
ode will, if looked up, throw the lurid light of half a dozen intriguing
chancelleries upon the theme. Times have changed since, and the poet’s
words are less in vain. Then not a statesman harkened to Shelley
or cared a rap about an eloquent minstrel’s critical lays. That intransigence persists today, but strikingly modified; and there areno statesmen,
perhaps, entirely ignorant of or unmoved by thelines Shelley addressed to
the destroying and preserving autumn wind.
It is the persistency, however, of the evil the ode rebukes, that
assures the piece its immortality. Human affairs are imperfectly
managed now as then, and often, now as then, disingenuously administered while the people are indifferent to encroaching dangers. As
rascality will ever seek advantage, so the ode will ever retain its place
in universal literature. But this is obiter dicta here. Another may
profit as much in vocabulary and diction in reducing the ode to its
primary elements, and reach an entirely different conclusion concerning
itsunderlying philosophy; orremain, asis hisright, wholly indifferenttoi!
The rhetoric of the piece this paper does not take up; but it would
pass a test like that; it is concise, trenchant—always to the point. It
flows along in a manner emphatically free, makes its point with no
extraneous dissertation, and then stops. One should learn from it to
say things, even rather important things, in a simple unrepetitious
manner. The first vulgarity of speech to overcome is repetition. When
one has learned not to repeat, but to express a thought once and have
done, he has gone a long way toward command of his vocabulary and
will thenceforth need most of all to acquire a vocabulary adequate to
his thoughts.—W. R.


The Institute of Economics has published a number of carefully
prepared and authoritative books on various aspects of the tariff problem in the United States. These books are as follows:
Making the Tariff in the United States, by Thomas Walker Page,
$2.50.
Sugar in Relation to the Tariff by Philip G. Wright, $2.50.
The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable Oils, by Philip G. Wright, $2.50.
The Cattle Industry and the Tariff,by Lynn Ramsay Edminster, $2.50.
The Tariff on Wool, by Mark A. Smith, $2.50.
The Tariff on Iron and Steel, by Abraham Berglund and Philip G.
Wright (Press), 33.00.
I am calling these books to your attention for two reasons. In the
first place if you should care for any or all of these books for review
purposes, I would be glad to see that copies are sent to you. In the
second place, I should appreciate the favor if you would call the attention of the members of your Chamber of Commerce to these publications
in order that they may order copies if they find them of interest in the
present tariff situation.
—C. R. Hugins, Editor.
The address is, The Brookings Institution, 26 Jackson Place,
Washington, D.C.


Precision


Courtesy


Efficiency


Off Season Units
for Sugar Centrals
The Otto-Deutz, coldstarting, full Diesel engine is made in sizes
suitable for all off-season
power units in the sugar
central, and is generally
recognized as the most
efficient and economical
power for such purposes.
Call or write us for catalogs
and detailed information


Diesel Engine, type VMV 145


Philippine Engineering Co.
Sole Philippine Representatives


MANILA
P. O. Box 786
Tel. 2-23-05
936 Calle Raon


CEBU
P. O. Box 308
Tel. 410
P. Burgos and Magallanes Sts.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


May, 1929


  


17


Two More Philippine Poems by Gilbert S. Perez


Cabaret


She arrived late
And the child
At home
Coughing and struggling
For life-giving breath
Needed a mother’s
Care.
She arrived late
With overly carmined lips
And the stiff
Mechanical smile
That conceals
An aching heart.
The orchestra strummed
A jazz-bedraggled
Waltz
While the rays
From the red and blue
Lights
Timidly pierced
The heavy tropical
Darkness.
Rhythm and softened
Notes
Glided on and over
The glistening ballroom
Floor
And mingled with the grim
Laughter
That hides a breaking
Heart.


Smile, lips, smile—
Smile away the fountain of tears;
Slide along, aching feet,
Slide;
Shuffle away,
Cobra skinned dancing
Slippers,
Tired slippers,
Slippers that pay for hammer
Strokes,
Nails
And tinsel-spattered
Cradles of death.


The Pilgrim
For thirty years
And four
He had followed
The dusty road
That leads
To the old stone church
At Antipolo.
For thirty years
And four
He had knelt
And prayed
At the Holy Virgin’s
Shrine.
He saw
The dark gray
Packard,
But did not see
The pilgrim freighted


Laboring
Train
At the crossing,
Till he heard
The sickening
Crunching press of steel
On shattered bone.
So he lay on his cot
At San Juan
De Dios
With his face
Turned to the wall,
And both legs
Chopped off near the hips.
The Doctor said,
That his heart was weak.
Weak nothing!
He died of a broken heart!
For what is the use
Of a Virgin shrine
To a man who may not
Kneel?


Schwulst Foregoes Salary


An error appeared in a Journal editorial in the
March issue, relative to Earl B. Schwulst’s
compensation as bank commissioner. The commissioner’s salary is P7,200, which was stated as
going to Mr. Schwulst together with additional
compensation making up a sufficient salarv.
He informs us he thinks his pay under the Belo
act enough, and is not drawing the commissioner’s salary; he believes the bureau does not
make sufficient demands upon his time to warrant payment to him of the salary.


THE WHITE EMPRESS OF THE PACIFIC


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE
QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC
CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS
14-16 CALLE DAVID
MANILA, P. I.


ING RESPOROING TO ABVERTISEMENIS PLEASE MENTON THE ANERICAN GRANEER OF GONMERGE TGURER


18


  


May, 1929


A Triumph of the Cross Over Majesty
By FRANCISCO DE AGUARENA
Sometime Private Secretary to His Excellency Don Diego de Salcedo, Governor
and Captain-General for His Majesty King Philip IV, in the Philippine Islands.
1663 1668
(As Translated and Arranged by Percy A. Hill)
The original MSS from the library of Don Eduardo de Lete, of Negros, deceased. In the original the margins have been annotated by Padre Nithard, which
notes have been omitted in the translation.
Some of the antiquated expressions and phrases have been modernized for the
benefit of the reader, and notes added in parenthesis are by the translator.
The original MSS as written partly in the Philippines and partly in Ciudad
Rodrigo, Leon, Spain, were evidently brought back to the islands by the son of
Aguarena, thus finding their way into the library of unpublished MSS of Don Eduardo, who dedicated a lifetime to the collection of unpublished manuscripts relating
to the Philippines.—P.A.H.


“I cannot submit to such an imposition!
Impossible! The poor pray for the protection
of a Divine Providence. Unhappy virgins are
stained by those calling themselves Apostles
of the Divine Creator, and the communion
service is being used for private ends. To be
silent in the face of facts would be unworthy
of me, having taken the sacred oath before
These abuses
His Majesty (Philip IV)....
must cease or I will tear off my knightly insignia.
I cannot admit of His Majesty’s name being
bandied from mouth to mouth to deceive the
poor and the unhappy. I know. You are
but human, and as humans liable to err, but you
must err in moderation, for in any other manner
I shall not permit. I shall not permit that the
Orders preach that I am under their thumb.
These blasphemous sermons must also cease.
Get rid of these pernicious missionaries who interpret the laws of God as they please or I as Captain Gencral will apply the justice of His Majesty
the King. As good sons of the Church, preach
the doctrines of Christ and cease abusing the
common people. You are abusing them, and
keep on abusing them, but I am determined that
this shall cease These reports from the towns
of Tayug and Nagcarlang (in Laguna province)
are sufficient. These missionaries must cease
their vile abuses."
These phrases were repeated with gesticulations
of repugnance by the illustrious Captain-General
governing these Islands on the morning of the
8th of October, 1667 in the Roval Palace of
Manila (then facing the present Ayuntamiento).
On the table of his office were piles of wellthumbed papers which, judging from their disarray, had been repeatedly handled by him.
He spoke with fury to one who stood before him.
This personage was dressed in a semimonastic
cowl, old in appearance and of a greenish color


with age, beneath which were short trousers
belted with a sword having a hilt of bronze.
His jacket of fine malla cloth was open and his
red-brown hat bore on the left side a somewhat
bedraggled plume.
He was the alguacil mayor of the Holy Inquisition, Captain Francisco Viscarra y Almandia,
a gigantic Basque. He bore an order from the
Holy Office to the Captain-General, who laid
it on his desk with a nervous hand. At the other
end of the chamber, which served as an audience
room, stood two of the palace guards. In the
fury of the above remarks of His Excellency,
they had drawn their swords with their right
hands, holding their halberds in their left, as if
to guard him from any untoward move on the
part of the alguacil mayor. Who were these
guards? Were they loyal to His Excellency?
We shall see. One of them was named Canuto
de la Llave and the other Jesus de Murgia.
At that moment they were perhaps loyal to
their master, but later, being suborned by the
friars, they fell wholly into the power of the
Commissary of the Inquisition. (This was
Fray Joseph Paternina, whose importunities
had got him appointed when in Mexico City,
upon the death of Fray Juan Maldonado, the
former Commissary). What was the order or
letter that His Excellency handled with such a
nervous hand? Let us see. The writer of these
annals had an opportunity to read it, being confidential secretary to His Excellency, and working
alongside the licentiate Don Manuel del Angulo.
It was addressed to Don Diego de Salcedo and
was the transcription of a letter of the parish
friars of Tayug and Nagcarlang, submitted by
His Grace the Metropolitan Archbishop Poblete,
and bore the date September 4th, 1667.
Knowing this we will proceed to give it verbatim as copied from the original in the archives


of the Captain-General.
It must be noted that the Governor-Generals
had under then till a much later date all the
alcalde mayors, or, to be exact, the provincial
governors, and other state officials, while the
friars who administered the parishes were under
the direct supervision of their provincials and the
Archbishop as head of the Church. The divided
authority of the King of Spain and the King
of Heaven is what caused so many bitter Church
intrigues, many of them fatal to participants,
in the struggle between Church and State.


A Glorious
Thing!


NOSERATGOIN


The knowing know!
Kuenzle & Streiff
Importers
Manila, P. I.
343 T. Pinpin Tel. 2-39-36


The Most Popular and Most
Useful Single Reference
V
Book in the World
EDeceuorid
The
AE
a
World Almanac
A
HP
GEN
PE
lamann natum
Just arrived—₱1.50
Official records of the world’s agricultural and industrial production,
trade and commerce, banking and finance; up-to-date descriptions
of countries, governments, colonies, dependencies, populations; historical summaries, chronologies for the year; records in all the sports;
compendiums on business law, travel, time and distance tables, etc.
Answers the thousand and one questions that come up so frequently, and are nowhere more accurately or more quickly answered.
Philippine Education Company
101-103 Escolta
Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


May, 1929


  


19


The reader can use his judgment in weighing the
evidence introduced by the letters, but it should
be noted that His Excellency had no great abundance of tact and diplomacy required for steering the bark of state under the peculiar Iberian
character of government that then obtained in
all Spanish colonies and possessions.
Herewith the letter of the head of the Church
to the head of the State, as borne by the alguacil
mavor of the Holy Office of the Inquisition:
“Your Excellency sees that the interference
of the alcalde mayor Don Alejandro in the town
of Tayug while the priest was confessing the
young woman Dolores Mocha y Moreno was a
real contempt of the ecclesiatical laws punished
by a severe excommunion. After being reprimanded and put out of the church, he called
upon his troops, profaned the sacred temple by
forcible entry, and carried off the young woman—
which is deserving of the most condign punishment. He furthermore used indecent language,
which amounts to blasphemy of Holy Church.”
“Your Excellency said that this was not a case
for the Holy Inquisition, and that you would
take the necessary steps to punish the aggressor
after due investigation. But to date nothing
has been done about this case. If similar cases
pending, of insults to God’s ministers, are not
taken notice of by your Excellency, the Church
will not tolerate these abuses and will itself
punish the guilty. It will adjust those cases
still pending, and it will not tolerate such abuses
committed in your name and by those under
r direct authority, nearly every day.
yot
‘The Nagcarlang case as your Excellency
knows, was referent to the school of Christian
doctrine. We have been sent to these islands
of His Majesty the Catholic with the obligation
to, serve humanity, and are obliged to teach
the young generation the doctrines. Very few of
these, and we refer to the young native Women
(the Indias) assist, and on the 14th of this month
(evidently September 1667) only one presented
herself. The priest, Fray Pedro Iztar de Santa
Ana, being sick, called this foolish, (torpe)
maiden to give him his medicine while he lay
sick in bed. This woman, advised by certain
malignant persons, cried out without any motive
whatsoever. She was heard by the alcaldillo
Justo Nereta, who, with insulting phrases, took
the maiden by force from the convent, informing
the populace with indecent stories against the
holy priest of this town.
"Of this Your Excellency has been advised.
The happening has roused the anger of all the
natives of the town, due to the wrong imoression
given by others, and they have gone so far as to
insult Holy Church, they and the officials of the
town, and your Excellency also sees we cannot
tolerate such a state of affairs. I cannot say
that vou are solely responsible; that is for the
Holy Inquisition to decide, later.” It still remains
that these abuses against the Holy Roman
Catholic and Apostolic Church must be punished
or the people and the Church of God will take
a just vengeance on those who foment such
trouble."
The letter, or order, contained some more
sentences that could not be read, owing to their
illegibility, and it was signed by His Grace the
Metropolitan Archbishop, Poblete.
(Poblete himself was a well-meaning prelate,
but utterly under the influence of the regular
orders; in other words, he, as a prince of the
Church, lent himself too willingly to their ends.
Theletter, in all truth, was probably written by
Fray Paternina of the Inquisition, and onlv
signed by His Grace, and its tenor was both
insulting and aggravating, considering all the
circumstances in the case, and the regular battle
between Church and State began, as it did under
each administration. In the annals of the long
centuries those struggles did not affect the people
as it did the twin Spanish powers themselves,
and mostly over mere prerogative. The Church
during all the centuries was loyally upheld by the
Spaniard no matter what his rank. But its
servants, being human very naturally erred,
which is also human. The Church’s teachings
are a fine heritage to the only Christian people
in the Orient—the Filipinos).
CHAPTER II
IN WHICH IS RELATED THE BEGINNING OF THE
PLOT AGAINST THE CAPTAIN-GENERAL, HEADED


BY THE FRANCISCAN FRIARS AND LATER PUT INTO
EFFECT THROUGH THE HOLY OFFICE OF THE
INQUISITION
On the afternoon of March 9th, 1668, I saw
several groups of persons in animated conversation near the Church of Santo Domingo in the
Walled City, which abuts on the river Pasig.
Outside the gate and on the esplanade facing
the river were other groups of high officials
gathered together, some of whom were pallid
with fear. Something was about to take place
out of the ordinary. The afternoon was dark
and a finc rain was falling. Near the mouth of
the Pasig could be dimly seen the form of a
sea-going galleon. Captain Gencral Don Diego
was there on foot accompanied by an adjutant
and a file of soldiers drawn from the regiment
quartered in the citadel of Santiago, close by.
I approached the latter group in curiosity for the
troops were fully armed, one of fhe musketeers
bearing a lighted lint, as is custom. The Captain
General was speaking.
‘You do not command here. I represent His
Majesty as Captain-General and Governor in


these islands. Return aboard vour galleon
before I order the shore battery to fire upon you!
Do not reply to me, or I will have you put in the
stocks. Get out, insolent and daring one!"
The governor thus expressed himself, being irritated beyond measure at something.
Before him stood a man of medium stature,
between forty-five and forty-six years of age,
ruddy and robust in expression. His uniform
demonstrated that he was the captain of the
ship seen in the offing, and at the foot of the stone
steps descending to the Pasig was a shallop
manned by six men in the dress of sailors, browned by the sun and winds of long voyages. Upon
the prow of the boat were the words Santo Nino,
from which I deduced the name of the galleon
lving hove to. The ship captain who had brought
down the anger of the Captain General upon
him was Don Francisco Requel de Bastamonde,
as Don Francisco Corvera, the King’s fiscal,
later informed me.
The ship captain, doffing his cap, replied to
the governor.
“By your Excellency’s mercy we have aboard


MeCormick-Deering Tractor—10-20 and 15-30 H. P.
The Cieat value Ol Tmno
on the Farm


DROSPERITY is rare wherever
A time is being wasted on broad
scale. Time is the most valuable
thing we have. That is where the
great value of machines and
power and planning comes in.
These factors help a man to multiply his work, his production and
his profit.
Time is money and MCCormick-Deering tractors are the


greatest savers of time on the farm
today. The tractor speeds up
every farm activity and helps you
through the job. These savings
are open to you if you own a
MeCormick-Deering tractor.
Remember the most profit
goes to those best equipped for
power farming.
Write us or call on us for a
demonstration.


For More Profit and a Happier Life, Farm
with MeCormick-Deering Tractor Power
MACLEOD AND COMIAlva


Iloilo


154 M. de Comillas, Manila
Davao
Cebu
Vigan


Legaspi


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNA


20


  


May, 1929


Padre M. Ricci. We have had a stormy voyage
and are in misery from lack of fresh water and
food. Nearly all my crew are sick with the
scurvy, and if you will not let us land we ask
in mercy’s name for some help in our miserable
condition. We are come from Nantay (China)
He was
and are in bad shape, Your Honor.”
unable to conclude, as His Excellency cried
"Who is this Padre Ricci vou speak, of?”
“He
is, Your Excellency,” replied the ship captain,
“a Christian missionary who has suffered persecution in China. The Hollanders permitted us
to rescue him, although they are allied with
Koxinga (Kue-Sing) and Padre Ricci was allowed on board with some sick Hollanders for
transit to Batavia. But Padre Ricci is a Dominican and desires to take refuge with those of
his order here in Manila."
“Food and equipment!” shouted the Captain
General. "Help the accursed Hollanders, fanged
dogs who rob, burn and asassinate!” (It should
be noted that Don Diego was a trusted and high
officer of Philip IV in his campaigns against the
Dutch in Holland, was a Belgian by birth,
although of noble Spanish parents. It was
therefore very natural that he should bear an
undying hatred towards the Dutch, as his enemies from birth. Hence his ungoverned fury.)
“And this from you, a Spaniard upon whom the
King has conferred the sacred obligation of
defending the banner of Castile and its interests,
to bring here sick heretics and desire to leave
The irate Governor grasped the
them ashore!”
hilt of his sword and cried, “Get out of here,
soulless traitor, brutish animal who desires to
stain the arms of your country! Give thanks
to God in his mercy that I do not quarter you
with my sword!” Here his anger would not
allow of further speech. Drawing his weapon
completely from its sheath he was about to
precipitate himself upon the ship captain, when
a young girl about fourteen years of age flung
herself between the two, and held his hand,
saying, “Uncle, uncle! In the name of my dear
mother who lies in this very Church of Santo
Domingo, and for love of me, your niece Charing,
hold your hand and do not stain it with the blood
of such miserable unfortunates!”
Throwing back his cloak, Don Diego seemed
ashamed of his patriotic fury and sheathed his
weapon. The girl, Charing (Rosario) wiped
the sweat of anger from the forehead of her
uncle with her white fingers, the act seeming
to calm the angry passions of the Governor
for the moment. In fact his orphaned niece


Rosario had at all times a soothing influence on
Don Diego. That she appeared at the right
moment was due to the friendly offices of one
of the gentlemen in waiting of His Excellency
who had called her to the scenc.
Bruskly he ordered Captain Requel to disembark Padre Ricci, who was to be taken to his
private cabinet for cross examination. A
coach drove up with a pair of horses mounted
by a coachman. The rain increased. A foot
man opened the door and His Excellency entered,
together with his niece, still pallid from the expe

rience due to her uncle’s anger. At this moment
Captain Requel advanced a pace and bowing
to the Governor, said, "For piety’s and mercy’s
sake, sir, allow me to take on fresh water.”
The irritated governor replied, "Leave here at
once, you reptile, who would sully the banner
under whose folds you earn a living?” "per
coach drove off in the rain, disappearing through
the low gate of Santo Domingo and entering the
walled city.


(The historical happening in reference to the
arrival of P. Ricci is evidently recounted by
Aguarena to show his master’s hatred of heretics,
a crime for which he was tried later by the Inquisition. But it also shows the Governor’s extreme
irritability, possibly made so by the plotting of
the clergy. It also shows a rigid lack of humanity to his fellow countrymen, Captain Requel
and his crew, that gives a bad impression, to
say the least. Nor have the friar historians
neglected to call attention in their chronicles
to this lack of common humanity as showing the


peculiar and irritable state of the Governor’s
temper. But with their usual twist, they have
refrained from saying this was due to his hatred
of heresy—in the case of the ship captain,
Requel).
Before Don Diego departed he had given
orders to Don Francisco Corvera, the King’s
fiscal, to meet him in his private cabinet, and
further ordered the sargento mayor, Don Juan
de la Concha y Aznar, to comply with certain
regulations in reference to the galleon and its
unfortunate crew.
The rain began to increase every moment,
and being without my cloak I hastened my steps
towards calle Cabildo, to the house where I
lodged. In this same house dwelt Dona Marieta
de Memije, a native of Ilocos, who served in the
capacity of chamber-guard to His Excellency
and to whom both she and her family owed many
favors. She was comely, middle-aged, and
perfectly familiar with her duties at the palace,
and had served for some time as personal attendant to His Excellency, who was a widower.
Furthermore, she was of tried loyalty—at that
date.
The wind rose to a tempest laterin the evening.
It was about eleven o’clock when Marieta arrived
from the palace and she was wet, pale and upset.
I asked her if she was sick or in pain. She
replied that she was well, but highly perturbed
at news she had heard on her way home from the
palace on the Plaza de Armas, which by accident she had overheard. It appeared that she
took shelter from the rain in a small store, which
contained several other people who had sought a
refuge from the storm, and had overheard what
we are now about to relate.
To explain matters still further, I should say
that Dona Marieta had a pretty daughter named
Lutgarda, whose father was reputed to be a
Spanish friar and parish priest of Laoag. She
was born there and at the time of which I write
she and I maintained intimate relations. She
was my housekeeper, and besides being lively
and handsome was also industrious. Lutgarda
asked her mother if she had had supper and
received an answer in the negative. Dona
Marieta further said that His Excellency was
in a vile humor, that he had thrown an ink well


Ataitie ula ant racine Co.


OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


LARK


&Co.


RIAECA
CA MANILA,
9094 ESCOLTA
MASONIC TEMPLE


ULARE
—LARE either direct or reflected
impairs eyesight and causes discomfort, annoyance and eye fatigue.
Why endure it when a pair of
CLARK & CoMPANY’s tinted lenses will
give you relief by eliminating glare
without disturbing the quantity of
light.
Always the best in quality
but never higher in price


May, 1929


  


21


at an usher, broken some costly vases, and was
walking about gritting his teeth in anger and at
times pounding the table with his fist. She had
asked permission to visit her family, which was
granted by Don Diego, who ordered her to be on
hand early next morning. My mistress, Lutgarda, placed an excellent supper before her
mother, who, between mouthfuls, related to me
the following in a mixture of Spanish, Tagalog
and Ilocano, helped out by Lutgarda as interpreter.
“Aba, Nonoy (as she used familiarly to call
me), as I came back here I passed through the


principal market place, where I met a number of
persons who bore bronze crucifixes on their
breasts larger than any I have ever seen.”
Who were they, and what were they talking
about?”
“There were Captain Tomas, Padre Ricardo,
Sargento Jose, Cabo Gonzalo, the master of camp,
Don Agustin (de Cepeda), Padre Melchor
Padre Jose (Paternina, the Commissary of the
Inquisition), Alguacil Captain Francisco (Viscarra), Ordinarios Don Sebastian (Rayo-Doria),
Don Nicolas (Munoz de Pamplona), Don Juan
(Tirado) and Padres Francisco and Mateo.”
She had mixed all ranks and grades together, but
they represented the highest of the officials
plotting against His Excellency, especially Sebastian Rayo-Doria. (This man had married a
cast-off mistress of the former governor, de Lara,
and was then the alcalde of Tondo. Whether
he received a slight, or thought so, from the new
governor, Don Diego, is not known; but he
cherished an unreasonable and deadly hatred
against him, and was the prime witness and
mover in the plot against His Excellency. Later
found guilty of treason, his property was confiscated by the Crown, and his death only saved
him from imprisonment).
“What were they saying?” I asked.
“They were saying that the hour had arrived
to sacrifice the evil and redeem the good; that
the devil with horns of fire had come to Manila
to bring a tempest of evil upon the people and
to carry them to hell without hope of pardon,
and that this devil dwelt in the Royal Palace
for they had seen the horns on him, growing
out day by day. They were in the front part
of the store, and behind them were about fifty
men with large bronze crosses round their necks
who were eating fried fish and drinking wine.
Padre Jose Paterninawas paying for all the entertainment, saying that in a fight with the devil
there was nothing to be afraid of if God was in
the heart and Christ upon the breast.”
"Why do you think the others were plotters?”
"Aba, nacu, Nonoy! They had long hair,
descending to their shoulders, were dressed in


black and the cowls had holes for the eyes, and
fire was painted on their robes!”
“What did they have to say?”
“They said that the signal was to be a strong
whistle, and those who did not cry Holy! Holy?
Holy! were to be killed."
I was, to say the least, curious.
"When did they say these things were to take
place?”
“They said shortly, unless the Devil left the
Royal Palace.” She ended her account and,
after attending to her household duties, retired.
Later that night I was awakened by a loud


knocking on the door of our house which was
the usual ponderous affair, studded with starshaped bolts. I was about to sally and open it,
to see what was wanted, when Dona Marieta
held my arm, saving, “Do not open the door!
You go back inside to Lutgarda—not because
of any fear, but that you need not be mixed un
in any of this business. We women are not high
enough to count; besides, I know Padre Jose
Paternina. I have often given him alms and
money for the salvation of souls. My sister


supplies his convent with fowl, he is even my
confessor.” This long list of reasons again
piqued iny curiosity, but saying nothing. I
retired into the sala. A little later Marieta
came in with one of the Palace guards, Diego
de Ruelas, bringing a message from His Excellency for me. It was written in haste, short
and to the point.
To Francisco de Aguarena—
Come at once. I need you.
Your Governor General and Captain—
Diego.
The last word bore a hurried rubrica not at
all like Don Diego’s ordinary writing.
(Continued in June)


Percy A. Hill, translator of the accompanying article, recently made a trip
through the Ilokos provinces, and writes
of their deplorable economic condition:
T have been here (in the Philippines)
some 30 years—have visited Ilokos four
times during that interval—but by
Jameslif I were an Ilokano kailan or tao
I would do violence to everyone who
wears buttons on his pants! As an
example of a poverty-stricken decayed
and miserable region this has no equal
under the Stars and Stripes. Not even
a sentimentalist, let alone anyone with
a sense of economics, could do other
than weep over this old region, condemned to poverty. All the towns from
Agoo to Bangui are living on the Hawaii
dole. (He means, savings sent back
from llokano workmen employed in
Hawaii). The oldest and best built of
all regional towns, many of them of
brick and stone, present a scene like
interior China. These people, frugal,
thrifty and diligent, live on two meals
a day. Women work as camineros (that
is, common laborers on the roads) and
carry baskets of stone on their heads
over a mile at two centavos a basket.
If they make 30 centavos a day and live,
they are doing fine. The whole thing
is a disgrace to the United States."
Mr. Hill says a bit more, but this is
graphic enough. He is a reliable observer. This review has thought for a
long time that the actual condition of
the rural masses in these islands should
be ascertained by the government, for
its guidance. Mr. Hill’s remarks lend
emphasis to that opinion.—Ed.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Better than a DoctorBAUORO
Our Evening Trains Take You to the
Mountains While You Sleep and—
Land You Back in Town Refreshed from
a Week-End Amid Baguio’s Cool
Breezes and Beside Her Pine-Knot Fires
Manila Railroad Company


Victorias
ELS


I YHEN ladies startV
ed cycling thirty
years ago they rode on
Dunlop’s as a matter of
course, for Dunlop had
already been making tires
for ten years past. You
wanted a tire so you ordered a Dunlop. To-day
Dunlop make tires to
travel at any speed from
two to two hundred miles
an hour.


Only Dunlop Experience Covers the Whole History of the Pneumatic Tire.


22


  


May, 1929


ORIGINS OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH
(Gibbon: Continued from April)


The ancient Christians were animated by a
contempt for their present existence, and by ajust
confidence of immortality, of which the doubtful
and imperfect faith of modern ages cannot give us
any adequate notion. In the primitive church the
influence of truth was very powerfully strengthened by an opinion which, however it may deserve
respect for its usefulness and antiquity, has not
been found agreeable to experience. It was
universally believed that the end of the world,
and the kingdom of heaven, were at hand. The
near approach of this wonderful event had been
predicted by the apostles; the tradition of it was
preserved by their earliest disciples, and those
who understood in their literal sense the discourses of Christ himself were obliged to expect
the second and glorious coming of the Son of
Man in the clouds, before that generation was
totally extinguished which had beheld his humble
condition upon earth, and which might still be
witness of the calamities of the Jews under Ves
pasian or Hadrian. The revolution of seventeen
centuries has instructed us not to press toc
closely the mysterious language of prophecy and
revelation; but as long as, for wise purposes, this
error was permitted to subsist in the church, it
was productive of the most salutary effects on
the faith and practice of Christians, who lived
in the awful expectation of that moment when
the globe itself, and all the various race of mankind, should tremble at the appearance of their
divine Judge.
The ancient and popular doctrine of the Millennium was intimately connected with the
second coming of Christ. As the works of the
creation had been finished in six days, their duration in their present state, according to a tradition which was attributed to the prophet Elijah,
was fixed to six thousand years. By the same
analogy it was inferred that this long period of
labor and contention, which was now almost
elapsed, would be succeeded by a joyful Sabbath
of a thousand years; and that Christ, with the
triumphant band of the saints and the elect who
had escaped death, or who had been miraculously
revived, would reign upon earth till the time
appointed for the last and general resurrection.
So pleasing was this hope to the mind of believers,
that the New Jerusalem, the seat of this blissful kingdom, was quickly adorned with all the
gayest colors of the imagination. A felicity
consisting only of pure and spiritual pleasure
would have appeared too refined for its inhabitants, who were still supposed to possess their
human nature and senses. A garden of Eden,
with the amusements of the pastoral life, was
no longer suited to the advanced state of society
which prevailed under the Roman empire. A
city was therefore erected of gold and precious
stones, and a supernatural plenty of corn and
wine was bestowed on the adjacent territory; in
the free enjoyment of whose spontaneous productions the happy and benevolent people was
never to be restrained by any jealous laws of
exclusive property. The assurance of such a
Millennium was carefully inculcated by a succession of fathers from Justin Martyr and Irenaus, who conversed with the immediate disciples of the apostles, down to Lactantius, who
was preceptor to the son of Constantine. Though
it might not be universally received, it appears
to have been the reigning sentiment of the orthodox believers; and it seems so well adapted to the
desires and apprehensions of mankind, that it
must have contributed in a very considerable
degree to the progress of the Christian faith.
But when the edifice of the church was almost
completed, the temporary support was laid aside.
The doctrine of Christ’s reign upon earth was at
first treated as a profound allegory, was considered by degrees as a doubtful and useless
opinion, and was at length rejected as the absurd
invention of heresy and fanaticism. A mysterious prophecy, which still forms a part of the
sacred canon, but which was thought to favor
the exploded sentiment, has very narrowly
escaped the proscription of the church
Whilst the happiness and glory of a temporal
reign were promised to the disciples of Christ, the
most dreadful calamities were denounced against
an unbelieving world. The edification of the


new Jerusalem was to advance by equal steps
with the destruction of the mystic Babylon; and
as long as the emperors who reigned before Constantine persisted in the profession of idolatry,
the epithet of Babylon was applied to the city
and to the empire of Rome. A regular series was
prepared of all the moral and physical evils
which can afflict a flourishing nation; intestine
discord, and the invasion of the fiercest barbarians from the unknown regions of the North;
pestilence and famine, comets and eclipses,
earthquakes and inundations. All these were
only so many preparatory and alarming signs of
the great catastrophe of Rome, when the country
of the Scipios and Caesars should be consumed
by a flame from Heaven, and the city of the
seven hills, with her palaces, her temples, and
her triumphal arches, should be buried in a vast
lake of fire and brimstone. It might, however,
afford some consolation to Roman vanity, that
the period of their empire would be that of the
world itself; which, as it had once perished by
the element of water, was destined to experience
a second and speedy destruction from the
element of fire. In the opinion of a general conflagration the faith of the Christian very happily
coincided with the tradition of the East, the
philosophy of the Stoics, and the analogy of
Nature; and even the country, which, from
religious motives, had been chosen for the origin
and principal scene of the conflagration, was the
best adapted for that purpose by natural and
physical causes; by its deep caverns, beds of
sulphur, and numerous volcanoes, of which those
of Atna, of Vesuvius, and of Lipari, exhibit a
very imperfect representation. The calmest
and most intrepid sceptic could not refuse to
acknowledge that the destruction of the present
system of the world by fire was in itself extremely
probable. The Christian, who founded his
belief much less on the fallacious arguments of
reason than on the authority of tradition and
the interpretation of Scripture, expected it with
terror and confidence as a certain and approaching event; and as his mind was perpetually filled
with the solemn idea, he considered every disaster that happened to the empire as an infallible
symptom of an expiring world.
The condemnation of the wisest and most
virtuous of the Pagans, on account of their ignorance or disbelief of the divine truth, seems to


Hartley Embrey Sherman has furnished the Journal some important
notes about the merits of bananas
which should lead to revision of certain popular notions regarding them:
Mrs. Sherman says the regular eating
of ripe bananas, and they are ripe
when dark spots appear on the skins,
will prevent beriberi, scurvy and
kindred deficiency diseases in children
and adults. They are good for children
six months old and up, and when
generously eaten by expectant mothers
will reduce the number of children
born predisposed to contract beriberi.
Ripe bananas are casily digested by
children.
Bananas are naturally sealed against
germs, as are oranges, and like the
orange they burn to a slightly alkaline
base—the normal condition of the
blood and digestive tract. They contain vitamins A, B and C; although the
quantities of these vitamins are not
as great as those in some other foods,
they are sufficient. Bananas are always plentiful and cheap. Unripe
bananas are not digestible and should
be cooked before being caten. It is
the opposite of economy and wholesome
advice to Filipinos, to discourage the
use as food of bananas. Tomato juice,
too, strained to eliminate the seeds
and pulp, serves every purpose of
orange juice and supplies all the necessary vitamins.


offend the reason and the humanity of the present age. But the primitive church, whose faith
was of a much firmer consistence, delivered over,
without hesitation, to eternal torture, the far
greater part of the human species. A charitable
hope might perhaps be indulged in favor of
Socrates, or some other sages of antiquity, who
had consulted the light of reason before that of
the gospel had arisen. But it was unanimously
affirmed that those who, since the birth or the
death of Christ, had obstinately persisted in the
worship of the daemons, neither deserved nor
could expect a pardon from the irritated justice
of the Deity. These rigid sentiments, which
had been unknown to the ancient world, appear
to have infused a spirit of bitterness into a system of love and harmony. The ties of blood
and friendship were frequently torn asunder by
the difference of religious faith; and the Christians, who, in this world, found themselves
oppressed by the power of the Pagans, were
sometimes seduced by resentment and spiritual
pride to delight in the prospect of their future
triumph. “You are fond of spectacles,” exclaims the stern Tertullian; “expect the greatest
of all spectacles, the last and eternal judgment of
the universe. How shall I admire, how laugh,
how rejoice, how exult, when I behold so many
proud monarchs, and fancied gods, groaning in
the lowest abyss of darkness; so many magistrates, who persecuted the name of the Lord,
liquefying in fiercer fires than they ever kindled
against the Christians; so many sage philosophers
blushing in red-hot flames with their deluded
scholars; so many celebrated poets trembling
before the tribunal, not of Minos, but of Christ;
so many tragedians, more tuneful in the expression of their own sufferings; so many dancers.”
But the humanity of the reader will permit me
to draw a veil over the rest of this infernal description, which the zealous African pursues in a
long variety of affected and unfeeling witticisms.
Doubtless there were many among the primitive Christians of a temper more suitable to the
meekness and charity of their profession. There
were many who felt a sincere compassion for the
danger of their friends and countrymen, and who
exerted the most benevolent zeal to save them
from the impending destruction. The careless
Polytheist, assailed by new and unexpected
terrors, against which neither his priests nor his
philosophers could afford him any certain protection, was very frequently terrified and subdued by the menace of eternal tortures. His
fears might assist the progress of his faith and
reason; and if he could once persuade himself to
suspect that the Christian religion might possibly
be true, it became an easy task to convince him
that it was the safest and most prudent party
that he could possibly embrace.
(Continued in June)


Used to It
A fellow died and went to h—,
Which he didn’t mind, of course,
For in Manila, truth to tell,
He had been on the force!
Unpublished Order
Arrest any man you see doing wrong,
A doctor, a sage, a sawyer;
But your place on the force won’t last
very long
If you ever arrest a lawyer!
Reform
A chief of police had a lot of authority
And didn’t know how to use it,
He reduced the force to a kind of sorority
Where the password was “Excuse it!.
Motto
If vou've got a good detective
And he proves himself a man,
You must act quick, to save the force,
And give the rogue the can!


May, 1929


  


23


The Manila Stock Market During April
By W. P. G. Elliotr


Business in general has shown a steady increase in practically all lines of trade, during the
month just closed.' Late cables from the United
States relative to the nonimposition of restrictions on the islands products have been of such
reassuring character that a decided feeling of
optimism for the future business of the year
is heard on all sides.
New Corporations.—The Sara-Ajui sugar central capitalized at P3,000,000 and the United
Shoe Machinery Corporation, capitalized at
P6,000,000 have been registered. Another new
corporation recently registered and already
operating, is The Pure Cane Molasses Company
capitalized at ₱100,000. This corporation is
a subsidiary of the United Molasses Company
of London, England. The new company proposes to build tank installations in Manila and
Iloilo for the storage of molasses, the company
also owns a fleet of 20 modern tank ships for
the transport of molasses for export.
Supreme Court Decisions.—Two decisions
recently rendered by the United States Supreme
Court in Washington are unfavorable from a
shareholders’ point of view, the first being that
income from the sales of Philippine products in
the United States marketed through foreign
corporations are taxable under the Philippine
internal revenue law. This question had been
in abevance since 1923, and while the importers
in fact have been paying income tax on goods
sold in the United States, the pavments were
always made under protest. The present
decision serves finally to settle the question at
issue. The second decision ruled that stock
dividends in the Philippines are subject to income tax, and this decision reverses the insular
courts in the several cases brought before them.
As the local supreme court was equally divided
on this subject, it is thought that the question
will be again brought up for trial and decision
locally, in an endeavor to get a final ruling from
the local supreme court.
Publication of Banks Balance Sheets.—Amendment of the banking laws to suit modern business
conditions will be urged upon the legislature
when it meets in July, it is reported. The alteration of the present banking laws that will be
advocated, will deal with the publication of the
balance sheets of the banks. It is pointed out
that in the United States, banks publish their
balance sheets monthly, stating the financial
standing of the bank. The proponents of the
amendment, however, do not advocate the
monthly publication of balance sheets, but
will urge a quarterly balance This will be a


The
Philippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS SURETYSHIPS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance
 ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest
Call or write for particulars
Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
P. O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


guarantee to the public, and at the same time
serve as an adveriisement for the banks.
Banking and Exchange.—Total resources of
Philippinc banks continued their upward trend,
until about the 20th of the month, when large


OX Y GEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure


HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hydrogen
99.8% pure


ACETYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes


WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops


BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
Electric Storage Batteries


Philiopine Acetylene Co.
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.


withdrawals were made for account of the
quarterly sales taxes. These withdrawals were
responsible for a sharp shrinkage in the cash
position, and as a natural consequence foreign
exchanges for gold dollars particularly, weakened
considerably.
The Stock Market.—The market has enjoyed
a particularly busy month and as we have before
pointed out a decidedfeeling of optimism prevails.
Banks have been very active with fairly good
sales of Bank of the Philippine Islands at ₱175.
Hongkong Banks have been very actively traded
in from HK$i250 the opening price, down to
HKS1230 at the close. Chartered Banks had a
large turnover at #19-348, and China Banks
were placed at P90. Peoples Banks have been
actively traded in at P107 and report an excellent first quarter for 1929. Surplus has
increased by P33,316.64, deposits also increased
P625,356.53 and total resources are now P10,-
000,000. In addition to the branch already established at San Pablo, Laguna, another branch has
been opened in Baguio, which will greatly aid
in the development of the mountain capital.
Insurances.—Unions of Canton after opening
at HKS3S7 have declined to HK$380 on heavy
trading. The Compania Filipinas, Insular Life
and Philippine Guaranty are firm with buyers
at P3100, P350 and P350 respectively.
Sugars.—Sugar shares have shown more
activity this month probably due to the reassuring cable advices that there will be no restrictions on Philippine sugars imported into the
United States, and there is a growing feeling
that the more seasoned sugar shares are buys
at present prices.
The San Carlos Milling Co. reports net profits
at the close of the year, December 31, of $666,-
220.58 and the estiiated crop for this year will
be 30,500 tons according to the report of the
company management.


Bacolod-Murcias were in good demand and
on fairly large transactions were placed at P?.
Tarlacs were fairly heavily traded in at ₱170.
and this central is, according to the latest reports,
making an excellent showing for the year. Talisay-Silays were placed at P25 and more are
wanted at this figure. Carlotas on small transactions were done at P235. Pasudecos on
heavy trading opened at ₱45, and closed at
₱46.50 bid with sellers at not better than P47.
A large quantity of Bagos were placed in Honolulu at P19.50. A fair sized parcel of Luzons
changed hands at ₱1000. Victorias common
were done at P165 and the preferred 9% were
placed at FIIO. Hawaiian-Philippines are in
demand at ₱45.
Plantations.—Plantations have been very
inactive with no transactions reported in either
Polos or Pamplonas.
Mines.—Benguets have been heavily traded
in at P2.75 throughout the month and more
can be placed at this price. Balatocs have also
continued steady with buyers at P2.40 and
more of these are also wanted at the same figure.
A record gold production is reported by the
Benguet Consolidated Mining Co. and the
Balatoc Mining Co. for the first quarter of this
year. Benguet Consolidated produced during
this period, gold valued at P839,658.92 and
Balatoc during a similar period produced gold
valued at P470,220.86. It is reported that
Benguet will resume the payment of dividends
in June. The new power plant on the Agno
should be in operation by next October, thereby
giving an impetus to exploration work and also
sufficient power to run both plants as well as
supplying current for lighting the city of Baguio
and surrounding districts. Itogons continue
firm and are nominal at PiO.
Industrials.—Philippine Educations have as
usual been the outstanding feature in this list
with large sales of preferred shares at P105. A
small block of educations common are offered
at ₱172.50, and this is the first offer to appear
in the market for many months. Philippine
Educations report sales for March, 1929 of
₱158,012.33, this being an increase over the
same month last year of P35,942.28. Sales for
the first quarter of 1929 show an increase of
₱119,645.69 as compared with the corresponding period last year. Philippine Educations
have declared the usual quarterly dividend on
the preferred of 2)4% and have also declared
a quarterly dividend on common shares of 3%-
La Urbana 8% Liberadas were again active at
₱200. In the unlisted securities, Botica Boie
common were placed at P200 for a moderate
sized parcel and there are a few more offered
at the same quotation.
Bonds.—The bond market has been unusually
active with large sales of Tarlacs 8%, Bais 8%-
North Negros 8%, Polo Plantation 10%, all
being placed at par plus accrued interest. University Club bonds are much in demand, but
they will only be issued as the various stages
of building warrants.
The market closed firm with advancing price
tendencies, the sales for the month aggregating
28.717 shares.


INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS


Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBERETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: “YPIL,” Cebu.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


24


  


May, 1929


792 tons. Of the total cargo moving during
February 55,687 tons, or 49%, was carried in
American bottoms.
Passenger traffic from Manila, both transpacific and via Suez during April has shown
considerable increase over any previous month
of 1929, and in fact over any previous month in
past years from the port of Manila. First
figures represent first class, second figures steerage: To China and Japan 313-451; to Honolulu
8-585; to the Pacific Coast 118-1549; to Singapore and Straits Settlements 10-14; to Mediterranean ports 35-2. The largest individual
sailing from Manila during April was the Empress of Russta, which sailed on April 26, carrying from Manila first class, second class, third
class and steerage a total of 683. This, however,
is not the largest single shipment from Manila
since January 1. Figures for Mediterranean
ports are not complete as some lines have not
been heard from. These figures are not as high
as would be expected due to the lack of passenger
accommodations.
Many passengers have been obliged to go via
Hongkong, taking British and French Lines from
that port in order to reach their destinations on
schedule. The figures of 1,549 steerage for
Pacific coast exceed by far any previous month
from Manila This is largely due to many
passengers postponing their trip to the States
until after termination of school, which was the
latter part of March. Steamship lines have
been unable to accommodate requests for steerage
transportation and prospects are this will continue
through the month of May and part of June.


THE YOKOHAMA SPECIE BANK
—LTD. —
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
Capital (Paid Up) -
100,000,000.00
Reserve Fund
105,500,000.00
Undivided Profits
9,346,622.43
MANILA BRANCH
600 DASMARINAS, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager
2-37-58—Export, Current Account, Cashier
PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER
PHONE(2-37-55—Import, Accountant


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, Dollar Steamship Line Co.


According to Asso1
ciated Steamship Lines"
statistics, there were
exported from the Philippines during January
a total of 127,490 tons
of cargo, moving in 72.
vessels, made up as
follows: To China and
Japan 9843 tons; to
the Pacific coast for
local delivery 22,25
tons; to the Pacific
coast, thence overland,
568 tons; to Pacific
coast, thence intercoastal steamer to the Atlantic
coast, 3929 tons; to the Atlantic coast 67,976
tons; to Europe 22,362 tons; to Australia 561
tons. Of the total cargo moving 70,330 tons,
or 55%, moved by American bottoms.
During February, there were exported from
the Philippines a total of 114,412 tons of cargo,
moving in 67 vessels, made up as follows: To
China and Japan 9150 tons; to the Pacific coast
for local delivery 23,412 tons; to the Pacific
coast, thence overland, 474 tons; to the Pacific
coast, thence intercoastal steamer to the Atlantic coast, 1712 tons; to the Atlantic coast 58,-
619 tons: to Europe 20,253 tons: to Australia


The Dollar Steamship Line has just received
advice that the President Adams and President
Harrison, completely reconditioned, will arrive
in Manila on June 18 and July 2 respectively.
These steamers have been remodeled on the
same lines as the President Polk, passenger accommodations being increased from 95 to approximately 210 first class passengers. Additional deck space, lounge room and social
halls have been added and the dining room has
been increased in size to accommodate capacity
list. The President Adams and the President
Harrison both have four large suites; also, 31
large outside cabins with private bath.


K. A. MeLennan, president of the Japan
Society of Vancouver, B. C., and head of the
Terminal Dock and Warehouse Co., Ltd., of
that port, accompanied by Mrs. McLennan,
arrived in Manila April 15 aboard the President
Madison. Major and Mrs. McLennan left
Manila aboard the same liner April 20.


Robert G. Kendall arrived in Manila April 15
aboard the President Madison to assume the
position as assistant with the Columbia Pacific
Shipping Company.


E. J. Chalmers, of the Columbia Pacific Shipping Co., left Manila April 26 aboard the Empress
of Russta for Hongkong, where he will assume
the position of assistant in the offices of his firm.


M. J. Buckley freight traffic manager of the
Dollar Steamship Line, with headquarters
at San Francisco, accompanied by Mrs. Buckley,
arrived in Manila April 29 aboard the President
Jackson. Mr. Buckley is touring the orient in
the interest of his company and is leaving Manila
May 4 aboard the President Jackson.
Robert MeClelland arrived in Manila April
24 aboard the Columbia Pacific steamer Pennsylvania and will be connected with the operating
department of that company in Manila.


H. A. N. van Nieuwenhuyse, formerly connected with the Java-China-Japan Line at
Hongkong, arrived in Manila April 1 aboard
the President Lincoln to relieve H. L. A. van
Kretschmar, of the same company, who is
leaving Manila on vacation.


H. B. Beaumont of Montreal, J. J. Forster of
Vancouver, B. C., and Ed Stone of Hongkong,
all general passenger agents of the Canadian
Pacific Ocean Service, arrived in Manila April
9 aboard the President Monroe. They were on
an inspection trip and after spending five days
in Manila sailed again on their return by the
President Cleveland April 13.


W. J. Jones, for the past two vears with the
passenger department of The Robert Dollar
Co., Manila, has been transferred to the freight
department in charge of claims.
A. H. Terry announced last month the arrival
at his home of an eight-pound girl. Mr. Terry
is agent for The Robert Dollar Co. at Cebu.


PONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


May, 1929


  


25


Schools Take a Look at Farming


This excerpt from a general cconomic survey report is the work of a committee headed by Gilbert S. Perez,
head of vocational education in the
education bureau, who, incidentally,
contributes to the JOUrNAl. What
is published here will illustrate the
general excellence of the report, now
current in pamphlet form and obtainable from the education bureau.
Mr. Perez but recently left Manila to
visit Europe and the Americas and
observe the progress of vocational
education in the temperate and tropic
zones. He is one of the oldtimers in
the civil service whose work is highly
commendable. What is here published
is the work of the subcommittee of
which Dr. Toribio Vibar is chairman
and Jose Camus, Faustino Reyes, and
Ludovico Hidrosollo are members,
Camus being assistant director of the
agriculture bureau, Reyes head of the
public lands division of the lands
bureau, and Hidrosollo director of the
nonchristian tribes bureau.—ED.


of the Philippines is at present uncultivated.
There are thousands of hectares of virgin land
available for agriculture, but, unfortunately
a large part of this area is not at present available
for profitable agriculture. By profitable agriculture is meant not only the growing of agricultural products, but also the possibilities of
cultivating the crop at such a cost, and of selling
the produce at such a price, as to make it a
profitable undertaking to the farmer and his
dependents.
The committee has found that the reason these
large areas are not occupied is not because of
the lack of a desire of the people to go to the
farms, but because of the absence of roads and
means of communications which will make it
easy for the settler to go from place to place and
for him to sell his products after he has settled.
Large tracts of virgin land are available, but
most of this land is not connected with the


markets by good roads. Thus it does not matter
how efficient a farmer may be or how diligently
he may apply himself to his work it is an impossibility for him to market his crop. The
building of a road or of highways through a
fertile unsettled section of a country has invariably been followed by a rush of settlers to
that section of the country. The establishment
of steamship lines to small settlements usually
results in an increase in the number of settlers
in that section, and a consequent decrease in
the amount of good land open to homesteading.
The extension of the railroad to the Bicol regions,
the opening up of the interprovincial highways
in Mindanao, and a road connecting the two
coasts of Mindoro will do more to reduce the
area of idle land in the Philippines than any
system of education, or any campaign of propaganda for the purpose of attracting more
people to the farm.
It should be noted that whenever conditions
are favorable for settlement, the land is immediately taken up. Along the coast of Min

Your committee considers the settlement of
the public domain as the most vital factor in the
economic development of the Philippines. Of
our total area of 29,629,600 hectares of land,
only 3,712,712 hectares were under cultivation
in 1926 according to statistics issued by the
Bureau of Commerce and Industry in 1927.
It can be stated without fear of successful contradiction that 10,000,000 hectares of the 25,-
906,888 hectares of uncultivated land are potentially agricultural and subject to settlement.
No factor can increase the taxable wealth of
the Philippines more than making the agricultural portions of the public domain productive.
From these figures it is evident that a large part


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe


See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig S von Knobelsdorff
Agents


90 Rosario, Manila


Phone 22324


AMERICANN MALLNE
BOLLARSTEAMSI LANE


COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


The "President” Liners Offer
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


TO SAN FRANCISCO


ANI


ROUND THE WORLD


LOS ANGELES


via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE FRIDAYS
24 Calle David


President Hayes
President Polk
President Adams
President Garfield
President Harrison
Sailings every fortnight


May 22
June 5
June 19
July 3
July 17


MANILA


VICTORIA
AND
SEATTLE
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS
Telephone No. 2-24-41


N MNSIE N INAAMENI MEN MEANIEA TE EMNEANNINO EENIAE


26


THE AMERICAN
OMMERCE JOURNAL
HAMBER Ol


May, 1929


danao where there is no malaria and where the
lanes of the sea may be used to carry the products to the market, land which was vacant
four years ago has already been taken up and new
settlers and small investors in farm lands have
to return home disappointed, to wait for the
opening of roads to the interior. Members of
the committee who have gone to Mindanao have
found that the number of settlers going to that
region would be a revelation to those who believe
that it will take more than a century to develop
that large island.
Some sections of Mindanao which are ideal
locations in terms of soil fertility are so badly
affected with malaria that the establishing o
colonies without a thorough medical survey will
be little less than criminal. One plantation
colony in a section of this kind in northern
Mindanao is making heroic efforts to survive.
Pounds of quinine are consumed daily by the
managers and the workers, but this measure is
purely palliative. Without governmental aid
in the form of more efficient sanitary and medical force, the death toll will be too high a price
to pay for the settlement of that particular
region, in spite of its wonderful possibilities
from a purely agricultural standpoint.
The fact that in this place and in other similar


fever-stricken sections, we find pioneers who are
risking their lives, their meagre capital, and the
lives and happiness of their families, is a proof
that there is not as much of a disinclination
towards the farm as some would have us believe.
From the data gathered, it may be stated that
the vounger generation is not averse to life on
the farm, nor are they unmindful of the need of
the economic development of the country; but
they are conservative about rushing into an
unsettled portion of the country without capital.
far away from friends and home and medical
attendance, and exposed to malaria and other
diseases which are common in all newly opened
up tracts of land. It may be interesting to note
in this connection that the percentage of young
men failing as independent farmers is considerably lower than the number failing in the
business and commercial fields. Perhaps this
very conservatism is more of a proof of wisdom
than an indication of inherent indolence or lack
of enterprise. They evidently prefer to work
at some other jobs until their financial condition
is such that they are practically sure of making
a success in farming.
The committee also found that the conditions
for marketing the products of the farm or the
cattle ranch are far from being satisfactory.


There is a great need for an organization for
marketing. The tobacco producers are not
bothered by their lack of knowledge of marketing,
but rather by the lack of organization for marketing. Where there is an organization as is the
case of sugar and copra, there is a high return
for the labor and capital expended and a continued progress and development. These facts
are stated because it is believed that conditions
should be considered not as they should be but
as they actually are.
In the Philippines, capital costs from 50 to
100 per cent, while in the United States the rate
of interest ranges from 5 to 6 per cent. Due to
the lack of capital in the Philippines, the little
capital that is available is more exacting, expects larger returns from its investment, and
consequently is reluctant to increase the present
wage scale. However, as the competition with
countries which employ higher grades of labor
increases, local capital will find that it can
compete effectively with capital ofothercountries
only by employing a higher class of better remunerated, more skilled, and more contented laborers.
When the cost of capital approximates that of the
United States, there willbeno dearth of applicants
for unsettled regions of Mindanao and Mindoro.
No people have a greater desire to own land
than the Filipinos, and the only things that keen
them from getting the land are the lack of capital,
the lack of transportation which will take them
to the land and which will enable them to take
their products to the market, and the lack of
organization for marketing farm products.
When capital is available at a low rate of interest,
a system of good roads is expanded, and the facilities formarketingfarm productsare increased, unsettledareasof fertile land willbe a thingof the past.
There are at present under the Bureau of
Education fourteen agricultural schools (secondary), sixteen farm schools (secondary), two
farm schools (elementary), and 277 settlement
farm schools (elementary). The objectives of
these schools, which were organized for the occupational needs of the country, are essentially
vocational. Although there may be some countries where it is possible to find better technical
agricultural schools, there is no school organization which has given more attention to a system
of schools where the instruction includes actual
job experiences under conditions as near as
possible to those which the students will meet in
actual life. Of the agricultural secondary, farm
secondary and farm schools (elementary), 6 were
opened in 1907 to 1910- 7 in 1911 to 1915; 11
in 1916 to 1920; 4 in 1921 to 1925; and 3 in
1926 to 1928. From these figures, it will be seen
that the Bureau of Education has been opening
agricultural schools at the rate of one a yearsince
1907. This rate is quite commendable considering the financial support given to the Bureau
for agricultural-education work.
Considerable efforts have been made to make
the agricultural high schools as practical as
possible. The first part of the school life of an
agricultural high-school student is spent in
communal enterprises, but during the last two
vears of the course, the student farmer leaves
the school dormitory, lives on a miniature farm,
cultivates his own home garden, raises his own
pigs and chickens, brings his major field crop to
the school granary, and receives from the school
bank his shareof the products. If he does notown
the carabao, he has to deduct from his profit, the
amount that in real life would be the rental of the
workanimals. Inother words, heis made to feel that
heisnotonlya student, butalso a farmer with a farmer’s responsibilities and a farmer’s viewpoint.
The Central Luzon Agricultural School, the
Bukidnon Agricultural School, the Lagangilang
Agricultural School and other large secondary
agricultural schools are destined to be the safetyvalve of our community morale. Day by day
we find among the young people of the country
a growing spirit of unrest. The clerical positions
formerly easily secured by high-school graduates
are now growing more and more difficult to
obtain. But this situation will gradually solve
itself. Slowly, but surely, will come the realization that schools like the Central Luzon Agricultural School are the schools which will enable
a graduate to find in his rice fields and coconut
groves that financial independence which he
formerly believed to be possible only in a lawyer’s
office or at a doctor’s desk.


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


ORED
ABE
IRELLSS
RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


25 PLAZA MORAGA


Phones:


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


May, 1929


  


27


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


The year 1928 had
the largest total sales
since 1920. The first
four months of 1929,
however, exceed the
same period of 1928
by P2,441,665.


Sales, City of Manila


March
1929


April
1929


Sta. Cruz............


₱ 844,183


849,388


Binondo.............


61,700


907,117


San Nicolas..........


523,000


128,500


Tondo...............


119,748


203,002


Sampaloc............
San Miguel..........


49,445
345,800
80,800


120,42


Quiapo............ ..


20,367


Intramuros...........


368,000


40


Ermita..............


246,850


22,926


Malate.......... . ...


415,598


278.040


Paco................


6,652


145,334


Sta. Ana........ . . . . .


47,440


20,441


Pandacan............


25,640


2,550


Sta. Mesa............


26,000


* . * .


₱3,160,862 P2,697,947


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
BY E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Gonoalon


Copra.—During the
closing days of April, the
local copra market displayed such weakness as
has not been seen for vears
and during early May a
new low price level for the
past five years will probably be set. This condition
comes unquestionably as
a result of large world
Pa
stocks of Fats and Oils
and a corresponding disinterest on the part of all
large buyers toward taking
on further business at present. Manila arrivals
for April totalled approximately 243,871 bags
which is very good considering the season of the
vear. With fundamentally weak conditions
both on the Continent and in America, it is
very improbable that the local copra market
will improve for sometime to come. We quote
from latest cables:
Manila, buen corriente P9.50 to P9.75; arrival
resecada F10.75 to ₱11.00; San Francisco,
$.04-1/4 nominal; London, Cebu sundried, dull,
E2llitj6.
Coconut Otl.—With heavy selling pressure
from both U. S. and P. I. Crushers, the American market for this item declined approximately
1/2 cent per pound during the month. While
the sum total of trading was not large, the independence of buvers made it possible for them to
reduce their ideas with each small purchase,
and in the main these reductions were promptly
accepted by sellers. Prices in all competing
Fatsand Oils are off from 1/4 of a cent to l cent per
pound, with no indication of improvement in
the near future. Latest cable advices follow:
San Francisco, 8.07 to 8.07-1,8 f.o.b. tank
cars nominal; New York, $.07-1/4 c.if. with
little buying interest; London, no quotations.
Copra Cake.—The failure of a large Hamburg
dealer in this commodity caused considerable
weakness in Copra Cake during the month with
price for futures quoted on a scale down. Local
exporters are practically out of the market
indicating P59.00 to P61.00 per metric ton ex


godown. These prices are not attractive to
local mills and very little business has been
noted. Latest cable advices follow:.
Hamburg, afloat 48/0,0; futures E8/670 to
E810/0; San Francisco, meal $33.50 per ton
of 2,000 lbs., nominal.


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


Raw leaf:—Shipments to European regie administrations account for over80% of last month’s
export of leaf tobacco. The demand from the
United States for Philippine stripped tobacco,
while yet small in volume, shows nevertheless some increase. The market in tobacco for
local consumption continues rather quiet. Export figures for April are as follows:
Raw Leaf, Stripped Tobacco and SerapsKnos


9,695
China.............. . . . . .
923073
CEechoMevala    


523,130
France.............. . . . . .
Hongkong................
1,162
11,877
Japan.......... . . . . . . . . .
1,410
North Africa............
North Atlantic (Europe)..
188,612
Spain... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 737,640
Straits Settlements........
2,256
133,671
United States............


Total................ 2,532,535


April 1928........... 294,582
Cigars:—We are, unfortunately, compelled to
report a new low record in shipments to the
United States for April. This decrease is due
partly to overstocks in the States and partly
to a strike in a local factory which, however, was
settled at the end of the month. Comparative
figures for cigar shipments to the United States
are as follows:
9,738,331
April 1929.......
March 1929............ 12,985,111
Auna  AQUEN


Cross America on the New
Drientalfimited
Seattle to Chicago—No Extra Fare


Treated as an honored guest every moment you are on the
Oriental Limited, you will find our afternoon teas just another
expression of our hospitality. And every service you desire for
luxurious living—showers, maid, valet, barber, hairdresser—
unexcelled dining car service, lounge, and compartment
observation car—will make you feel as much at ease as in your
own home. En route you will traverse 60 miles of Glacier
National Park and arrive in Chicago without change of cars
to make direct connections for points East. Great Northern


representatives board ship at Victoria to make reservations
for you.
Full information from
REA


J. Wesley Young, G. A., P.D.
1205 Fourth Avenue
Seattle, Wash.
A. H. Hebb, Agent
916 Government Street
Victoria, B. C.


Edw. A. Dye, General Agent
607 Hastings Street
Vancouver, B. C.
C.A. Gerken, General Agent
1009 Hearst Building
San Francisco, Cal.


M. J. Costello, Western Traffic Manager
Seattle, Wash.


Cable address: Hillrail


M Dependable Railway


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


28


  


May, 1929


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the
Manila hemp market
for the month of April
with statistics up to and
including April 29th,
1929.
Lg
U. S. Grades:—The
New York market at
the beginning of the
month was fairly steady
with shippers offering

the following prices: D,
17-344 cents; E, 16-172
cents; F, 14-1,8 cents;
A
G, 8-172 cents; I, 13-148
cents; J1, 10 cents; $1, 13-3/4 cents; $2, 12-172
cents; S3, 10-1/8 cents. Buyers showed no
desire to operate and owing to heavy receipts
and large stocks in Manila, sellers endeavored
to stimulate trade by reducing prices. By the
end of the first week a decline of 1 cent a lb.
had been recorded on most grades. The market
continued dull and declining and by the 15th
exporters were offering to sell at: D, 15-3,8
cents; E, 14-3/4 cents; F, 12-3/4 cents; G, 8-148
cents; I, 11-5,8 cents; J1, 9-172 cents; S1,
12-348 cents; $2, 10-748 cents; S3, 9-578 cents.
Buyers in America continued to hold off and sales
were few and far between and always at lower
prices. At the end of the month the market
was weak and nominal asking prices were: D,
12-148 cents;
14-344 cents; E, 14 cents; F
I, II cents; J1, 9-148 cents; Si, 11-578 cents;
$2, 10-348 centsS3, 9 cents. However, it is
more than possible that shippers would have
accepted lower prices. The decline for the
month amounts to from 2-1/2 cents to 3 cents
on the higher grades and from 1 cent to 1-1/2
cents on the lower U. S. grades.
In Manila the market for U. S. grades was firm
the first of the month with exporters paving
the following prices: D P38; E, P34; F, P3
G ₱19; I, P29; J1, ₱21; 81, ₱30;’52, P2
$3, P20, but owing to the entire lack of sales
in New York, prices commenced to decline and
most of the grades were down from P0.50 to
₱1.00 during the first week. By the 15th
exporters were buying at the following pri
es:
D; P37; E, ₱34; F P29; G ₱17.50; I, P26;
J1, P20.50; si, P28; 52,'₱25; 83. ₱20. The
market continued to decline and the end of the
month found exporters reluctant buyers at the
following prices: D, P34, E P30.50; F, P26.50;
G, ₱16.50; 1, ₱24, J1, ₱19.50; 81, P25.50;
S2, P23; 83, ₱18. Dealers and speculators
seemed confident that there would be a reaction
and only a small amount of hemp was being
offered, the balance of it going into store awaiting
better prices.
U. K. Grades:—The first of the month found
the U. K. market firm with buyers in the U. K.
and on the Continent willing to pay the following prices: J2, 237; K, 234.5, Ll, 434; L2, 229;
Mi, 230.10; M2, 228.10; DL, E28; DM, 226.
The continued heavy receipts had their effect
and prices commenced to give way. There
was a better feeling toward the middle of the
month and prices on the various grades were
readjusted. Sellers were firm enough but
buyers were showing very little interest. Nominal


prices were: J2, 237.15; K, 233.15; LI, 234;
12, 231; MI, 231; M2, E27; DL, E27; DM,
$34. From the middle to the end of the month
U. K. and Continental buyers bought sparingly
and as a result prices declined and the end of
the month found shippers quoting as follows:
J2, 236.10, K, E31.5; L1, 231.10; L2, 229;
MI, E29; M2, 225; DL, E26; DM, 223. The
lossesfor the month range from 10/— to E3 a ton.
In Manila the market was fairly steady at the
beginning of the month with buyers at: J2, P17;
K PI6;'Li, ₱15.50; L2, P12.50; MI, ₱13.50;
M2, P12; DL, ₱12; DM, ₱11.’ The market
here was more or less quite and by the middle
of the month prices had readjusted themselves
to agree with the selling markets. On the average, prices were slightly lower. Quotations
were as follows: J2, ₱17.50; K, P15.25; LI,
₱15.25 L2, ₱13; MI, ₱13.50; M2, 11.50;
DL, ₱11.75; DM, ₱i0.25. The latter half
of the month prices declined rapidly on account
of it being impossible to dispose of fiber in the
consuming markets and the market closed with
prices nominally as follows: J2, F16.25- K, ₱14;
Li, ₱14; L2, ₱12.25; Mi, ₱12.25; M2, ₱10.75;
DL, ₱11; DM, P5.50.' Exporters were not
overly anxious to buy while on the other hand
the dealers believed prices offered were entirely
too low and in most cases were below the cost
of the hemp they had for sale. Some quiet
transactions were made at prices above the
quotations on certain grades while other hemp
went into store.
Japan:—This market continues to buy cautiously and reports would indicate that there
is a fair stock of hemp on hand in Japan. Shipments so far this year to Japan have been 50
per cent higher than they were a year ago.
Maguey:—The local mills bought a fair quantity of Manila Maguey during the early part of
the month but later the demand seemed to fall
off and as a result speculators in the Sinait
district commenced buving to store. The exporters could not afford to pay the prices asked
nor compete with the local manufacturers as
the fiber at present prices is entirely too dear
for the U. S. and U. K. spinners. Cebu Maguey
continues in full production and prices declined
about ₱1.00 during the month.
Production:—Receipts continued full and while
less than during February and March, still
averaged over 32,000 bales a week. Receipts
for the first two weeks in May are estimated at
60,000 bales so there are still no signs of the
predicted shortage. From the provinces we
continue to hear reports of production falling
off but there is sufficient hemp in store to keep
up receipts for some time.
Freight Rates:—There is no change in rates on
hemp since the last report.


Statistics:—The figures below are for the period
ending April 29th, 1929:


1929


1928


Manila Hemp.


Bales


Bales


On hand January 1........


158,452


139,632


Receipts to date..........


 587,867


453,886


Shipments to—


746,319


593,518


United Kingdom........


110,809


127,587


Continent....... . . . . ...


59,635


62,847


United States..........


189,908


119,081


Japan................ . .


156,133-


103,828


All Others.............


25,632


36,916


542,117


450,259


The Pagan


Chinee


Wherever you go in these islands, you see
The general store of the pagan Chinee.
He has money to lend on scant surety—
He’s a popular man, this pagan Chinee.
His food is all boiled, and for water,
hot tea—
He thrives in the tropics, this pagan
Chinee.
He buys everything at a moderate fee,
But he buys everything, this pagan
Chinee.
He sells everything that could possibly
be
In any demand, this pagan Chinee.
He’s a patron of course of the church
jubilee,
The parish fiesta, this pagan Chinee.
He’s oft shaken down by candidates, he
Expects nothing less, this pagan Chinee.
He reckons the cost and abides patiently
All things as they are, this pagan Chinee.
With methods eclectic he’s royally free
To meet all conditions, this pagan
Chinee.
The incense of poppy, the deftly cooked
pea,
Brings dreams of grandeur to this pagan
Chinee.


At cockpit and monte he often will see
If Lady Luck favors the pagan Chinee


CHARTERED BANK


OF INDIA. AUSTRALIA
AND CHINA
Capital and Reserve Fund..................... E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor.................. 3,000,000
MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


On his own holidays he indulges a


THE MANILA HOTEL


spree—
He’s not very saintly, this pagan Chinee.


LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - WALTER E. ANTRIM


Grown wealthy, at last he departs o’er
the sea
To the land of his fathers, this pagan
Chinee.
Then another begins who is younger
than he,
A poor man, soon rich—a pagan Chinee.
O Christian, behold! Can you ever be
The peer of this merchant, the pagan
Chinee?


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


May, 1929


  


29


APRIL SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


New York Market:
—Owing to the con
tinuedabundance of supplies in Cuba and Atlantic Coast ports, the
 
weakness of the market
of the previous month
was maintained during
F
the first two days of the

month under review,
with quotations at 1-778
cents c. and f. (3.65
cents l. t. for Philippine
PA

centrifugals). On the
4th, however, the market became nervous and prompt shipment of
Cubas were sold at 1-13/16 cents c. and f. (3.58
cents l. t.) and 6,000 tons of Philippine sugar
afloats for February shipment changed hands
at 3.55 cents I. t. In the second week, owing
to the deliberations of the House Ways and
Means Committee on the tariff question, the
New York sugar market became firmer and
prompt shipment of Cubas were sold on the IIth
at 1-15716 cents c. and f. (3.71 cents 1. t.). On
the 12th, Czarnikow bought spot parcels at
1.98 cents c. and f. (3.75 cents l. t.). which move
was considered significant. In the third week,
an improvement was noted in the market, when,
after considerable sales of Cubas were made on
the basis of 1-31,32 cents c. and f. (3.74 cents
 t.) for April shipment and 2 cents c and f.
(3.77 cents l. t.) for May shipment, the market
closed easy. This spurt in the market was
ascribed to the following reasons: (1) a natural
reaction from abnormally low price levels, (2)
the belief that the Guma-Meyer estimate of the
Cuban crop of over 5,000,000 tons was too high,
(3) a broader buying interest due to expectations
of an increase in the U. S. Tariff and (4) the
formation of a pool by certain large Cuban
interests for the disposal of the balance of their
crop. In the fourth week a firmer tone deveoped and sales of present shipment of Cubas were
made at 1-15/16 cents c. and f. (3.71 cents l. t.).
The visible stocks in the U. K., U. S., Cuba,
and European statistical countries at the end of
pril were 6,448,000 tons as compared with
5,808,000tonslast year and 5,543,000 tonsin 1927.
The total sugar production of the world is
estimated at 28,344,000 metric tons for 1928-29
as compared with 26,685,000 tons for 1927-28.
The sugar cane crop in raws this year is estimated at 18,781,000 metric tons as against
17,536,000 tons for last year. The total beet
output for 1928-29 is estimated at 9,563,000
metric tons as against 9,149,000 tons for 1927-28.
There still seems to be less justification than
ever for the belief in an improvement in prices.
There is an overproduction of sugar which is
the main factor responsible for the decline in
values.
The hope expressed in some quarters that the
exceptionally cold European winter might
reduce the area to be planted to beets this year
was not justified since the latest information is
to the effect that the areas will be slightly greater
than the sowings of last year.
Futures. Quotations on the New York Exchange during April fluctuated as follows:
High Low Latest
1.94 1.83 1.87
1929—May...
2.06 1.93 1194
July...
Sept....... 2.10 1.98 1.98
Dec........ 2.17 2.06 2.06
Jan....... 2.19 2.08 2.08
1930—March..... 2.23 2113 2.13
Philippine Sales. During the month under
review, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the
Atlantic Coast—afloats, near arrivals, and for
future deliveries—amounted to 45,000 tons at
prices ranging from 3.55 cents to 3.90 cents I. t.
as compared with sales amounting to 23,200
tons at prices ranging from 4.28 cents to 4.61
cents l. t. during the same period last year.
Local Market:—The local centrifugal market
wasfirmin the month under review and moderate

ly large transactions were effected at P9.00
per picul, although limited quantities were also
effected, in sympathy with the U. S. advices, at
₱8.75-₱8.875 per picul. Muscovado prices
were unchanged on the basis of P6.50 per
picul for No. 3 at the beginning of the month.
The market became weaker at the close of the
month with quotations on the basis of P6.00
per picul for No. 3, owing to the falling off in
the Chinese demand.
Crop Prospects:—With a few centrals still
grinding, the centrifugal sugar production of
the Philippines for 1928-29, under favorable
weather conditions following the severe typhoon
of last November, will be larger than the 1927-28
production; it is too early as vet to say how
much the main gain will be on Luzon due very
largely to exceptionally favorable weather
conditions.
It is thought no discriminatory or restrictive
legislation against Philippine sugar will be enacted by Congress during its present special session.
An increase in the U. S. Tariff to the basis of
3 cents per lb. is hoped for in some quarters,
which would mean that Cuba would pay 2.40
cents as duty instead of as at present of 1.764
cents per lb.
Philippine Exports. Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for the 1928-29 crop from November 1, 1928, to April 30, 1929, amounted to
294,091 tons, segregated as follows:


Metric Tons


Centrifugals....... 279,714
9,403
Muscovados.......
4,974
Refined...........


Total........... 300001


Java Market:—The Java market was steady
in the first week, but in the second week prices
declined due to sales of further Cuban cargoes to
Far Eastern countries. The following are the
latest quotations:
Spot and May shipment Superiors Gs. 1334-
P7.40, per P. I. picul f. o. b."
June shipment Superiors Gs. 13- P7.02,
per P. I. picul f. o. b.
July-August shipment Superiors Gs. 1234-
P6.89, per P. I. picul f. o. b.
The latest estimate by Java sugar producers
of the 1929 crop is placed at 3,025,000 tons.


Irregular Sparking
A girl and a fellow named Bissing
In a Lizzie antique began kissing—
A near-sighted spinster
Heard the noise in the minster
And called “You’ve a cylinder missing.”


“North
S
Coast
Limited”
A
"Finest”.
“the finest train in the wvorld and I have
traveled on all that are worth talking
about”'—Samuel Hopkins Adams,
Auburn, N. Y.
Col

Best
“equipment the very best, service splendid—a wonderful train"—N. A. Peterson, San Francisco.
NOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between
N the North Pacific Coast and Chicago! Leaves
Seattle at 11:00 A. M. for all the principal cities of
AR
the United States. Two days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel is its
diner service. New-style Observation-Club car with deep, restful
lounge—cushioned chairs—library—writing corner—club rooms—
showers—and maid and valet service.
The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos.
Cook Gl Son, Shanghai Commercial Ga Savings Bank, or any transPacific steamship company will gladly furnish additional information.


Oswald Crawford, G. A.
501 Granville Street
Vancouver, B. C.


R. J. Tozer. A. G. P. A200 L. C. Smith Blda.
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.


E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
Sia Govaramhene surost
Victoria, B. C.


NorthernPacificRailway


(352)


"First of the Northern Transcontinentals”


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


30


  


May, 1929


mimaaninianiminianiinininninininianinali


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of McCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.
MCCULLOUGHPRINTING COMPANY
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


It’s a Great
Refrigerator
EDLOTRO LUA
GAS REFRIGERATOR
MANg N MENIE 
MAO VON


Light the tiny gas flame and forget about the
problem of efficient refrigeration in your home.
Dependable, efficient, economical, clean.
Four handsome models from which to select; priced
from P495.00 and up with liberal time payments if
desired. Come in and let us arrange to install one
in your home and let us look after the refrigeration
for you.


Manila Gas Corporation
Main Ofice:
Downtown Showroom:
Calle Otis, Paco. Tel. 5-69-34 7 Calle David. Tel. 2-16-43


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
BY RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


Buying rates for U.
SS TT held firm at
3/4% p. m. until the
20th of April when
heavy withdrawals,
made by clients to meet
the quarterly sales tax
payments, so depleted
the Banks’ cash reserves
that rates dropped to
3,8% p. m. but later
reactedand closed slightly firmer. During the
last ten days of April
selling rates weakened
perceptibly and there
were general sellers of
U. S. STT at 748%p. m. The market gave
some slight indications of increasing strength at
the close.
Purchases of telegraphic transfers made from
the Insular Treasurer since last report have been


as follows:
Week ending March 23rd.........
Ni.
Week ending March 30th......... $370,000
Week ending April 6th........... 1,015,000
Week ending April 13th........... 1,100,000
With minor fluctuations of 1716 d. Sterling


rates held steady with sellers of TT at 2,/-7716
and buyers at 2,-9/16.
The New York-London cross-rate closed on
March 30th at 485-1/4, touched a low of 485-
7,32 on April 4th, was high at 485-7716 on
April Sth and again during the period April
IIth to April 17th inclusive, and was quoted
at 485 5,16 on the last day of the month.
The quotation for London Bar Silver on March
30th was 25-5/16 ready and 26 forward. The


high points for April were 25-15/16 ready and
26 forward on April 2nd and April 1Ith, while
a low of 25-5/16 ready and 25-5716 forward was
reached on April 30th.
On March 30th New York Bar Silver was
quoted at 56-1/4, which was also the high point
for April. The closing quotation of 54-548
on April 30th was the low for the month.
Telegraphic ‘Transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on the 30th of April:
Paris, 12.40; Madrid, 147)%; Singapore, 11412;
Japan, 9134; Shanghai, 81; Hongkong, 9834;
India, 135; Java 12234.


THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija,
Director, Rice Producers’ Association


The market for both
palay and rice is steady
with the exception of
the southern islands
where demand has fallen
off due to stocks on
hand. The prices remain the same as those
of last review except
the superior class of
rice which has registered a small advance

A
being ₱9.10-P9.15 per
sack.

Advices from Saigon
show demand steady and prices as a consequence
advancing. This is due in part to Chinese
demand. The Shanghai Rice Dealers Association estimates the present rice crop as only
5,400,000 short tons as against a normal 15,-
000,000 tons. This decrease is due in part to
floods, insect pests, droughts, civil wars and
economic chaos in the producing regions, and
the demand for rice has stiffened prices in all
expert countries. The reduction of certain
areas devoted to rice has been noted in the


Orient, due to floods; in fact Korea permanently
lost an area of some 21,000 acres of lands totally
swept away by uncontrolled floods during this
last season. Rice merchants of Cebu intend to
import direct from Saigon, saving the high
transshipping freights from Manila.
The proposed floating of an additional ₱10,-
000,000 of irrigation bonds for further extension
of irrigation does not look like a wise move at
present. There are still a number of projects
unfinished, and the collection of water fees is
still far from perfect. In this connection we
might point out that the systems underway
should insure a sufficient supply until population demands further extension. Over-production with no profitable markets is a danger
to be avoided by the industry. We should make
haste slowly in view of conditions affecting the
rice-producer these last three years. Undernormal
conditions we are self-sustaining, hence further
extension (at a price) is not a wise move at
present.


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
BY L. ARCADIO
Acting Traffic Manager, Manila Railroad Company


The following commodities were received in
Manila March 26 to April 25, both inclusive,
via Manila Railroad:


Rice, cavans...........
Sugar, piculs...........
Tobacco, bales.........
Copra, piculs...........
Coconuts...............
Lumber, B. F..........
Desiccated coconuts,
caseS...............


March
April
206,625
234,250
516,768
315,784
360
4,560
131,500
115,550
2,421,650 2,725,800
357,750  318,600
15,170 16,810


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


May, 1929


  


31


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


February, 1929


February, 1928


Monthly average for 12 months
ending February, 1929.


Quantity 


Value


2


Quantity


Value


22


Quantity


Value


22


Su
gal



................. 92,879,093


₱14,538,19


78,373,142


₱12,
721,8:


46.


46,433,208


₱7,718,651
4,504,200
4,099,151
,467
"Sao
790,2
7,75
533,60
09,9


29


Hemp.
.........


14,248,109



4,542,5


3.
3.2


14,695,54a


2,8


18.0


15,101,27


A


ocon
1 Oil.
....


15,632,116



5,126,566


15.4


836,609


3,019,8


2,480,86


ODra


10,240,715



964,78


7,539,809


1,444,12


19,912,728


Cigars (Number).......
Embroidery ....................................


13,951,000




575,846
18


18,671,002


4,15
796,8
36


18,599,934


Maguey......


1,707,37.
............


2,34


1,811,483


96,186


,736
1,


Leaf Tobacco.......



3,611,444



2,450,541


'69,931


eso


Desiccated and Shredded Coconut...................


1,655,25
*..............


555,3.


54
1,217


.5


84,736


H.
ats (Number).


140



758,098


is


32,739


130,400


628,78
481,65
503,452
304,733
107,859
63,406
111,805
841,753


Lumber (Cubic Meter)......................


2,26



437,094


oso


8


3,835


1.


Copra Meal.


11,270,962
* ...........


846,095


2.6


3,565,108


411,060





6,924,945


Cordage.


664,594
*............


370,95


8,119


358,131


336,870


Knott
1 Hemp.
*......... ...............


77,182



275,252


1.


14,258


14,40


3,28


Pearl Buttons (Gross)..................
Canton (low grade cordage fiber)....................
All Other Products ...


56,746

369,510




51,882
0,80
629,531


O.
O.


13,144
592,160


5,476
39,71
708,354


O
2. 5


69,213
601,825


Total Domestic Products...........................


..........4


₱32,951,784


₱27,287,792


99.7


P26,219,075
119,303
34,078


99.5
0.1


United States Products.............................


* .............


75,33


"2


01,249


0.2


oreign Products..................................


...........


88,952


0.3


81,804


O.I


Grand otal.  *





P33,116,049


100 0


P27,470,845


100 0


P26,371,956


100 O


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


Monthly average fo


February, 1929


February, 1928


2 months ending


Articles


February,


1929.


Value


O


Value
-


22


Value


28


Cotton Cloths..........


₱3,833,85


16.4


₱2,914,993


₱3,455,0


15.


Other Cotton Goods..



794,472


2.5


905,166


 4.5


1,187,940


 5.2


Iron and Steel, Except


Machinery ...........


1,766,57


1,264,361


1,897,030


Rice...



121


.6


534,19


Wheat Flour..........


1,041,8


84
516


Machinery and Parts of.


1,643,0


153,7.


1,429,


Dairy Products.........


7


7,5


18


Gasoline ...............


2,


49,8


650,05


Silk Goods............ .


653,41.


3..


84,8a


Automobiles.
*.... 4


1,090,32


4.


05,553 4..


49,4


Vegetable Fib
Goods...


400,275


1.


1


36,40


2.0


Meat Products..........


2,67


423,4


1,0


Illuminating Oil.........


662,816


2.1


1,4


Fish and Fish Products..


364,4


98


1.8


71,45


13


Crude Oil..............


18,82:


1,200 0


209,93


Coal.


204,448


1.0


291,360


 1.5


410,815


1.9


Chemicals, Dyes, Drugs,


E
LO.


340,645


310


.6


400,538


1.8


Fertilizers..............


853,128


SAANOS


6,97


1


Vegetable.............


55,916


H


191,326


i.o


359,665


1.7


Paper Goods, Except


ooks


349,485


 1.5


247,106


1.3


415,925 1.9


Tobacco and Manuf


tures of..............


605,20


1,048,780


583,191


Electrical Machinery...


344,764





352,721


13


384,058 1.9


Books and Other Printed


Matters...


102,542 0.5


166,660 0.9


217,491


1.1


Cars and Carriages, Ex

cept Autos...........


9,027


343,041


..8


224,186


Automobile Tires.......


267,44


265,497


Fruits and Nuts........


24
10540


1.5


4
437


2.2


285,199


Woolen Goods..........


102,0


118,810 0.6


Leather Goods...



234,015


P


242,398


1.5


242,425


1.2


Shoes and Other Foot

warc........


161,850


302,42


140,811


O.


Coffee.................


83,398


64


128,317


d


160,166


O.7


Breadstuff, Except


Wheat Flour.........


135,336


132,946


180,561


O.8



Eggs........


261,997


0.5


133,554


184,479


8


Perfum
  Other


Toilet Goods. ........


100,791


94,638


135,343


0.6


Lubricating Oil........


140,983


0.4


164,435


35


196,228


0.9


Cacao Manufactures, Ex

ept Candy..........


73,554


121,563


147,376


o.7


Glass and Glassware...


135,542


84


179,226


35


174,676


O.8


Paints, Pigments, Var

nish, Etc......
.4


116,429


113,386


155,327


.7


Oils not separately listed


144,285





54,229


0.3 144,607


O.7


Earthen Stones and


Chinaware.



72,71


.


155,41.


129,682


Automobile Accessories.


137,885


0.5


61,096


84


147,482 6.7


Diamond and Other Pre

cious Stones Unset..


96,812


0.5


147,775


0.8


127,418


0.6


Wood, Bamboo, Reed,


Rattan...
..


101,92


sag


114,608


33


India Rubber Goods....


,747


117,768


Soap...


104,615


155,4


O.*


184,66


O.8


Matches.......... . . . ..


35,280


0.2


15


2,1"


Cattle................


2."2
56


BE


0,5


Explosives..............


64,183


O.2


3


35,579


Cement........



7,300


4


91,0


Sugar and
Molasses.....


,444


0.6


76,356


4


51,7


O.


Motion Picture Films...


8,738


.3


,002
18


,468


All Other Imports......


5,169,649


13 3


1,284, 139 G.3


,895,778


8.3


Total.


P21,523,295


100 O


₱19,559,380


100 0


P22,624,917


100 0


TRADE WITH THE


UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN


COUNTRIES


Monthly average for


February, 1929 February, 192
8


12 months endin


Ports


February,


1929


Value


28


Value


2


Value


22


Manila..


₱35,555,521


64.7


₱30,477,7


7,012
65.0 P32,94


67.:


1oilo..


0,900,728


19.9


9,406,738


20.:


6,.
,570


Cebu.


5,508,296


10.)


5,717,007


6,509,201


13¬


Zamboanga.............


547,108


73,359


d


583,055


Jolo..


51,081


0.2


133,374


.4


106,397


Davao..


1,402,121


2.7


739,384


O


1,255,86


2.6


Legaspi.................


674,489


1.3


182,504


O.3


824,862


1.7


Total.


₱54,639,344


100.0


₱47,030,225


100.0


P48,996,957 100. 0


CARRYING TRADE


IMPORTS


Nationality of
Jessels


Monthly average for
12 months ending
February, 1929 February, 1928
February, 1929.


Value


22 


Value


So 


Value


28


American..........


...₱ 9,339,661


42.7


₱10,906,908


 54.8


₱10,055,781


British..............


7,478,16
.


34.


5,554,971


28..


7,578,75.


8


Japanese.............


761,90



341,208


952,35


jutch...


460,598



62,535


1.6


636,196


German..............


,160,038



5.5


928,931


4.9


1,534,017


orwegian...........


930,853



4.5


6,95


0.8


723,8


Philippine...........





117
2


O.8


137,138


Spanish................


148,432


167,7


1.1


157,623


Shinese...............


45,23


62


25,526


0.3


60,039


0.4


Swedish.............





14,411


O..


Dannish...........


600,980



2.9


42,26


0.3


sechoslovak.........


 *


34


French.............


*.


56,277


0.4


By Freight............. P20,926,502


97.1


₱18,821,983


96.2 P21,997,229


97.3


By Mail. ............


596,793
*


2.9


37,397
—


O.A


—628,688


2.7


ta


-P21,523,295


100 0 ₱19,559,380


100 O


P22,624,91!


100.0


EXPORTS


Monthly average for


February, 1929


months ending
February, 1928


Nationality of


February, 1929.


essels


Value


2


Value


28


Value


American.............. ₱16,888,837


51.6 ₱11,448,310


42.1 ₱12,079,76


British...............


6,351,598



19.)


11,090,508


0.9


,942,7.


9.4


Japanese.............


2,689,204



2,082,538


7.5


2,550,62


German..............


56,353






711,84


2.5


894,42


Norwegian...........


3,228,977



9.7


1,245,632


4.4


29,268





Spanish..............





io


Dutch...........


535,495


1.5


193,543


0.5


6
34.


Philippine...........


*


18,449


218,256


O.8


Chinese..............


36,200
 


36,171


0.1


10,768


Swedish..............


132,113
* *


84


348


1.3


ench..............


*.


4,880


Dannish.......


1,149,033
* .





420,289


1.6


By Freight............. P31,967,810


96.6


P26,827,403


97.8


P25,326,670


96.0


By Mail.............


,148,239



S.4


—043,442


2.2


1,045,286


4.0


Total.


133,116,049


100.0


P27 470,845


100. 0 P26,371,956


100.0


TRADE WITH


THE UNITED


STATES


AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for


Countries


February,


1929


February, 1928 12 months ending
February, 1929.


Value


2


Value
22
Value
28


United States........


..₱41,981,033


76.4


₱34,765,597


73.0


P33,893,509


69.1


United Kingdom......


1,431,281



2,836,046


5.9


209,488


apan...............


2,874,478
*


2,659,10


.3


,303,597


de


China...
* ..


1,292,903



216,40


4.


7,48:


3.


French East Indies...


531,731
 


,63:


0.4


538,942


Germany.............


1,188,768
* .


1,213,04


Spain................


246,
* .
183


H
Ae

o

057,9.


Australia............


70,889



5


,0-


British East Indies...


14,.






633,18


709,6


Dutch East Indies...


6,8



59,69


15,7


la


France...............


367,2-
 


33


I.6


Netherlands.........


63,47






HEN


.3


346


Italy....


9,645



70,5


44,50


Hongkong............





bs


30,88.


8


30,


O.C


Belgium.............


o8
22,3
 .


4


75


471,50


Switzerland...........


57



4





2


apanese-China....


21,5.



52,29





Ioo,16


Siam..............


51,119


50,11


33,16


Sweden..............





8


74


0.2


Canada..............


¬
*


2


A
53
6


O.1


105,406


.2


Norway..............


100,668


0.2


73,98


Austria..


,2


15,861


Denmark.........


43,80



O


43,95


O.1


Other Countries......


302,921
* *


0.6


220,213


0.5


311,810


0.6


Total.


-154,639,344


100 0


₱47,030,225


100 0


₱48,996,957


100.0


32


  


May, 1929


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
“SILVER FLEET”
Express Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


EEAE
B


 TIO


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigerated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey


Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
P26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE
Tel. 5-69-44
110 P. Faura


5 RE IP
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18
BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


“LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
P. O. Box 1423
Manila, P. I.


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: "SALEFIBER”


Phone 22516
Derham Building
Manila
P. O. Box 2103
MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


P. O. Box 1394 Telephone 22070
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Collections
Investments
Income Tax
Manila, P. I.
121 Real, Intramuros


REMEMBER
The JOURNAL is a mighty good
publication to send to someone in
the United States whom you wish
to keep informed regarding the
Philippines!
P4 Yearly Does It
Send name and address to
The
American Chamber of Commerce
Journal: P. O. Box 1638,
Manila, P. I.


Mr. MANUEL VALENTIN
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.
244 Plaza Sta. Cruz
Manila, P. I.
Phone 2-61-30


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops
Manila, P. I.
Port Area


—
IN RESTONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS FLEASE MENIION THE ANERICAN GRANBEN OF CONMERCE


SPREADING YOUR RISKS
The keen businessman diversifies his investments both geographically and by types, not alone to avoid
possible adverse conditions in some single industry or section of the world, but also to share more widely
in those favorable developments which strengthen investment holding and make them more valuable.
WE SUGGEST

Pittsburgh Hotels Corporation—
51425 Sinking Fund Gold Bonds, due March 1, 1948, yielding approximately ............... 5342
Chile Copper Co.—
20-Year Gold Debentures, due 1947, yielding approximately .......... 5145
Cities Service, Power and Light Company -
51623 Gold Debentures, due November 1, 1952, yielding approximately.............. 5.652
German Central Bank for Agriculture Farm Loan—
Secured 65 Sinking Fund Bonds, due October 15, 1960; yielding approximately............. 61502
Columbia Steel Corporation—
First Mortgage Sinking Fund Gold Bonds 51¿25 yielding approximately......... 51425
Norwegian Hydro-Electric Corporation—
Gold Bonds—Series A—5142, due 1957, to yield approximately .............. 6. 125
Commonwealth of Australia External Loan—
30-Year 55 Gold Bonds, due September 1, 1957, yielding approximately . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 5.1252
General Electric Co., Germany—
20-Year 622 Gold Sinking Fund Debentures, due May 1, 1948, yielding approximately....... 61222
The average yield on the above list is approximately 62
Full Details On Request


INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION


FRANK G. HAUGHWOUT
Biological Laboratory
915 M. H. del Pilar
Manila, P. I.
Siool, Blood and Urine Examinations
Special Sunday and Holiday Hours for
Business Men: 8 to 9 a.m.; 3 to 5 p.m.
Weck-days: 7:30 a.m. to 12 m.; 1:30 to 5 p.m.


Manila Wine Merchants, Ltd.
174 Juan Luna
Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones: 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for


Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electrio
Westin g ho


119 Calle T. Pinpin
Manila, P. I.


Recommended By Leading Doctors


Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake


EL. 5.73.06


Nature's Best Mineral Water


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to bel) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


TA SE  EE EE EE TE EEAN TEE  E TERO


DOL S DROTHERS SIA


A new car, expressive of a new era in the march of automotive progress. ... unfettered
by the bondage of the commonplace. ... aristocratic in its individuality.... a car of appeal
from all standpoints, name them as you will; beauty, performance, dependability, comfort—
such is the new Dodge Brothers Six.
The new Six is a true representative of Dodge
Brothers organization as it is today—-an organization with a heritage of soundness and
dependability, guided by an administration of
engineering and manufacturing genius. That’s
why great things may be expected of the new
car without danger of disappointment.
SEE THIS NEW SIX—TODAY—AT OUR SHOWROOMS!
Sole Distributors:
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, INC.
Cebu
536-568 Gandara
Iloilo


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   O


VOL. 9, No. 6


JUNE, 1929


Changing American Policy in the Far East.
Its Manifestations in the Philippines.
Our Own Size-Up of Governor Davis.
Newspaper Comment on Governor Davis,
Summarized. Newspaper Comment on
Vice-Governor Gilmore, Summarized.— The
Ben F. Wright Habeas Corpus Case.
The Bangos (Milkfish) Industry: Capital
₱45,000,000.— The Legend of the Asuang,
a Dying Superstition. Other Leading
Articles and the Monthly Reviews of
Philippine Commerce and Industry.
For Students of English:
Another of Our Haphazard Studies in the
English Language.


ULY.


A: MAGAZINE.


PREEMINENT IN.


THE. PHILIPPINES


TABACALERA


The word “TABACALERA"
on a cigar is just as significant
as the word "Sterling" on silver


Your tobacconist
will gladl y
supply y ou


NOTIOS


Motorship Alabat arrived from Hongkong


Modern new twinscrew motorship specially designed and ordered by the
Manila Railroad Company to replace the steamship Samar on its scheduled
run and to handle the growing volume of freight and passenger traffic between
the East Coast of Luzon Ports and the Railroad Terminal at Hondagua.
The M.S. Alabat is of greater capacity than the S.S. Samar and is
equipped with the latest conveniences affording comfortable first and third
class accommodations. She will accept freight and book passage for Legaspi,
Mercedes, Paracale, Mambulao and Capalonga on its initial trip to Hondagua.
The date of her sailing from Manila will be duly published in the local papers.
For further particulars apply to Traffic Manager, Central Office, 943
Azcarraga, Manila.


MANILA RAILROAD COMPANY

MMERU
LE TEGENG G AENENEN E TENTEI TE ANRENCANGLNER


June, 1929


  


1


It’s a Great
Refrigerator
ELECTRO LUX
GAS REFRIGERATOR
MN VOn
MADE Ng MNNI


Light the tiny gas flame and forget about the
problem of efficient refrigeration in your home.
Dependable, efficient, economical, clean.
Four handsome models from which to select; priced
from P495.00 and up with liberal time payments if
desired. Come in and let us arrange to install one
in your home and let us look after the refrigeration
for you.


Manila Gas Corporation
Downtown Showroom:
Main Office:
Calle Otis, Paco. Tel. 5-69-34 7 Calle David. Tel. 2-16-43


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM


can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Islands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


1
EIIIA

Over 100,000
Passengers
Carried Daily
By
MERALCO
Street-Cars and Busses


A High-class
Advertising Medium


Telephone
A. B. TIGH
2-19-11
Advertising Manager


SCHOOL OPENS!
JUNE 10
For School Books and School
Supplies of All Kinds go to the
Philippine Education Store
on the Escolta, second floor,
and make your selections.


Philippine Education buys
in the largest quantities
and sells at the lowest prices


Philippine Education Co., Inc.
Manila, P. I.
101 Escolta


N ENEEE E AEENO EN ENLAT DE MIMENENIENUO ONAINNO


  


julie, 1945


Dunlop experience of tire making
forty-one
years ago, when they made pneumatic tires for the old high
bicycles. Since then it has embraced tire performance on every
variety of vehicle running on every kind of surface.
ONLY DUNLOP EXPERIENCE COVERS THE
WHOLE HISTORY OF THE PNEUMATIC TIRE


Luzon Stevedoring
Co., Inc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Phone 2-16-61
Port Area


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette Mfg. Co.
31 Tayuman
Manila, P. I.
IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLED!


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OF COMMERCE TOURNAL


JUNE, 1929


Vol. IX, No. 6


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY


COLONEL DAVIS SUCCEEDS
COLONEL STIMSON


The American Chamber of Gommerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.
Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
'. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, VicePresident
B. A. Green, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
V. L. Applegate
C. Rockwell
Kenneth B. Day
Alf Welhaven


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Frank W. Butler
Wm. H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
H. L. Heath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Carl Hess
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
.A. Meyer, Chairman
Alf Welhaven
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wilson


COMMITTEES
FINANCE
J.L. Headington, Chairman
Wm. H. Rennoids
F. W. Butler


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
..L. Spellman
M. M. Saleeby
PUBLICATIONS
. A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Bennett
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, ChatrW. 3. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMEN?
J. L. Headington, Chairman
F. W. Butler
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
B. A. Green, Chairman
J. R. Wilson
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
 Bradford
3.
L. E. Nantz
INVESTMENTS
A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
B. A. Green


President Hoover was prevailed upon in May to appoint as governor
general of the Philippines a man without insular experience, Colonel Dwight
F. Davis, one of the Coolidge cabineteers, but a colleague whom, in his own
cabinet, Mr. Hoover had not wished to retain. Colonel Davis—much is
made of the military service and reserve rank of the current grist of governors general—will be in Manila July 7 and will travel across the Pacific
with some of the men who are to be around him in the state council: Speaker Manuel Roxas, the papers tell us, and possibly Senator Sergio Osmena,
Agriculture Secretary Rafael Alunan and others of the mixed commission
sent to Washington. As Coolidge’s secretary of war toward the close of
that tight-lipped administration, Colonel Davis had perfunctory cognizance, temporarily, of Philippine affairs.
He had succeeded Weeks, of Massachusetts; he himself is a Missourian, of St. Louis, but in education he is Harvard and he is one of fifteen
members making up the Harvard council, a body with no little influence
inside and outside academic circles. So the Cambridge crowd that likes
to run the Philippines finds him all right—and he is wealthy. As soon as it
appeared that a compromise had to be made, or when it became evident
that General Frank R. MeCoy’s appointment, just at this juncture, might
spill the beans, overnight a shift was made to Davis. The entity which
Colonel Stimson placed in charge of the local administration of the Philippines—that is, those individuals of it who had not gone to Washington,
notably the senate president—being queried and replying favorably,
though conditionally, the compromise the president approved was made
public. In due course Colonel Davis’s name went to the senate, and the
work of the binational Philippine junta was ratified.
Then Memorial Day came, giving time to jot down these notes.
The stipulation coupled with the senate president’s approval of Colonel
Davis for governor general is, that Colonel Davis adhere to Colonel Stimson’s policy; and Colonel Davis announced, when he reached Washington, that he would do this. The significance of the condition is, that Stimson did not reach journey’s-end; he only hurdled past some way stations,
so that Colonel Davis, in following Stimson’s policy, will of course be expected to go on from where his predecessor left off. The office is not yet
half as weak as it might be made by diligent endeavor—the policy isn’t
half carried out as yet. Here is glory waiting.
Colonel Davis is second choice for the governorship, the junta (the
Cambridge boys and their allies) wanted MeCoy; and Colonel Stimson’s
pledge to MeCoy is temporarily put aside. Manila is Colonel Davis’s
second choice, he wanted to go to Paris; that ambition waits, and the pity


TKICES REDUULD.
RECENT Reduction in Freight Rates now
Apermit us to announce a reduction in the prices
of all body types of New Model “A” Ford Cars,
including truck and Commercial Chassis.
Write for our New Reduced Prices and Easy
Installment Plant.
"After We Sell We Serve”
Manila Trading & Supply Co.
MANILA
ILOILO
CEBU
BACOLOD


TON
ga)


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERANTA UN


F COMMERCE JOURNAL


4


  


June, 1929


of it is, the new American embassy in Paris is said to be really handsome and
pleasantly arranged. Besides Paris . . . well, who wouldn’t, being wealthy
and one of the boys, wish to go to Paris and brush up his French?
Colonel Davis is also second in other respects; he is the second exsecretary of war to be appointed governor—Lord! why can’t this dignified
title be enough, without the general tacked on?—and he is the second parvenu in insular affairs to be appointed governor by his party, the Republican, which used to have the rule of apprenticing men
to the governorship by a period as vice governor. But
how could that be now? The president’s cabinet can’t
be expanded. There is no Belo bill in Washington,
and the countries of the world, offering posts for ministers and ambassadors, are only a certain number
and no more. But demands upon the president for
patronage increase; the logical thing has therefore
happened, and the governorship has been shifted from
a career position to a political one. That, surely, is
as natural as can be.
Again, in disposing of a cabinet man of your own
party, whom you do not choose to have in your cabinet
even though you are committed to continue the administration of your predecessor (who wasn’t, at all
times, precisely enthusiastic about your candidacy,
however), the delicate question arises as to just where
to send him. Maybe a minister’s position, or even an
ambassador’s, is of lower gradation than that of a
cabinet secretary. Bundling the aspirant off to Manila, to a quondam executive post still nominally such,
makes it unnecessary to decide delicate questions of
official etiquette. Almost anyone may be safely sent
to Manila, especially when he is only going there to
carry out another’s policy or as a stop-gap.
In all of this—no reflection even of the slightest

upon Colonel Davis. Practical politics is practical,
and the sole aim here has been to set down some of
its manifestations in relation to the fact that the islands now have Dwight
F. Davis for His Excellency, the Governor General.
Whatever conditions and expedients may adhere to the appointment
of a governor, no governor ought to be prejudged. Judgment should be,
as in this instance it is, held in abeyance until facts of actual administration occur upon which to base an opinion cooly and impartially. But in
feeling so, it does not follow that one need write, for a sophisticated audience, with the credulous enthusiasm of the boy, anticipating the summer
picnic, applauding the droll stories of his Sunday School superintendent.
Essentially, Colonel Davis is a wealthy man (by inheritance), well
married, who has gone in for a public career. Though Manila may not
be Paris, he will certainly find himself as cordially welcomed here, by all,
as if Malacanang and the murmuring Pasig, humming with mosquitoes, had
been the dream of his whole manhood. It is even entirely reasonable to


expect from him a good administration; and that of course implies that
while he may arrive in Manila expecting to stay but a short time, and
make way for MeCoy, he will possibly settle down to a long period of public
effort in the islands.
From his western breeding he cannot have entirely recovered, which
signifies that the pioneer problems here will make their appeal. As
a Missourian, he believes in low taxes and careful expenditures, one
may suspect; and if such is the case, from certain
existing conditions he will be unable to withhold his
executive interest. So it will go, new and intriguing matters arising daily to challenge him to effort.
Colonel Davis will naturally begin as a social governor, much inclined to let George do the heavy work;
but it is as good a bet as any that he will not end that
way.
In one field particularly, where active interest is
needed, he will probably bestir himself quite early.
That field comprises parks and playgrounds and amateur athletics and sports. It is important, of a piece
with what most distinguishes Colonel Davis’s career
thus far, his aldermanic work in St. Louis. To have
parks, to have conservatories of art and the artcrafts,
of flowers and ferns, and to organize the energies of
youth in clean sports and play—these would be no
mean things for any governor to do, systematically,
as matters of major attention, and to stamp his name
upon the achievement.
Governor Gilmore would have soon got round to
it, and the governor who does get round to building
bridges upstream on the Pasig to accommodate crosstown trafie now so annoying to so many thousands
of the humbler folk of Manila, will do something
tangibly renowned. Again, the governor who persuades the government to cease building grandiose office palaces
in the capital, until the rivers are bridged that now, with only bamboo
ferries, impede traffic and take toll of commerce, will make an undying
name for himself. Colonel Davis will soon discover plenty to do. It is
possible, if not probable, that he will undertake it, gradually become absorbed in it and forget his nostalgia, and that he will conduct a prolonged
and effective administration.
Finally, if Colonel Davis comes no closer to carrying on Colonel Stimson’s policy in Manila than President Hoover, so far, has come to carrying
on his predecessor’s in Washington, then Colonel Davis’s reported pledges
will be no particular handicap if he decides to run the job to suit himself.
His breeding, more than his eminence with want of insular experience,
greatly recommends him.
—W. R.


Hon Dyint E pan
Governor General


Retail
Wholesa
ppine American D,
n
Importers
Agents
P
* Ca
BORICA DOI
MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
We have been selling drugs for 98 years


TNEN O S ENN N IN NO S


ITIE EMIERKCNN CAPBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


5



Chang g American Policy in the Orientna b nifestations in the Philippines


ine pabiitit, Tocentig ga-- he fact that
there is objection on the part of Japan to transferring Minister MacMurray, diplomat by
career, from Peking to Tokio, where he would be
America’s ambassador, has rather more than
casual significance. It is reasonable to assume
that an international understanding lies behind
it, and that Japan’s foreign office has not violated America’s confidence. The objections
specify that MacMurray seems often to act independently in China, when concurrent action
by the several powers would be more desirable.
Concerning tax matters and exterritoriality,
and willingness for treaty revisions, America
so acted—taking the lead in letting a bad situation grow worse, before applying drastic
remedies, perhaps.
Aggravation of the situation has continued
until millions are reported starving, the tuchuns
are once more at each other’s throats and the
authority of Nanking is challenged in the field.
Has it come time to tighten up? At least it is
reasonable to conjecture that the time for firmness is approaching, and that America prepares
herself—America who never enters alliances, but
does frequently undertake concurrent action
with other powers. That Japan and England
have an understanding hardly admits of doubt;
and that America under Hoover will veer toward
a policy inducing peace among the Chinese is a
reasonable assumption.
Modification, toward more consistent cooperation, a policy holding China to her responsibilities, may be anticipated from the
Hoover administration. The Chinese number
a fourth of the world’s population, and China,
not Russia, is the key to world peace. This was
the dictum of John Hay, who, as secretary of
state, got America to acquire the Philippines in
furtherance of his China policy, which was that
of opening the doors of the empire and letting
America in where she had once stepped out. He
wanted to do this because of trade; it was the
first time since the Civil War that the necessity
for overseas trade had pressed upon America,
and China was found closed up. That necessity is
once more acute, and the residual legatees of the
Hay tradition are at the helm of the ship of
state. No matter that Hoover had to be introduced to Colonel Stimson—“for God, for
Root, Taft, Hughes,
country and for Yale.”
Forbes and the rest wanted Stimson in Kellogg’s
place, and they put him there—a man who in
Manila had chated because his own publicity
was crowded out of the overseas news by the
Kellogg world-peace pacts, at which he sneered.
There is much cold calculation in the state
department now, and more outside of it to draw
from. There will be changes whenever material interests dictate them and specious reasons, for the consumption of the public, will be
abundant. Possibly there is honesty coupled
with this, but it is that type of honesty which
relies upon the other fellow to go over the hoss
he is trading for. Eleven months’ experience of
it in Manila should teach this much. What has


prevailed in foreign policy during eight years
is now no longer handicapped by amateur statesmen and those outside the inner circle.
Let the light thus gathered be turned upon
the Philippines. What may be in store for
these islands is of most interest. Here, too,
the policy of letting the pot boil until it pops
over may be discerned; but such abeyances, to
those who have some conception of what they
entail, are disquieting.
For the past several years a perceptible weakening of the insular executive has been in progress. Wood, as governor, endeavored in vain
to reinvest the office with the powers which
had been dispersed from it. He wanted thorough-going support in Washington; he never
got it, and what support did come from there
seemed to derive from the president personally
(not Harding, but Coolidge after him) and not
from the war department. He doggedly held
on until fatally ill, and his vice governor may be
said to have deprived himself of the opportunity
to become governor (as things are presently
going) by adhering to Wood’s views as to the
propriety and public advantageousness of an
independent executive. It was said that he
too favored using the federal internal revenue
from Philippine products sold in America,
mainly from cigars, which accrues to the Philippine treasury, for adequate executive administration; so that if disagreement with the executive led the legislature to curtail appropriations,
funds would be adequate anyway. It was also
said that his veto of the bill from the Philippine
legislature which was the forerunner of the
Belo bill which Colonel Stimson approved—a
bill drafted to substitute the Kiess bill in congress, just referred to—made him persona non
grata with the insular dictatorship and barred
his promotion to the governorship of the islands,
despite his widely acknowledged qualifications
for that office.
About the time of General Wood’s death,
indeed, there was quite a movement in Washington toward rehabilitating the office of the
insular governor. But it came to nothing, it
has now waned altogether. Colonel Stimson
was made governor: the precedent of appointing
a man without insular experience has now been
followed by appointment of Colonel Dwight F.
Davis to the post.
Colonel Stimson showed his inclination to rely
upon the insular dictatorship (a term used in an
analytical, not a disparaging, sense) by reestablishing a state council such as had functioned
in lieu of an earlier governor. In this council
the dictatorship is incorporated; even such
fundamental executive obligations as the choice
of cabinet members, who are members of the
council too, and the selection of judges devolve
upon the council. The voluntary surrender of
executive powers, otherwise independent and
unhampered, may be conjectured from this.
There is ample justification of the belief on the
part of the public that the dictatorship manipulates the reins of government, and, on the


part of government officials, that their tenure
of office depends upon pleasing the dictatorship, in which is combined a dominating influence upon the nominal executive and the
legislature alike. Nor does this influence stop
short of the courts.
Another degradation of the governor’s office
has been effected, which entails a consequent
further weakening of the position. This consists in ascertaining beforehand that the dictatorship will be pleased with the president’s
choice for governor. Thus exercising at least
nugatory power, if the dictatorship is not always
able to get precisely the man it prefers for governor, it is able to prevent the appointment of a
man it doesn’t want. It had its understanding
with Colonel Stimson prior to his appointment:
it was queried, and it replied favorably, prior
to Colonel Davis’s appointment. So sure is it
of its ground that it now believes the United
States will never appoint a governor who does
not have its approval, and one of its chief spokesmen has so intimated.
Incidentally, the approval given Colonel
Davis is conditioned upon his adherence to
Colonel Stimson’s policy; such has already been
his declaration, published in Manila newspapers
May 27. Governors inexperienced in the
islands are preferred.
Ground has been given also in the case of the
vice governor’s post. Sagacious maneuvering
through one means and another tends to estrange
the vice governor from the governor’s fullest
confidence, and so to deprive the latter, to a
degree, of the counsel an experienced insular
administrator should be able to give him. Degrading the vice governor’s office makes it
easier to convert the governorship into what it
has actually become, strictly a political office
and not one that follows, as formerly, upon due
apprenticeship to it in the vice governorship.
Until January of this year, official social precedence placed the vice governor next the governor as the second man in the land. But
subsequently, Colonel Stimson having obtained
an opinion upon the point from Colonel Davis's
department (of war), the vice governor stands
third in the line and the commanding general
is interposed between the two executives.
Does this look toward turning the vice governor’s office over to the dictatorship? Whether
it does or not, it is one with the policy, of major
importance in this discussion, of weakening the
executiveship—giving ground there in order to
gain it elsewhere.
Let no one suppose this to be a criticism of
what is transpiring. It is an effort, rather, at
exposition, for the guidance of those the actual
situation may affect. Names are avoided as
much as possible; personal feeling is suppressed.
What is observed as happening to the governor’s
office, is repeated as to the insular auditor’s,
through the medium of the courts. The islands'
supreme court repeatedly assumes jurisdiction
in cases the auditor is endeavoring to handle
in accordance with his view of the powers of his
office. Rightly or wrongly, the auditor is thus
made far less a responsible officer of accounts
than his predecessors were; the succeeding
opinions of the court, with their obiter dicia
voluminously appended, are diminishing the


The result of over
E
DE
half a century of
refining experience
Remember that SOCONY is Standard


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN CHAMPFE OR CORMERCE JOURNAL


MOTOR OILS AND MOTOR GASOLINE


6


  


juiic, 1345


authority hitherto pertaining to the auditor’s
office.
Seemingly it is considered a matter of little
importance that this is done; but, in such a
situation as that prevailing in the Philippines,
too much is seeming that appears on the surface
and too little is hard actuality. A deliberate
policy of laissez fatre, such as is only too evidently being pursued, will make no furore over
anyone’s depriving an auditor of his blue pencil.
For when confusion becomes worse confounded,
special agents will arrive in Manila with the
bond money from the
United States; they
will control expenditures. That gesture
may well be the first
intimation that the
trap has been sprung,
the quarry seized
upon.
Now there is opposed to all this looseness of administraA
tion, an objective; for
it is elemental that
men do not voluntarily forfeit power,
rather they seek its
aggrandizement.
Giving ground in
one quarter, where is
ground being taken
in another? It is
being taken in the
field of organized
capital mobilized to
exploit both the industries and the lands of these
islands, which languish for the impetus of such an
agency—the agency of big money.
For the California Packers Association’s
ambition to grow pineapples, there has been
made a reservation of more than 14,000 hectares
of land in Bukidnon in accordance with the
Alunan plan (as set forth in this review last
month). Rubber desires to pass the experimental and small-capital stage; it could
absorb its hundreds of millions of dollars. It
is presently discouraged by the restrictive land
laws and the amendments to which Colonel
Stimson was belatedly converted, but the natural conditions invite it. (The land-law amendments, by the way, are one of the acts of the
Stimson administration which received no local
publicity and were, perhaps inadvertently
omitted from at least some of the published lists
of acts of the legislature approved by the governor general. Usually, in an agricultural country,
land legislation is considered important). Machinery has been successfully introduced, and
it is more than probable that the modern exploitation of the islands’ fiber resources will
claim its millions of agricultural capital and its
kingdoms of public domain. A few intimate
lines from the war department’s bureau of insular affairs (where administration of the Philippines is centered) under Colonel Davis may be
appropriate here:
“The talk everywhere is of the Philippines.
... They point to the four hundred millions
in China across the way who could be made
available by a very slight modification of our
immigration laws."
What is affecting government here is this new
influence, that of the concessionist, who is essentially indifferent to the quality of local government, be it good or bad. He, with his
large interests, producing staples and necessities
for the homeland, will always have quick recourse to ample protection; and his primary
interest in the country will be its soil. He will
sell overseas, buy overseas; his local outlay will
be only to labor, and his influence will naturally
be exerted toward securing immigration. He
is destined, it goes without saying, to have his


troubles. He is no less destined to be a factor
in the game, and not very much concerned with
what happens to the local resident and the
inhabitants—except as his interests are directly
involved.
He is only one force, but a powerful well
organized one which, very properly, for its own
good, means to wield influence where influence
really counts. He is an expert fellow who can,
with his millions, make fallow lands flourish
and the marts of the islands hum with industry.


From Review of Reviews
Kellogg in a double-breasted, President Hoover in a plain sack coat, and Stimson
in formal cut-away


But he is no altruist, his business is to turn a
profit with the enormous sums entrusted to his
management. In his behalf the government
has traded away so much, for him there is so
much seeming autonomy. But he is largely
a law unto himself. For his rubber, his pineapples, his fiber, navies move. Things are let go,
until it is time to better them. Then there is
peremptory reformation. Have the Philippines unwittingly undergone caribbeanization?
Possibly, or one may say partly, perhaps. This
article is prompted by the frequent criticisms
of governmental irregularities, the demeanor of
the executive, the alleged prevalence of squeeze.
As if such conditions were strange, or subject
to improvement. It is all, essentially, quite
the other way. A new norm prevails in Philippine public affairs.
Government, especially its impeccability, is not
the primary objective of administration nowadays: pride in the oldtime civil service goes
out with the past. Colonel Stimson proclaimed
himself the harbinger of a new era. So, truly,
he was—the era of the concessionist, of him
whose crops crown a thousand hills. But Colonel
Stimson was but the messenger of the luscious
gods. Ceres had ordered that crops be sown,
and the era was as sure to dawn as common
knowledge of the fertility of the islands’ idle
acres was to spread throughout the world.
Now it is to deal with.
(Concluded on page 18)


T
O7
Historical Spots in Manila


The Ayuntamiento.—In Spanish times this
building was the city hall." In this building,
over the front veranda, General Wesley Merritt’s flag was flung to the breezes August
13, 1898, a confirmation of the American occupation of the city. On a rostrom built
for the ceremony, facing the Ayuntamiento and the old Plaza de Armas, renamed Plaza de McKinley, Taft took the oath of
office as Civil Governor of the Islands July
1, 1901. He was the first and only civil governor, succeeding the last of the military governors, Major General Arthur MacArthur.
Taft’s audience, down in the plaza, were the
regulars and volunteers of the army who were
throwing in their lot with the country they were
helping, or had helped, in pacifving, who were
ready to assume the responsibilities of peace
by entering the insular civil service, provided
for in the first act of the Taft commission, sitting
in the Ayuntamiento September 19, 1900.
Taft was followed in the Ayuntamiento by
Luke E. Wright (the first chief executive of the
islands bearing the title governor general, which
Taft arranged for as secretary of war), Henry C.
Ide, James F. Smith, W. Cameron Forbes and
Francis B. Harrison; and under General Wood,
after Harrison, the executive offices were removed to the new executive building at Malacanang. Taft had been preceded by military
governors from Merritt and Otis to MacArthur
father of our present distinguished department
commander, and this military interim between
war and the beginning of peace—that Paz
Romana which America seems so deft in establishing—has never received the critical attention it deserves. It remains a thrilling
chapter, unwritten, in the national annals and
those of the nation’s land forces. Until recently, two major laws promulgated in this
interim, the marriage act and the code of criminal procedure, remained on the insular statutes as written; the first was modified, not with
entire success, two years ago, and the other still
remains the law of the land.
The first act of the Americansoldiers who took
quarters in the Ayuntamiento, was to distribute
rations from their knapsacks to the caretakers
and their families, who were terrified by the unwonted proceedings and, fearful of going out to
market, half starved.
The bureau of archives, housed in the Ayuntamiento, has unbroken records dating back
to Legaspi’s commission as an adelantado from
*It is still a municipal property, and one which should
be converted into a museum and art gallery and preserved carefully for its historical interest in Spanish
and American times.


Philip II in 1565, and the copy bears Philip’s
rubrica or signet mark. With the rise of academic interest in orientalia of every sort, among
the progressive universities of America, these
records will be valuable source material; but
it is a fact that they are carelessly handled, and,
piled helterskelter in the passageways of the
courts, of which there are two spacious ones,
at the time of the American occupation they
were subject to unwitting vandalism—the
soldiers using them as old paper, apparently
worthless, for one purpose and another.
The kitchen police resorted to them for fuel!
The old records, however, are parchment
bound, on handmade paper known as catalan,
and inscribed in the faultless script which the
friars taught the native scriveners employed
by the Spanish government. Types of this
escribiente, or scrivener, are still found in some
of the government offices, including the archives
bureau. They are like characters out of Dickens.
One charm of Manila is its blending of the new
and the old. This writing of which we have
just been speaking is, for example, plainly influenced by the chirography of the Chinese—
hence, in part, its preciseness. Room after
room in the archives, by the way, is wholly
devoted to records of the Chinese, who always
formed a special community under Spain—
were limited in privileges, but specially taxed.
La Fuerza Santiago—Fort Santiago: Citadel
of Manila. Here, of course, has been American
army headquarters from the outset, and an
American contribution to the old fort is its excellent reference library—accessible by special
permission. Fort Santiago dates from the
founding of Manila, May 19, 1571, and work
upon it and upon the city’s walls and bulwarks
continued almost throughout the entire Spanish
period. The dungeons, the black hole of Manila,
a windowless strongroom where prisoners rounded up in one of the disturbances incident to the
Bonifacio revolt (of 1896) were suffocated, the
little guardroom where Rizal, martyr and pamphleteer of reform, spent his last night on earth—
these and many other details are points of interest.
There should be a guidebook to the fort, and
encouragement to the tourist to visit it. It was
not in later Spanish times, as it was made under
America, general military headquarters. It was
a school for cadets, and headquarters were at the
Estado Mayor on calle Arroceros, as the name
indicates. The superstructure of the fort, for
offices, is an American addition. The name of
Governor Dasmarinas, of the 16th century, is


juimo, 1343


THE AMEKICAN CHAMIBER ON COMMERCE JOURNAL


7


connected with the building of the fort and the
walls, but dozens of his successors had a hand
in the work. Legend says that when Philip
was told that the walls of Manila were completed, he stood upon she council table and strained
his vision toward the city, saying that they had
cost so much that he supposed they should be
visible from his capital!
The walls served the republic, such was the
community designated, well on many an occasion; and at least once they served to preserve
the city from annihilation at the hands of the
Chinese, who had either been scared into revolt
or had plotted the city’s destruction. The officers of the engineering corps of the American
army, who wrote a detailed report on Fort
Santiago and the walls of Manila, opined that
the defenses were then, in 1900, by no means
obsolute; and that there might be occasions when
their protection would even yet be a blessing
to the city.
Only the part of the walls from the Dominican
church (of the Rosary, a first rate example of
Gothic cathedral architecture) to the ordnance
section of the fort was demolished by the Americans, when peremptory word came from Washington to desist. This timely intervention by
some thoughtful authority has preserved to
posterity old Manila almost intact as in medieval
times, and reputed by learned travelers to be
unique, in being so preserved, among the cities
of its period. In other words, in old Manila,
with miles of bulwarked walls, casual observer
and scholar alike behold the best existing example of the medieval citadel and town. Every
thoughtful person, reflecting upon the relative
evanescence of the work of human hands, should
lend his influence to the perpetuation of this
heroic heritage from the golden age of Spain.
The architecture of Manila is as yet amorphous, partaking of all forms and none, with
notable exceptions. One conspicuous exception is the residence of E. A. Perkins on Dewey
boulevard, planned by Mrs. Perkins and meticulously adhering to the Spanish mission style.
This single example, and there may be others
less noteworthy, indicates the valuable esthetic
influence the old city is to have upon our architecture when our journeymen in the profession grow weary of copying and set themselves the task of creating and adapting. When


Edward Price Bell, world-famed journalist who
knows his England and his Europe well, visited
Manila a few vears ago, one evening at sunset
we motored from downtown over the Jones
bridge, along Magallanes drive and out through
the walled city to Bonifacio drive, the oldtime
Malecon. Thence he had a view back toward
the city, and he exclaimed with rapture:
‘Now I know why you love Manila—for her
character! The city has a character of its own,
distinct, recognizable, seductive in its peculiar
charm!"
Of how many cities may that be truthfully


Review of Reviews photo
A NEW "DOLLAR"IN U. S.
Paul W. Chapman, an investment banker of Chicago'
was not known to newspapers nor to Who's Who in
America when he bought the eleven ships of the United
States Lines recently—the Leviathan and ten other liners
—for $16,500,000. He is 48 years old. He owns the
dock railway at Hoboken, the connecting link between
ocean ships and nine trunk-line U. S. railways. Ho
manufactures an airplane having a cruising capacity of
4,000 miles with 25 passengers aboard, and he plans combining airplane traffic with the speed of his new ships to
cut the voyage time between America and Europe.—
John F. Sinclair writes about him in the May Review of
Reviews.


said, especially American cities? One may
feel it in New York; one senses the growing
pains of a Chicago or a Detroit, and looks forward to their maturity; and in San Francisco
another metropolis with a mission background,
he feels more than the ephemeral and the expedient round about him. Boston certainly
purveys the culture of New England; and there
is Baltimore, and there are smaller cities that
are not all middletowns. But even so, there is
no Manila among them all—none rivaling her,
imbued as she is with the nobility of four centuries of proselyting and indefatigable civilization, impinging stubbornly upon a paganism
that will not altogether be put down. Out of
this, of course, in architecture, in everything,
one does not always obtain beauty; he does,
however, discern distinctiveness.
The Hubbell Monument. At the west end of
plaza Cervantes, in front of the Bank of the
Philippine Islands, stands the monument to
George Hubbell, of Bridgeport, Connecticut,
an American consul who died in Manila, the
inscription says, in 1831. This is one of the
oldest records of Americans in the Philippines,
but Americans, colloquially known as Bostoneses, traded with Manila and established themselves ashore in the city as soon as Spain opened
the islands to foreign commerce at the opening
of the 19th century; and when Hubbell of Bridgeport was consul, there existed a community
which gave reason for the position. In predicting the return of Americans to the islands, Rizal
had probably carefully studied the commercial
records. Americans were here for two or three
generations, leading the way in trade, until the
Civil War and pioneering the American west
absorbed for a period of twenty years the energies of her young men; and with this task over
Americans returned to Manila. The soldiers
discovered Hubbell’s monument in a warehouse,
and high command brought it forth to be set
up where it now stands—the oldest American
monument known in the islands.
Nothing is known of its history, perhaps the
guild of foreign merchants had it made. Monuments are not always erected when they are
sculptored; it was a matter of twenty years
between the time France gave Liberty to America and the time it was erected in New York
harbor; and during that period the monument
lay in a warehouse, duty unpaid!
This reference will give occasion to close this
paper with references to other monuments in
Manila. The monument to Magellan, at Magellan circle back of the Intendencia building, was
designed to be erected at Mactan, where the
great navigator was killed. But, put ashore
from the ship that brought it from Spain, it was
too cumbersome for the interisland craft, report
has it, and so it remains in Manila. Legaspi and
his navigator, Father Urdaneta, the Augustinian
missionary, were, however, the founders of
Manila. Their monument, too, an heroic bronze
piece now adorning the old gun-r
posite the east entrance of the Ma tel,
was discovered by the Americans .
TiScupation period in a warehouse of th
tomshouse—the bronze sword hilt gon
8
pillaged and sold to a Chinese junkn
The
th.2
missing paraphernalia replaced with
G
Americans assumed the duty of choos
for the monument and erecting it.
Burnham monument, on Burnham

unad
memorial to the great Chicagoan wh
modern Manila and Baguio, rests de datad
for the time being, as a stroke of lightnimr ed
it a few years ago
The monument to Arthur W. Fergu₱.
American executive secretary, who wa : rouch
a part of the early civil regime, stands. Plaza
Fergusson in Ermita. A plaque pe emates
the name of Taft, on Taft avenue, beit seced
at the junction of the avenue with ca Palre
Burgos, and trees planted by Taft and Te't
are growing on the old Luneta, General wood
having caused them to be protected with iron
railings. Dewey is remembered in the city’s
most elegant boulevard, a thoroughfare which
one day may unite the city he blockaded with
the city where he raised the American flag aloft
May 1, 1898—old Cavite.
One landmark in old Manila has an intimate
connection with Arthur Fergusson, whose work
would have been less conspicuously brilliant


THE YOKOHAMA SPECIE BANK
E LTD. E
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
Capital (Paid Up) -
100,000,000.00
Reserve Fund
105,500,000.00
Undivided Profits
9,346,622.43
MANILA BRANCH
600 DASMARINAS, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager
SA
PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER PHO
t, Aa


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMRNTSE


AN JON THE AMSGIGAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


8


THE AMERICAN CHAMBEK OF COMMEROE JOURNAL


sune, 1


had he failed of learning the Spanish language.
The place of his contact with Spaniards and
Spanish-speaking friends, daily, vear after
year, is the Palma de Mallorca, a hostelry in
vellow paint on calle Real, of course in old
Manila. At a little round table here, among
cronies of his genial kidney, Fergusson held
forth daily—in an atmosphere as stimulating
as that of an oldtime English coffeehouse. Among
the habitues of the place, and a guest at the
round table, was Fergusson’s assistant, who
succeeded him as executive secretary, Frank
W. Carpenter, Governor Forbes’s amanuensis,
and real source of accurate information, in the
preparation of his book on the Philippines.
These reliable servants of the Philippine government owed their effectiveness to their acquisition
of the language; and Carpenter did not stop
with Spanish as a second mother-tongue, but
mastered Tagalog too, if not several other dialects. This information is imparted for what
it is worth; at least it shows that the educated
American can become a versatile polyglot, when
he wishes to, and make it pay.
Men of the Fergusson and Carpenter type
had a chivalry of their own making. All during
his service in the government, Carpenter kept
Box A, into which he tossed a copy of every
document he handled (and they were thousands,
of the most important) and notes of his own on
special incidents and the character and conduct
of men and officials—notes showing when they
wobbled, when they failed to play the game,
or maybe when they did play it magnificently—
the good and the bad together, all in the telltake Box A. This, altogether, was a priceless
record, an exhaustless treasure for the historian


Of more than sixteen hundred kinds of fishes
recorded from the Philippines, bangos is the
first in importance. It is by far the leading
fish in Manila markets, and is the product of an
industry in which over 45,000,000 pesos are
invested around Manila Bay alone. Bangos
is the daily staple animal diet of tens of thousands
of Manilans, and in the typhoon season is the
only cheap fish available. Bangos is shipped
almost daily either by train or motor truck from
Hagonoy, Bulacan, Navotas, and Malabon to
various towns of Mountain. Pangasinan, Tarlac,
Nueva Ecija, Bulacan, Pampanga, Laguna,


and the novelist alike, and for the biographer.
And what, in the end, did Frank Carpenter do
with Box 4? Upon leaving Manila, or somewhere upon his route home to Boston, he opened
it up and destroyed, personally, so that he would
know that it was done, every paper it contained!
Some of the information was too devastating,
and he concluded that the fairest way was to
consign it all to limbo without discrimination.
So, though there is much of history left in Manila,
there is no Box 4; and as a consequence, many
a reputation, otherwise perilous, is secure of
historical renown. The oldtimers were about
the last of the Victorians, not the early of Albert’s happy days, but the late, of the God-fearing widow—of that contemporary American
period that doted upon Howells and started
Teddy trust-busting. They had a certain
code to which they held, a peculiar mixture of
sin and saintliness that dated them with the
period the internal-combustion engine put an
end to.
Such were the Americans who occupied Manila and stayed to found the new community.
A toast to their pluck and their virtues. As
to their vices, if such they had or have—for
many are our neighbors still, and many seek
nepenthe of Manila days in the homeland—
overboard with Box A! If there are permanent
American objects of history in Manila, they are
mostly of their building. It is very hard to
write even a little, reminiscently, without digressing to pay them deserved honor.
The above was hastily prepared, hence its discursiveness, as an address to the Manila Sojourners' Club, May
2S Bu.


Milkfish—Industry


Batangas, and Tayabas Provinces. In the
interior towns of the above-named provinces
bangos in all forms finds a very good market
and plays an important part in the diet of all
classes.
In suitable natural localities, with fairly
favorable marketing facilities, the culture of
bangos is one of the most profitable industries
in the Philippines. Throughout a large part of
the Islands one monsoon may bring a glut of
fish to the shores, with a corresponding scarcity
during the opposite monsoon. In every such
locality bangos ponds are desirable and profitable,


if the countryside is at all thickly settled, even
though there is no large town close at hand.
The bangos feeds upon diatoms and other
plankton organisms, the leaves of submerged
flowering plants, and algae; ,it consumes large
quantities of the filamentous’green algae. The
fry feeds upon plankton and the surface scumon
the muddy bottom of quiet shallow bays and
tidal creeks. When food is plentiful the bangos
grows very rapidly.
The bangos is among the most prolific of
fishes. One of the ovaries of a ripe female
taken in Subic Bay on April 10, 1927, measured
330 millimeters in length, 89 in extreme breadth
(35 at the anterior, and 24 at the posterior extremity), 40 in extreme thickness, and weighed
450 grams. The other ovary was equally large
but had been damaged in removal. Bangos
eggs are very small. The ovaries of this specimen contained 3,415 eggs per gram. One
ovary contained about 1,530,000 eggs; therefore,
the fish had about 3,060,000 ripe eggs ready to
spawn. This fish was about three-fourths of a
meter in length. It is a safe assumption that
fish half again as large would contain many
more eggs.
In Batavia, Java, Dr. A. L. G. Seunier examined the roe of a fish 1,120 millimeters long, including the caudal fin (probably about 940 or
950 millimeters in real length). The roe weighed
1,304 grams, and one gram contained 4,370
eggs, making a total of about 5,700,000 eggs
in the whole roe.
It seems probable that a bangos never contains less than a million and a half eggs, and that
a very large female may have in excess of 7,000,-
000 eggs. Bangos average 3,000,000 eggs and
can only be exceeded, if at all, by the cod, which
has been known to have about 9,000,000 eggs.
The minute bangos fry swim in vast shoals
near the shore line of shallow sandy coasts and
enter estuaries and tidal creeks. They come
in with the advancing flood tide and go out with
the ebb, and therefore are always surrounded by
fresh, cool, but shallow water. A knowledge of
this fact is fundamental to the successful culture
of bangos.
The capture of bangos fry (kawag-kawag in
Tagalog) is a very important industry. The
flat sandy coasts of Balayan and Batangas Bays,
Batangas Province, Luzon, furnish by far the
largest quantity. The annual license fees for
catching bangos fry in Batangas Province during
April, May, and June amount to about 100,006
pesos. The fry captured are shipped to Malabon and other points on Manila Bay, there being
no bangos ponds in Batangas Province.
The fry are caught in exceedingly fine-meshed
nets, made of coarse sinamay (abaca cloth).
Most of them are caught from the middle of
April to the latter part of June, but they can
sometimes be caught during the early part of
July.
When captured, the fry are about 10 millimeters long and exceedingly slender. They are
so small and transparent as to be nearly invisible.
As soon as possible they are placed in low, widemouthed, pot-bellied, unglazed, earthenware
jars (palayok or palyok), some of which have a
capacity of about 15 liters each, and others 30
liters. From about 1,500 to a little over 2,000
fry are placed in the 15-liter jar and 3,000 to
3,500 in the 30-liter jar. The jar is then covered
with a piece of the base of a leaf stem, or petiole,
from the areca, or betel-nut, palm. This is the
most critical stage in the handling of bangos.
A little carelessness may ruin the whole stock
in the jar. The jar should be kept filled with
clean water so that the fry may move abovfreely, and should be handled carefully to avoid
injuring the tender fry.
After the dealer has sorted the fry, the purchaser counts them. Manifestly, it would be
impracticable to count the fry in all the jars,
which sometimes number 500, so an average is
usually taken by counting the contents of ten
iars. In counting the fry a wide-mouthed china
bowl is dipped into a jar and filled with water
and fry. Then a clam shell is dipped into the
china bowl and several fry are taken up in it.
The counter calls out the number of fry in the
clam shell and the number is checked by two
tellers. This operation is repeated until all
the fry in the jar have been counted. When all


We Have
The Largest and Most Complete Stock
of Drygoods in the Philippines
If you need silks, linens, cottons, or
notions you can serve yourself best
by choosing from our large stocks
We also carry haberdashery, and
make men's suits and shirts
Manuel Pellicer y Co., Inc.
Phone 2-11-06
44 Escolta, Manila


Manila’s Bangos

This article is extracted from the paper on the bangos industry of the Philippines published in
the current number of The Philippine Journal of Science. It is the work of Herre and Mendoza,
and for complete data the reader is directed to it. Obviously, an industry dating from unknown
antiquity, which engages a goodly share of the capital of the islands' senate president, and altogether,
only in the environs of Manila, P45,000,000 is something to know something about. The same
industry flourishes in the Dutch East Indies. There it is wholly in the hands of the Chinese, and here
Filipinos have an important if not a major share of it. The native words garongin and hatirin apply
to the bangos, the milkfish of English, at varying stages of growth.—Ed.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


June, 1929


9


  


the fry in the selected jars have been counted
the total number is divided by 10 and the result
thus obtained is taken as the average number
of fry in each jar. The average multiplied by
the total number of jars gives the total number
of fry in all the jurs.
Fry are bought and sold by the ten thousand,
or lacsa. The price varies at present (1927)
from 15 to 50 pesos per ten thousand, according
to the season and place. In general the price
is lower in the vicinity of Malabon, and higher
in Bulacan, Pampanga, and Bataan; it is also
higher early in the season as the best fry are
then available. The danger of heavy rainfall
during the latter part of May and in June also
reduces the price, since heavy rains cool the
ponds and reduce the salinity of the water,
weakening or even killing the fry.
According to the belief of old men in Batangas
Province, bangos fry originate in the following
way: When the water is dried up and the soil
exposed in swampy places in the interior, during
the dry season, the ground is heated by the sun
and stirred into life. Light rain falling on it
then causes the fry to form, and they are washed
down by the river into the sea. As proof of their
story the narrators point to the abundance of
bangos fry in the mouths of creeks and rivers.
In many parts of the Visayas and Luzon it is
believed that bangos, and also buan-buan and
bid-bid, are generated spontaneously in fishponds. This is because the minute fry, entering with the flood tide, are overlooked.
“The bangos fishpond industry is really a
major industry, and is a source of large revenue
to the government of several provinces, even to
some that have not a fishpond within the boundaries. Bulacan Province, with 3,193 hectares
of land devoted to the fishpond industry, receives 118,000 pesos annually from taxes on its
fishponds; while Batangas Province, with no
fishpond within its boundaries, collects about
100,000 pesos from municipal licenses for
catching bangos fry. These fry are sold to growers about Manila.
It is impossible to state the exact amount of
land devoted to fishponds about Manila Bay,
but the approximate areas in the various prov

inces are as follows: Rizal Province, 3,193 hectares; Bulacan, 16,700; Pampanga, 14,200;
Bataan, 4,000; Cavite, 659.
The market value of bangos ponds about
Manila Bay varies from 500 to 2,500 pesos per
hectare. The value of a pond depends upon
the distance to market; the distance to the open
bay; the volume of water and its depth in the
adjacent river or creek; the age of the pond;
the quality of the soil in relation to the growth
of lumut; the cleanliness of the pond, that is, its
freedom from mud, grass, brush, etc.; and the
liability to flooding by fresh water.
In general, bangos ponds are more valuable
in Malabon, Navotas, Obando, Bulacan, and
Hagonoy and decrease in value as the distance
from Manila increases. A conservative estimate
of the value of the bangos fishponds in the
provinces listed above is over 45,000,000 pesos.
In Iloilo and Capiz Provinces there has been a
rapid increase in the number of fishponds during
the past few years and there are now about 900
hectares in operation, with an approximate value
of 600,000 pesos. If the value of fishponds in
Zambales, Pangasinan, La Union, Cebu, Oriental
Negros, and other provinces is added, it is found
that more than 46,000,000 pesos are invested
in 'fishponds in the Philippine Islands.


The returns from bangos ponds vary greatly
and depend upon the management, the distance
to market, the cost of transportation, and the
weather conditions.
The best fishponds, carefully managed, yield
an annual income of 300 pesos per hectare.
There are only a few owners, however, who get
such good results. Some ponds bring in about
250 pesos per hectare; only ponds kept in very
good condition do this well. Third-class ponds
make a profit of 200 pesos a hectare each year.
Ponds kept in good condition should do better
than this, unless they are far from a good market
and have poor transportation.
Salt-water fishponds in which bangos are
reared are called "plaisdaan" in Tagalog, "pococ"
"potot," and "lapat"
in Pangasinan, “pococ,”
in Ilocano, and "ponong” in Visayan. They
vary in size from one-eighth of a hectare to 68
hectares as on the estate of Carlos Palanca, near
Hagonoy, Bulacan. A system rof fishponds
under one management may contain hundreds
of hectares, as the Ayala and the Carlos Palanca
estates in Bulacan and Pampanga.
Large areas of swampland or tidal flats suitable for fishponds occur along the sea coast in
many localities in the Philippines. In general,
four factors are of prime importance in choosing
a site; namely, the soil, the vegetation, the
proximity of a deep tidal stream, and the market.
The vegetation.—The ideal land for a fishpond
site is peat or tule land, as there is practically
no clearing to do. As soon as the dikes and the
sluice gates are built everything is ready for
use. The commonest type of salt-water swamp
in the Philippines and next best for fishpond
purposes is nipa-swamp land. The nipa palm
is easily cut off. It is not necessary to remove
all the plants and stumps before using the land
for a fishpond; in fact, it is often advisable to
leave a few trees for shade. When the leaves
are kept cut off and the terminal bud is destroyed the nipa plant soon dies. The stump rots
quickly and is then easily removed.
The main part of the pond may be very shallow, the water over most of it with a depth of
perhaps half a meter. Around the margins
where the earth was removed to form the dikes


it is, of course, deeper. In large ponds two
more ditches are dug, each one connecting the
centers of opposite sides of the rectangle and
intersecting each other at right angles. All
these ditches should be made with the bottom
sloped so that all the water will drain readily
to the outlet of the pond. Ponds of great extent
may include part of a creek or even several
small creeks, in which the water may be two
to several times deeper than elsewhere. Such
channels are beneficial in providing cool areas


JACOB LEVY
PHILIPPINE HATS
Buntals
Bamboos
Calasiaos
Balibuntals


Correspondence Solicited
227 Calle David
Manila, P. I.
Cable Address: “TEXTILES”


for the fish to lie in when not feeding and are
convenient when it is necessary to do repair
work or clean a pond, as the fish can retire to
them when the rest of the pond is partially or
wholly bare.
A bangos pond is of necessity divided into
several compartments or made up of several
connecting ponds which are operated as a unit.
A fishpond should be divided into not less than
four smaller ponds, or compartments, and as
many more may be made in large ponds as are
found necessary. These ponds naturally vary
in size and depth, since they must accommodate
fish of different sizes and are used for different
purposes. One of the ponds in the systems should
bevery much larger than any of the others. Where
the total area is small and there are but four or
five divisions in all, the largest division should
be as large as all the rest taken together. In a
fishpond system of any size it is necessary to
have a small catching pond, into which the fish
are led when they are to be caught for market.
In addition to the main sluice gate or gates,
it is necessary in a good fishpond system to have
small sluice gates of simple construction placed
here and there to allow water and fish to pass
from one pond to another.
After the dikes, cross dikes, sluice gates, and
other gates have been constructed and the pond
system is completed, there are expenses not yet
mentioned. There must be a caretaker close at
hand at all times.
The caretaker must have a house of some sort.
It is usually placed near the main sluice gate.
The house may be a bamboo and nipa shed
costing a few pesos or a well-built, modern
cottage costing several hundred pesos. In
many places an artesian well is necessary to
provide drinking water. The cost of drilling
a well is from 150 to 200 pesos. The usual wage
received by the caretaker is 40 pesos a month,
and often a liter of kerosene a week in addition.
Some owners pay as little as 150 pesos a year;
needless to say they do not get first-class service.
Large systems of fishponds, ranging from 200
to 800 hectares in extent, pay good salaries to
the resident manager, up to 350 pesos a month
including a good house, light, and a motor boat
for inspection trips. A fair average salary for
the foreman in charge of a fishpond system of
moderate size, 15 to 60 hectares, is 45 pesos a
month.
Laborers must be employed to inspect and
repair the dikes: to destroy snakes, crabs, and


(Continudd on rage 12)
THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - WALTER E. ANTRIM


OF INDIA, AUSTRALIA
CHARTERED BANK
AND CHINA


Capital and Reserve Fund..................... E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor.................. 3,000,000


MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


10


  UURNAL


THE WRIGHT HABEAS CORPUS CASE
Thefpress has confused in the minds of many readers the situation
current in the Wright-Tan C. Tee case. The essential facts are brief.
Early this year the insular auditor, Ben F. Wright, would not issue, when
requested to do so, his certificate that funds are available for work on the
Iloilo marginal wharf; he held, as he still holds, that negotiations with the
contractor, Tan C. Tee, had been carried farther than they really ought
to be before the auditor’s certificate required by law was requested.
(Administrative Code, 607-608). Colonel Stimson, as governor general,
failed of reconciling the divergent views of the auditing and the public
works bureaus; he disagreed with the auditor’s view on the fundamental
question involved. On administrative appeal the secretary of war, now Governor General Dwight F. Davis, conditionally sustained Stimson’s opinion.
Tan C. Tee then sought to mandamus the auditor, and proceedings
took place in the supreme court. The full court, in Malcolm’s opinion
from which there was no dissent, held with the public-works director and
directed the auditor to issue his certificate. Johnson, J., did not sit; his
son-in-law, A. D. Gibbs, is the senior partner in the firm of Gibbs and
McDonough, Tan C. Tee’s attorneys. The court then adjourned for
vacation, Justices Malcolm and Ostrand going on leave of absence to the
United States. The other seven members of the court remained in the
islands. Most of them were in Baguio, where the vacation justice, Johns,
J., was sitting when subsequent events occurred. This fact, that a quorum
of the full court has been accessible during the summer is important. For
while the law permits the court its summer recess, it does not inhibit the
court from sitting if it so desires. In fact a special division of the court was
maintained this year at Baguio during the months of April and May.
After a case is decided, the practice of the court permits the unsuccessful litigant to file a motion for reconsideration. Such a motion was filed
by Wright in this case. This motion was overruled by Johns, J., as vacation justice, and from this order Wright appealed to the court as a body.
An appeal of this character has heretofore been supposed to tie the hands
of the vacation justice and to carry the matter to the court as a body.
But in this case Johns ordered Wright to comply with the decision. This
Wright refused to do, whereupon he was first fined P500 and then placed
under arrest. After this occurred in Baguio, a writ of habeas corpus was
issued by Street, J., upon application of Wright, in Manila, and the writ
was made returnable July 1, the first day of the next term of the court. The
contention of Wright, and the theory upon which the writ of habeas corpus
was issued, is that Wright’s appeal from the order of the vacation justice
overruling his motion removed the case from the jurisdiction of the vacation justice, so far as immediate enforcement of the decision is concerned.
None of the merits of the mandamus case was involved in the habeas
corpus proceedings. It has been erroneously inferred that Justice Street’s
action divides the court upon fundamentals of the case at bar. As to a
quorum, another matter brought in question by the press comment, there
will be a quorum of the full court prepared to act on the case July 1, when
the writ of habeas corpus is returnable. The quorum will comprise Chief
Justice Avancena, and Street, Villamor, Johns, Romualdez, and Villareal,
JJ., six in all, with Johnson, for the reason given above, not sitting.
Acts of the vacation justice are subject to ratification by the court
when it convenes in banc for its annual sessions. This procedure is perfunctory.
The quorum sitting July 1 may determine, as no doubt it will, whatever questions remain in legal dispute. It is not the practice to grant frivolous appeals, i. e., those based upon insufficient grounds, or which thresh
over old straw. The court may confirm the Malcolm decision of March,
deny the petition for rehearing, refuse to entertain an appeal to the supreme
court of the United States. Again, it may not: Wright still has another
day in court. But even if the court adhere irrevocably to its March decision and issue its final decree, that will not per se bar Wright from reach
ing the court in Washington (even if, to avoid contempt of the court here
he issues the certificate required of him); for the court in Washington may
take jurisdiction by certiorari in whatever Philippine cases it desires to
have come up to it—of those involving sufficient value, as this one
does.
If this latter possibility were the outcome, all that had transpired
here would be void as of date of the Washington court’s action. Water
under the bridge could not be recovered.
No, the case does not go over to October, when Justices Malcolm and
Ostrand are expected back in Manila. The delay is only to July 1, almost
upon us. But there has been delay enough, in all conscience; and all
this regrettable litigation, costly to both sides and to the public, even
involving personal expense to the auditor demand upon him for a personal
bond of P150,000, besides a fine of P500 actually paid.


THE PAPERS LOOK AT DAVIS
The Bulletin picks up Governor General Davis’s statement that he
will arrive in Manila with an open mind, and says that he will be received
with an open mind, “the attitude here is one of watchful waiting, . .. he
will make for himself the rating which is to be given him.” Regretting
his lack of experience here, the same paper describes the “efforts . . . to
write a Davis inaugural message out of the Stimson farewell address to the
legislature” as "a political maneuver as dangerous as it is clever.” It
says there can be no quarrel with the major policy, economic development; the disposition of everyone to assist Colonel Davis is sincere. In its
editorial of May 17, the Bulletin draws the deadly parallel and, finding
“his standing such that he could not be ignored,” accepts his appointment
as a political one.
The Herald, May 21, says "what is the use of squawking now? . . The
fact that our favorite lost in the race is no reason for shedding our tears
over it ... It seems premature for his detractors to say just now what
manner of a Governor General Mr. Davis would turn out to be.” This
paper makes nothing of previous experience in the islands, "some of our
best governors general had never had any previous schooling in Philippine
affairs before their acceptance of the Philippine post . . . (Stimson) seldom
sought the advice of local wiseacres. And if he did, it was only to make
doubly sure that his own opinion was correct."
The Herald will be inclined to find in Governor Davis "a kindly attitude” such as Taft, Forbes, Harrison and Stimson had (it says) "and a
sense of the fitness of things."
The Tribune, catering like the Herald to a young public, and sponsoring nationalism, thinks "Davis should be committed to the Stimson policies
on the powers of the Filipinos in the government under the Jones Act (the
islands’ organic law, of 1916, prescribed by congress). These policies
were put into effect with Mr. Davis as secretary of war, and, thus, as the
cabinet member sponsoring them, he cannot now with good grace frown
upon these policies without inviting the charge of inconsistency.” But
the Tribune, like the Bulletin, finds the choice a political one: "it now
develops that the Hoover regime ... has chosen ... a new executive here
to play orthodox politics.” It hopes for clarification of policy, and refers
particularly to the stymied situation respecting the government business
corporations.
The Times spit on its hands May 16 and came very much to the
point on this question of converting Malacanang into a political post:
“The President has made a serious mistake. He has gone counter to
the established traditions of his party and he has laid the ground for future
treatment of the Philippine post as a happy hunting ground for political
job seekers . .. He has done his party, his country and the Philippines
an ill turn.” Pausing to remark the excellent personal qualities of Colonel
Davis, and to register (seemingly in the Hollywood sense) optimism concerning his administration, it goes on to a vehement close: “That is not
the point at issue. The appointment of Mr. Davis, however laudable
it may be, means that the United States has definitely abandoned the
policy of previous years. It is discouraging news for those of us who, for
many years, have preached the necessity of building up here the traditions
of experienced and continuous American colonial policy. It serves notice
on future appointees to the post of vice governor that they are to be considered purely as heads of the department of public instruction', not as
potential timber for Malacanang. It must necessarily lower the quality
of men who will accept the appointment.” Not yet talked out, this was
all followed up with Dissecting Sophistry May 20, paying its respects to
the peculiar idea that “the post of Governor General of the Philippines
should be filled by a man nationally known in the United States," and opining that Malacanang "is the job of a hard-working executive" and that
“the probability of a short sojourn is one of the principal arguments against
the appointment of Mr. Davis, just as it was against that of Mr. Stimson.
The new Governor General barely has time to learn a few details of this
complicated problem before he is called to another field."
But it applauds Colonel Davis’s emphasis upon economic development, in another editorial, May 21.
La Vanguardia falls into line with the common viewpoint of the Filibino press, deferential to the state council, remarks that Colonel Davis is
that sought-for man, nationally known, and a man likely to be inspired
with the policy of cooperation and sympathy of his predecessor, Colonel
Stimson—a man too who will be successful in this role of the understudy.
La Defensa (Catholic) feels that Colonel Davis “comes thoroughly
prepared" and "it seems that he will follow along the cooperation policy
established here by former Governor Stimson, and because of this he already has the cooperation of the Filipino leaders.... We must note,
however, that the new Governor General does not seem inclined to favor
our desires for Independence, and although this circumstance will not
make him necessarily a bad governor, on the other hand it is possible that
under his administration our activities in favor of independence may suffer
a little. ... We may lose in this important aspect of our national life.
El Debate (abor) swells the chorus of the Filipino press that Colonel
Davis is the man for all. Its editor is a member of the legislature and is
closely identified with the majority leadership.


june, 1929


  


11


The Newspapers
Here is the index on Vice-Governor Gilmore
in former Governor Forbes’s two-volume work,
The Philippine Islands:
Gilmore, Eugene A.. Secretary of Public Instruction,
1, 425, n.; Vice-Governor, 2, 333.
Here also is the text devoted to Gilmore in
volume 2, page 333, faithful to the reference in
the index:
Vice-Governor Eugene A. Gilmore served
(after Wood’s departure) as Acting GovernorGeneral until the arrival in the Islands on March
1, 1928, of the Honorable Henry Lewis Stimson,
of New York, who had been appointed Governor-General December 17 1927.
The parenthesis is supplied. Two or three
lines of text, then, sufficed Mr. Forbes in respect
to Mr. Gilmore’s public service in the islands;
but Forbes’s index on himself extends over more
than two columns. Such is the makingof
history. To verify the data, the editor borrowed his personal copy of Forbes back from
the neighbors, for whose accommodation it is now
once more waiting. They may thumb it as
much as they will.
Below are appended certain editorial comments upon Vice-Governor Gilmore, dating with
the appointment to the governorship of Colonel
Dwight F. Davis:
From the Tribune of Mav 28:
“There is every reason for believing that ViceGovernor Gilmore will be guided by a high sense
of duty, and accept the offer of President Hoover
that he continue holding here the post of vicegovernor-general. When a few months ago he
acquiesced to the plea of former Governor
Stimson to continue further in that post, he
acted guided by that duty. The conditions
which then dictated that action are the same
conditions that should lead at present to the
same decision.
“Vice-Governor Gilmore has served this
country these many years in a manner granted
by all to be exceptional. On three different
occasions he has served as acting governorgeneral, also in a manner unanimously adjudged
superlative. The demand that he stay here,
that he continue holding the post of vice-governor and secretary of the department of public
instruction, is subscribed to by the Filipinos and
all the alien communities in the country.
“It is not so much that that is a great tribute
to him as it is a sign of the necessity of his remaining here that, to our mind, will make him
decide to be still identified with the Philippine
government and the affairs of the Filipino
people.”
From the Bulletin of May 21:
“The same sentiment which was favorable
to the appointment of Eugene A. Gilmore as
governor general favors his continuing in office
as vice governor now that another man has been
named governor general. That is the prevailing
sentiment in the Philippines.
“The reasons supporting the sentiment favoring Mr. Gilmore’s continuing here are the
same as those favoring his appointment to the
governorship. He has knowledge and training
that are valuable to the office. Now that a
man without Philippine training has been selected for the governorship the assistance of a
trained assistant becomes all the more important.
‘The whole weight of sound argument is on
the side of making the vice governor more than
a mere cabinet member and a standby waiting
to sit in when the governor’s chair is vacant.
With a program of permanency in administration, continuity of policy and personnel, the
vice governor should have a prominent place
in the administration. Mr. Gilmore has a
schooling which should not be permitted to go to
waste.
“The office of vice governor is not one to be
sought after, not worth clinging to for what it is.
Mr. Gilmore could not be expected to hang to
it as if it were a prize. It is in no sense a prize.
But there is an opportunity for him to render a
service, a service which he alone is prepared to
render.
“That is the consideration behind the request
that he stay. He is needed.”


Look At Gilmore


Vice Governor EuE
gene A. Gilmore, it
seems at this writing,
A
will remain on in Manila as the vice gover
nor of the islands and
their secretary of public instruction under
Governor General
Dwight F. Davis. His
total service as the
islands (acting) chief
executive during the
dl past seven years comprises about fifteen
months; he, though Stimson is credited with it,
established cooperation between the executive
and the legislature. He secured aecord with the
legislative branch of the government without
sacrificing executive authority or limiting it
with a state council. He is making his second
insular budget; he extended Rizal avenue to give
another main road out of Manila; he got bonds
voted in sufficient sums for the adequate improvement of Iloilo and Cebu harbors and the
sanitation of Manila, where he encouraged zonification. He took all those effective steps (the
legislature agreeing) which are improving interisland transportation. Many predict he will be
of great assistance to Governor Davis, a reasonable assumption. He is no lame duck, a full
professorship of law awaits him in the University of Wisconsin, if he decides to return to university life. He has also received other offers.


From the Times of May 29:
“It is a matter of congratulation for the
country that despite alluring offers from high
institutions of learning in the United States
our present acting governor general, Eugene A.
Gilmore, apparently will stay with us and carry
on his work so auspiciously begun by him,
along health and educational lines.
Mr. Gilmore will continue as vice-governor
and in him the new governor general, Dwight F.
Davis, will find an able and experienced collaborator. What Governor General Davis lacks in
knowledge of the Philippines, Vice-Governor
Gilmore more than amply will make up for.
Thus again we find Mr. Gilmore’s personality
thrown in bold relief. Here is a man who, putting aside self-pride and all considerations of
personal gain, finds himself at all times ready
to serve his country and the people whom it has
been his lot to serve in this part of the world.
“Mr. Gilmore is showing good examples of
leadership and citizenship to the people of these
islands. Indeed a good citizen should be ready
to heed the call of service and serve his people
and other peoples as well, in whatever position
may be entrusted to him.
Governor Davis is reaching Manila July 8,
and the legislature will open July 15. Prior to
Davis’s arrival in the islands the budget for the
next fiscal year must practically be repared,
the task falling to Gilmore. That ought to
merit two or three words more of index in a
second edition of an alleged definitive compendium of Philippine history. Many editorial
comments in the Filipino press corroborate the
American comment appreciative of Gilmore’s
work as vice governor and acting governor
general.


The Call of Salt Water
By ED. GALLAHER
Affectionately inscribed to those old salts who imagine that a chicken ranch, somewhere, is the place to
round out the Biblical age.
The sea is my love and I cannot live without her!
Moods she has many, God knows, in calm and storm.
I have tired of her ways, her tumultuous caprices—
Her willful, wild ways have plagued my soul.
And the work she has given me!
It has seamed my face
And bent my back
And put pains and aches in my bones
Till I couldn’t sleep, many’s the time.
And the chow she’s given me wasn’t fit for a dog,
Rotten and stinkin"
And never enough at the best.
Once I left her and cursed her,
And swore never to see her again.
I went miles away from salt water
And fooled with chickens and pigs,
And tried to raise garden truck and the like—
For a man must live, somehow.
But at night in my dreams the sea laughed
And jeered at me and said she was waitin’,
Waitin’ to welcome me back.
No hurry!
Sometime, when the land got too solid beneath my feet
And I longed for a deck with a heave to it,
Id be back...
Oh, yes, I’d be back!
Every night she came and she laughed.
Sure enough, the land got too solid under my feet
And every bone in my body ached for a deck with a heave to it,
And the song of the winds in the riggin’,
And the sight of a smokin’, salt wake;
And the grunt of a pig
And the crow of a cock
Made me sick!
So I packed up my bag
And struck out for the docks where the ships come and go.
I was back,
Back to the place I belonged,
And the sea laughed no more:
She knows she’s my love, that I cannot live without her!


12


  


June, 1929


-Milkfish—Industry
Manila’s Bangos(From Page 9)


other vermin; to kill or scare away fish-eating
birds; and to assist in transfering young fish
and catching those marketable, changing water
in the ponds, repairing nets, and the rest of the
daily routine. Wagesare from 1to 1.50 pesosa day,
depending upon the locality; near Manila they
are higher, and in outlying provinces they may
be much lower.
Several small bancas and one or more large
ones will be needed for transportation along the
river and in the canals and ponds. The number
will vary with the size of the establishment and
the number of workmen. Large drag nets, or
seines, will be needed for catching marketable
fish. Small fine-meshed nets (panagap) are
needed to catch hatirin; these nets are from 6 to
S meters long and 3 or 4 meters wide. Large
long-handled dip nets are used for many purposes, and several of the square dip nets (bitinan)
will be needed when hatirin are caught. Small
fine-meshed baklad are necessary for catching
shrimps, or ulang and sugpo, and various kinds
of crabs such as alimango and alimasag. All
told these will cost from 100 to 200 pesos.
A large fish-pond system will need a motor
boat to carry the fish to market, bring supplies,
and make inspections. With a motor boat the
owner can market his fish without delay and
in first-class condition.
The number of fish per hectare in ponds stocked for market depends upon the condition of
the pond. The usual practice is to overstock.
Carefull growers when making the final allotment usually put in 1,000 hatirin for each hectare of pond in good condition. A pond in
excellent condition where everything is favorable, as the Ayala ponds at Macabebe Pampanga, can carry from 1,500 to 2,000 hatirin
or garongin per hectare till ready for market.
Harvest time in bangos ponds varies widely
according to the management and also the
locality. There are two plans in general use;


namely, harvesting once a year and harvesting
twice a year. To say that the bangos are marketed but once a year is a misstatement, since
under this system they are really harvested
from the end of May to the close of the rainy
season in September. When the fish are taken
from a pond it is drained and a new growth of
lumut started unless the pond already has a
luxuriant growth of alga. It is then promptly
restocked with the requisite number of hatirin
or garongin, so that very little time is lost from
the use of the pond. The bangos harvested
under this method weigh from 400 to 600 grams,
with an average of 500 grams, and sell at from
25 to 42 centavos each, according to the state
of the market.
Your
By Max J.
This would be a rosy world were it not for the
worries some of us bequeath to the rest of us.
Among worries that need not be passed on, and
which cause more distress, more annoyance,
more actual dollars and cents loss than any
others, are those arising from the failure to make
a will.
No man likes to think that after striving to
build up an estate, it will be found after he has
gone that he has been careless of his family's
welfare. Yet, if he dies without making a will,
he casts his property and the future of his dependents into the hands of the law, shackled by
the inflexible, arbitrary statutes of the state in
which he lives.
In most instances, men who fail to make wills
also fail to inform themselves how the law will
operate in the distribution of their own estates.
The court must charge someone with the
burdensome and difficult task of administering
*Data derived from exchanges of the International
Banking Corporation, Mr. Cavanaugh being in the
Mania omce


Occasionally a few bangos escape when the
rest are harvested and remain uncaught for
another year. By the end of the second year
they will weigh between 1 and 2 kilograms.
Such bangos are called "laon."
When the owner follows the method of harvesting bangos twice a year hatirin are placed
in the pond during May or June and marketed
from the end of September through the month
of October. Then the pond is drained, the
ground freshly prepared, and the pond restocked with garongin which are harvested
in April and May. The bangos reared under
this method should reach a weight of 300 to 500
grams and sell for 20 to 35 centavos each.


The term harvest appears in the text: the indusry is rated farming and is not taxed under the
revenue law.—Ed.
Will
CAVANAUGH"
an estate. If no will is left the family’s welfare
must depend largely upon the ability, experience
and prudence of some near relative, appointed
under statutory designation, who may or may
not be qualified, or upon the public administrator.
These conditions and the results likely to
follow are consistent neither with ordinary business judgment, nor with the love and consideration a man has for his family. No man deliberately intends them. They are, however,
the certain consequences of neglect and procrastination. The right to make a will is a
privilege the law gives to him who prefers to
impress his own judgment and desires upon the
disposition of the property his life efforts have
accumulated or which has descended to him
by inheritance. It assures him that his own
wishes, and not the arbitrary and inflexible
provisions of the law applicable to persons who
die without a will, will govern the distribution
of his property.


and a real
thirst -quencher—
There is
satisfaction
n ev er y
gIass of
de licious


iIsen


Brewed by
SAN MIGUEL BREWERY


When
R
louring
in these islands it is wise to
guard yourself against cholera, dysentery and those
deadly diseases that are
contracted through drinking
AH
impure water.
THE 1000,0 PURE
natural water—


is available everywhere!
It is guaranteed free from every trace of microbic life or
earthy deposits.
Its radio-activity has earned for TANSAN the name of
a preventive against stomach and kidney disorders!
Sole Distributors:
F. E. ZUELLIG, INC.
CEBU
MANILA
ILOILO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


June, 1929


  


13


Among the advantages he can secure through
making a will are the division of his estate with
an intelligent regard to the special needs of his
family, the nomination of guardians for his
minor children, the selection of the executor or
executors to whose ability and discretion all
of his accumulated property is to be entrusted,
and the granting of powers for managing real
estate and other property which will permit his
estate to be conserved and handled in a businesslike manner.
He can also, through a will, safeguard the
welfare of his family by postponing the date of
final distribution of his property. This is accomplished by providing for the creation of a
trust in the will, which is the legal manner of
continuing after death the care and supervision
which he himself now employs. It relieves his
widow and children from the burden and risk of
management and assures that his estate will be
used in accordance with the purposes for which
he built it up. Through a trust he assures the
comfort, security and advancement of the
persons dependent upon him.
Every prudent man will realize that some
such plan is essential to the full protection of
his family and his property.
Who Should Be Your Executor and Trustee?—
The executor’s duties are to probate the will
take possession of the property, ascertain the
claims against the estate, pay those that are
valid and reject any others, file income and
other tax returns for the deceased and for the
estate itself, secure appraisals of the property
for inheritance taxes, use discrimination where
the sale of assets is necessary, pay legacies,
distribute the residue, keep legal records and
make a final accounting to the court.
If the will creates a trust, it becomes the duty
of the trustee to set up the trust fund, keep it
safely and profitably invested and apply the
income and principal as directed. The trustee
also makes tax returns, keeps legal records, and
renders periodic accounts.
These important duties demand special training and ability and large expenditure of time
and effort. The modern executor and trustee
is continually called upon for action which
requires a practical knowledge of business,
banking, investment, taxation and accountancy.
He must be reliable, always available and financially responsible.
One further attribute is essential, which no
relative or friend can possess;—namely, the
certainty of surviving with the full capacity to
function until the estate is settled and the trust
administered.
A bank’s life is continuous. It is not subject
to sickness, loss of mental vigor, or death. It
includes within itself trained individuals, each
specially equipped with technical ability. The
administration of estates is a part of its regular
business and it is always available. Every
step in the process of settlement is directed by
men whose knowledge and experience embrace


that special part of the work. It has an impartial view-point and will not be swayed from
businesslike procedure by self-interest or family
disputes. Its accounts and acts are at all times
under the supervision of its own auditors and
those of the Government. Its responsibility
is fixed. Its appointment saves the estate the
heavy and unnecessary cost of surety bonds.
It is now almost universally conceded that the
soundest and most economical method of administering an estate is through a bank, either
acting as sole executor, or as co-executor in
conjunction with some relative or friend.
A Will Should Be Frequently Reconsidered.—
A will is far from being a static instrument and
there are many events likely to occur which
make a reexamination of it wise and necessary.
A birth, a marriage or a death may frequently
cause radical changes in the effect of a will, and
in some cases absolutely revoke it. Alteration
in the size and character of your estate, the
death or incapacity of the executor you have
named, or a change in your conception of what
is now expedient and prudent make it your
duty to study your plan from time to time in the
light of today’s knowledge and experience.
Such consideration may persuade you that an
entirely new will should be drawn. Perhaps it
may be sufficient in its general terms, but you
may wish to change the clause appointing your
executor because of the belief that the experience
and equipment of a financial institution are
now essential to the efficient administration
of an estate.
You can make this change and obtain this
character of assistance for vour estate without
changing your will, merely by making a simple
codicil, in which you name your Bank as executor or co-executor.
The Preparation of a Will.—A will is one of
the most important legal documents you will
ever make. No one without special training
and knowledge of the law should undertake to
write a will. It should be prepared by your
attorney and executed under his supervision.
In selecting a Bank or Trust Company to
act as Trustee or Executor under your will, it is
desirable to choose one with a history of long
and successful management—which history
assures experience, conservatism and stability.
It should be one where high standards, built up
and maintained from generation to generation,
guide and control the conduct of its business.


A director in Bureaucrasie—
'Why, the thousand pesos,” said he,
Is a very small stake
For an hombre to make,
When his salary’s six thirty-three!”
—P.A.H.


For Your Electrical Work
Phone
2-32-40

OMA
MORA ELECTRIC CO., INC.
7 CALLE SODA
MANILA, P. I.


RI PONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN


Soortsmen s
Headquarters
10 the Golfer we purvey
Harlequin, Superharlequin, and Dot and
Dash golf balls famous
everywhere for durability
and resiliency, and the
peerlees
PBURKE
G O L F
CLUBS
Kings of the Course


Squires Bingham Co.
15 Plaza Goiti Manila, P. I.
Phone 2-13-01



Social Progress
Tito Armiendo
(Pronounced with crescendo)
Was very expert with the cue;
When tardy to dinner—
As often, the sinner!—
Said wife “He is playing”. She knew.
A spouse quite obedient
And also expedient,
She kept his meals warm for his coming;
When he d lost she could tell,
He was gloomy as h—
But if he had won he’d be humming.
This makeshift existence
Kept up with persistence
Until, on an evening quite recent,
There was no wifey home—
(No use of a tome),
The man thought desertion indecent.
So, grasping his bolo
And striking out solo
(He learned wife had gone to his brother’s),
He slew in his pother
His wife, dad and mother—
In the house at the time were no others.
But alas for such measures,
Which heritage treasures
When wives flout man’s masculine honor—
Cops put him in prison,
The chair may be his’n—
The betting is odds he’s a gonner!
There’s a new notion growing,
Of America’s sowing,
That women are more than men’s chattels;
But ere it’s entrenched
More homes will be drenched
With the gore of such one-sided battles.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


14


  


junic, isa3


Passthe Century Mark? Easy in the Philippine!


Undeserved ill fame is so characteristic of the
Philippines that it even involves the climate.
Actually one of the pleasantest and most salubrious in the world, this climate is reputed one
of the most malignant. The climate is blamed
for mere human carelessness: the simple fact
doesn’t seem to register, that, as man thrives
in the islands, so will his parasites, against which
due precaution must be taken. So it happens
that among a people numbering about 12 million
there are some 230,000 deaths a vear; most of
them, however, among infants helpless against
the deficient and infected diet they are fed.
Even children in the Philippines, given approximately good care, thrive like guinea pigs.
It is the experience of Americans, and of Filipino
families where the mother has been tutored
moderately in the care of children, that the
climate is benignant for children, yet precisely
the opposite of this is the general impression
outside the islands. It seems inevitable that
people believe the worst about the islands, when
it would be far more sensible, especially for
Americans, and even more profitable, to believe
the truth.
The heat prevailing on the coast where Manila
is situated is, during the period from March
to October, often uncomfortable during the day,
and very rarely at night, since of nights there
is a pleasant moderating breeze and sleep is
sound and refreshing. In this period, too, from
May to October, first daily showers, then the
monsoon rains relieve the daylight heat. Many
old residents prefer the rainy season to the dry,
which prevails from November to May.
There is but rarely an instance of sunstroke
in the islands, and sun helmets are not commonly worn. This contrasts favorably for the
islands with the neighboring countries of Asia,
where fatal sunstroke is common. The Philip

pine peasant wears a broad sunshade in the field,
advisedly, both women and men; but for others
such precautions are quite unnecessary. The
sun’s effect is to stimulate the action of the skin
in getting rid of inimical matter, and to banish,
with its ultraviolet rays, a number of diseases,
principally those provoked by deficient nourishment of the bones.
The Philippines have, in fact, but a few maladies to overcome, when they will be reckoned
what they really are now for persons hygienically
inclined one of the most healthful of countries.
The maladies lingering on because of popular
ignorance and prejudice are, notably, beriberi


and malaria. The first mentioned will be the
first to go, but the other will yield in time; and
meantime it is helpful against the blood diseases


which work such havoc in temperate countries
and comparatively so little in the Philippines.
The fever accompanying malaria kills the spiro

chete, yet does not always kill the patient.
The natural salubrity of the Philippine climate
is readily demonstrable from the mortality
records. These show, in the first place, a preponderance of deaths during the age of infancy
and early childhood from easily preventable
diseases—deaths among the peasants, deaths
due to parental ignorance and the want of medical and hospital care. In the second place,
they show the remarkable age to which adult
life is often prolonged.
The latest health service report off the printing bureau press is for 1926. In that year 2,571


persons died in the Philippines who were 100
or more years old. Others lived on. Surely
there are few countries in which the century
mark is so frequently reached by the aged, but
this is but a part of the story; for in the same
year 5,561 persons died above the age of 70


Mag ag g MAIA g M A AEN E
and 5,031 above 80 and under 85 and 2,532
above 84 and under 89, and 2,461 above 90 and
under 94 and 1,482 above 94 and under 99.
The total approximates 23,250, about 10% of
all deaths for the year, and represents those
who more than lived out their allotted span of
three score years and ten. The record seems
at least comparable with those for other countries. Centenarians are so common in the Philippines that nothing is thought of it; it isn’t news
for a man to pass his 100th birthday, shriveled
and bent but still quite alive.
August is the most unhealthful month of the
year in the Philippines, and November the
most healthful. The hottest months, March,
April and May, are little more devastating than
November one of the coolest, which ushers in
four months of a season of invigorating sunlight
and stimulating cloudless nights that still awaits
due appreciation by the poet, the philosopher
and the traveler.


A dapper young man from BalerFor politics had a great flair
Till a chap from New York
Got him going on pork
And left him quite up in the air.


The JOURNAL announces with sorrow the
death in May of W. P G. Elliott. A member
of the firm of Hair and Elliott, brokers and stock
exchange members, Mr. Elliott had been contributing to this review a timely monthly review
of the stock and bond market. He had had a
long career in the orient. He was the President
of the Manila Stock Exchange. Condolences
to surviving relatives are sincerely expressed.
When other arrangements shall have been
made, the reviews of the market will be regularly published again.


On Every Billboard
“How was the scenery on your trip?”
“It ran largely to tooth paste and smoking
tobacco.”—Louisville Courier Journal.


The Insular Life Assurance Co., Ltd.
MANILA, P. I.


ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
-oans onrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
FOR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


HOME OFFICE
4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


Call or write for particulars to:


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 115
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
Kneedler Building
Manila, P. I.
Telephone 2-36-74


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENT PLEASE MENTION   UORNAL


E OT COIMIVERCL JOURIAL


15


Origins of the Roman Catholic Church
GIBBON—(Continued from May)


III. The supernatural gifts, which even in
this life were ascribed to the Christians above
the rest of mankind, must have conduced to
their own comfort, and very frequently to the
conviction of infidels. Besides the occasional
prodigies, which might sometimes be effected by
the immediate interposition of the Deity when
he suspended the laws of Nature for the service
of religion, the Christian church, from the time
of the apostles and their first disciples, has claimed an uninterrupted succession of miraculous
powers, the gift of tongues, of vision, and of
prophecy, the power of expelling daemons, of
healing the sick, and of raising the dead. The
knowledge of foreign languages was frequently
communicated to the contemporaries of Irenaus, though Irenaeus himself was left to struggle with the difficulties of a barbarous dialect,
whilst he preached the gospel to the natives of
Gaul. The divine inspiration, whether it was
conveyed in the form ofa waking or of a sleeping
vision, is described as a favor very liberally
bestowed on all ranks of the faithful, on women
as on elders, on boys as well as upon bishops.
When their devout minds were sufficiently prepared by a course of prayer, of fasting, andof
vigils, to receive the extraordinary impulse, they
were transported out of their senses, and delivered in ecstasy what was inspired, being mere
organs of the Holy Spirit, just as a pipe or flute
is of him who blows into it. We may add that
the design of these visions was, for the most part,
either to disclose the future history, or to guide
the present administration, of the church. The
expulsion of the daemons from the bodies of those
unhappy persons whom they had been permitted
to torment, was considered as a signal though
ordinary triumph of religion, and is repeatedly
alleged by the ancient apologists as the most
convincing evidence of the truth of Christianity.
The awful ceremony was usually performed in a
public manner, and in the presence of a great
number of spectators; the patient was relieved
by the power or skill of the exorcist, and the
vanquished daemon was heard to confess that he
was one of the fabled gods of antiquity, who had
impiously usurped the adoration of mankind.
But the miraculous cure of diseases of the most
inveterate or even preternatural kind can no
longer occasion any surprise, when we recollect
that in the days of Irenaeus, about the end of
the second century, the resurrection of the dead
was very far from being esteemed an uncommon
event; that the miracle was frequently performed on necessary occasions, by great fasting and
the joint supplication of the church of the place,
and that the persons thus restored to their prayers had lived afterwards among them many
years. At such a period, when faith could boast
of so many wonderful victories over death, it
seems difficult to account for the scepticism of
those philosophers who still rejected and derided
the doctrine of the resurrection. A noble Grecian had rested on this important ground the
whole controversy, and promised Theophilus,
Bishop of Antioch, that, if he could be gratified
with the sight of a single person who had been
actually raised from the dead, he would immediately embrace the Christian religion. It is
somewhat remarkable that the prelate of the
first eastern church, however anxious for the conversion of his friend, thought proper to decline
this fair and reasonable challenge.
The miracles of the primitive church, after
obtaining the sanction of ages, have been lately
attacked in a very free and ingenious inquiry,
which, though it has met with the most favorable
reception from the public, appears to have
excited a general scandal among the divines of
our own as well as of the other Protestant
churches of Europe. Our different sentiments
on this subject will be much less influenced by
any particular arguments, than by our habits of
study and reflection; and; above all, by the
ence which we have accustomed
 equire for the proof of a miraculous
ba suty of an historian does not call
o nterpose his private judgment in
an" important controversy; but he
nolissemble the difficulty of adopting
“*.3
E


such a theory as may reconcile the interest of
religion with that of reason, of making a proper
application of that theory, and of defining with
precision the limits of that happy period, exempt
from error and from deceit, to which we might be
disposed to extend the gift of supernatural
powers. From the first of the fathers to the last
of the popes, a succession of bishops, of saints, of
martyrs, and of miracles, is continued without
interruption; and the progress of superstition
was so gradual, and almost imperceptible, that
we know not in what particular link we should
break the chain of tradition. Every age bears
testimony to the wonderful events by which it
was distinguished, and its testimony appears no
less weighty and respectable than that of the
preceding generation, till we are insensibly led
on to accuse our own inconsistency, if in the
eighth or in the twelfth century we deny to the
venerable Bede, or to the holy Bernard, the same
degree of confidence which, in the second century, we had so liberally granted to Justin or to
Irengeus. If the truth of any of those miracles
is appreciated by their apparent use and propriety, every age had unbelievers to convince,
heretics to confute, and idolatrous nations to
convert; and sufficient motives might always be
produced to justify the interposition of Heaven.
And yet, since every friend to revelation is persuaded of the reality, and every reasonable man
is convinced of the cessation, of miraculous
powers, it is evident that there must have been
some period in which they were either suddenly
or gradually withdrawn from the Christian
church. Whatever aera is chosen for that
purpose, the death of the apostles, the conversion of the Roman empire, or the extinction of
the Arian heresy, the insensibility of the Christians who lived at that time will equally afford
a just matter of surprise. They still supported
their pretensions after they had lost their power.
Credulity performed the office of faith; fanaticism was permitted to assume the language of
inspiration, and the effects of accident or contrivance were ascribed to supernatural causes.
The recent experience of genuine miracles should
have instructed the Christian world in the ways
of Providence, and habituated their eye (if we
may use a very inadequate expression) to the
style of the divine artist. Should the most


skillful painter of modern Italy presume to decorate his feeble imitations with the name of Raphael or of Correggio, the insolent fraud would be
soon discovered, and indignantly rejected.
Whatever opinion may be entertained of the
miracles of the primitive church since the time
of the apostles, this unresisting softness of temper, so conspicuous among the believers of the
second and third centuries, proved of some accidental benefit to the cause of truth and religion.
In modern times, a latent and even involuntary
scepticism adheres to the most pious dispositions.
Their admission of supernatural truths is much
less an active consent than a cold and passive
acquiescence. Accustomed long since to observe
and to respect the invariable order of Nature,
our reason, or at least our imagination, is not
sufficiently prepared to sustain the visible action
of the Deity. But, in the first ages of Christianity, the situation of mankind was extremely
different. The most curious, or the most credulous, among the Pagans, were often persuaded to
enter into a society which asserted an actual
claim of miraculous powers. The primitive
Christians perpetually trod on mystic ground,
and their minds were exercised by the habits of
believing the most extraordinary events. They
felt, or they fancied, that on every side they were
incessantly assaulted by deemons, comforted
by visions, instructed by prophecy, and surpriingly delivered from danger, sickness, and from
death itself, by the supplications of the church.
The real or imaginary prodigies, of which they
so frequently conceived themselves to be the
objects, the instruments, or the spectators, very
happily disposed them to adopt with the same
ease, but with far greater justice, the authentic
wonders of the evangelic history; and thus miracles that exceeded not the measure of their own
experience inspired them with the most lively
assurance of mysteries which were acknowledged
to surpass the limits of their understanding. It
is this deep impression of supernatural truths
which has been so much celebrated under the
name of faith; a state of mind described as the
surest pledge of the divine favor and of future
felicity, and recommended as the first, or perhaps
the only merit of a Christian. According to the
more rigid doctors, the moral virtues, which may
be equally practised by infidels, are destitute of
any value or efficacy in the work of our justification.
(Continued in July)


TAtaMe Gun alt raeirie Co.


OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


SPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


16


  OF CUMMEROL JUURAL





OR


89 ESCOLTA 91


A


Outfitting Children for School?
Drop in! We have everything they need in the way
of clothing and desk supplies
We can make it easy for you!


AN IMPORTANT
Visit our store and see our
sets and desk sets of the finest
For instance, the Porter
ladies’ and men’s—P6. We
of pen, in standard size, at
P7; men’s—P7.50. A FULL
AND PENCILS TOO!


Our Special Radio Sale


Formerly Now
Radiola Crystal Set, Portable Model ................................ ₱15.00 P5.00
Kodel V. T. Radio Sets:—
30.00
7.50
Kodel Model A Set, 1-Tube................. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75.00 12.50
Kodel Model C Set, 3-Tube ........... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.50
45.00
Kodel Model P Set, 1-Tube, Portable Type.............................
12.50
Kodel Model P Set, 2-Tube, Portable Type ........................ .. ..
65.00
Magic Six Tuned Radio Frequency Sets:—
Magic Six Set, Six-Tube Model ........................ 90.00 22.50
Music Master Radio Sets:—
125.00
19.50
Music Master Set Model 50, 4-Tube ................ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150.00
35.00
Music Master Set Model 60, 5-Tube .................... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50.00
Music Master Set Model 100, 5-Tube ....................... 250.00
Freshman Masterpiece T-R-F Radio Sets:—
125.00 40.00
Freshman Masterpiece Set Model 5-F-2, 5-Tube ........................
Freshman Masterpiece Set Model 5-F-4, 5-Tube......................... 145.00
50.00
Freshman Masterpiece Set Model 5-F-5, 5-Tube.................... 175.00 60.00
Freshman Masterpiece Set Concert Model, 5-Tube ...................... 225.00 75.00
Freshman Masterpiece Set Semi-Console, 5-Tube ....... 250.00 90.00
Freshman Masterpiece Set Metal Panel, 5-Tube ....................... 125.00 50.00
Freshman Masterpiece Set Metal Panel, 6-Tube......................... 150.00
75.00
Freshman Masterpiece Set Multi-wave, 5-Tube ...................... . ..
75.00
200.00
Atwater Kent Radio Sets:—
47.50
Atwater Kent Radio Set Model 19, 4-Tube .............. .. . . . . . . . . . . . .
200.00
Atwater Kent Radio Set Model 12, Open Type....................... 300.00 75.00
Standard Multi-Valve Set, Complete with tube..... 85.00 22.50
French Special DX-Four Set, 4-Tube .................... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75.00
10.00
Tower Loud Speakers:—
15.50
9.50
Tower Spitfire Loud Speaker........... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25.00 15.50
Tower Scientific Loud Speaker............... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45.00
Tower Meistersinger Loud Speaker............... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22.50


These prices apply to sets only. Accessories, such as tubes, batteries, etc., when
bought with the above-listed radio sets, will be discounted 205. All purchases
are strictly cash—one price to all.
All of the above radio goods are brand new. Prices reduced to make space for new lines.
No Returns
No Exchanges
At our radio department: 136-138 Escolta


Frong


"You know, I” *
at Beck’s in aessen
should see the: -the
and afternoon ks
in Manila. Ir. 1,7
positively thr E
such splendid er


TOU CAN ALWATO II W


HE  EENNNNN N NO N


ILIMCAN UHAIDER Or COMIVEROL JOURNAL


STORE OF COMPEIENCD


E
a
AGnp


ANNOUNCEMENT!
gorgeous array of pens, duette
quality at attractive prices!
Jumbo, in assorted colorsalso have this famous brand
P4. Gold filled, ladies’ pensLINE OF PARKER PENS


are P2.50 to P4


An intimate
conversation!


Al loveliest things
4 My dear! You
stunningest evening
yo  3
zey atan,  ria
o set "hami A
als!”

an


Our Full Line of Raincoats
Is Nobby and Crinkly New
Quality in Style and Fabric
Men s, Women’s, Children’s


We Have a New
Columbia Branch
136-138 Escolta
Where it is a pleasure
to select VIVATONAL
electrical process records!
“Like Life Itself!”


Latest
IN
records
arrive
weekly!


Of the COLUMBIA-KOLSTER PHONOGRAPH, we
are showing fourteen different models. Four portables—nifty portmanteaux of song and merry-making!


NT


U WANT AT BECK'S


ad


G EN SNE NO


18


  


june, 1929


American Universities Grow China-Minded


Bulletin No. 10, the current number, of the
American Council of Learned Societies, is entirely devoted to the plans now well along
toward fruition for including and encouraging in
American universities studies and research
on China and the Chinese. To this end Manila
can assist, and may become, as a consequence,
one center to which American students in the
new cult (that is, new in America) will gravitate.
The subject may engage the attention of our
own university, some coordination of effort may
be established—which would be an advantage to
the cause of learning here. A study of the
Chinese as a foreign trader, colonizer, and father
of the Sino-Malayan dominant element in the
Philippines, would naturally lead to research
in the general records of the government and,
more particularly, in the orientalia and Philippiniana in the reference division of the public
library. This collection is reputed unsurpassed.
Then, too, the Bever collection of porcelains,
though mainly of fragments, but sufficient for
study, is unexcelled even in the London museums, which it actually surpasses.
The Council, quite rightly, feels that American
interest in China has been too long delayed.
Preliminary meetings under the auspices of the
Council, an effective agency for the advancement of learning, seem to have brought the
movement to the stage where funds will be
sought for the founding of the work; and that
there will responses in behalf of such institutions as Harvard, Yale, Princeton and Columbia
in the east, and Stanford in the west, there can
be no doubt.
Remarks by Mortimer Graves, secretary of
the Council, throw a sufficient light on the
subject:


Then let us examine into it a little.
Nothing is either wholly good or wholly evil.
For digressive illustration, of this philosophic
truth, let it be recalled that much of this growing
city of Manila occupies areas once the site of
majestic primeval forests. It was a grievous
wound to nature to cut them down, yet it served
mankind. A century ago the sturdy walnut,
hewn down and burned, gave place to corn fields
along the great Ohio; and in the place where the
pioneer ruthlessly bruised the forests and dug the
fallow wilderness, farms, towns and cities are
feeding, employing and sheltering millions of
people today—an important and significant fact
for us in the Philippines, since these millions of
Ohio-valley folk have constant need of our products. If the valley were still an awesome but
magnificent wilderness, copra would not sell
even for three pesos per picul. The esthetic
and the material are often opposed one to the
other; both are essential to modern life; the
esthetic is healing to man’s inclination to despair,
but it is the material utilization of the earth’s
wealth by which man really lives.
Conditions often appear in a more precise
light when their alternatives are reflected upon.
If the activities of the concessionist in the
Philippines seem objectionable, what is the
alternative? We have that at present, and it
is not satisfactory; no nor even very tolerable.
It is not very tolerable to behold the fertile
regions of Mindanao (and even many fertile
areas of Luzon itself) given over to roaming
barbarians who set wild fire to denude the hills,
spreading from little patches where they make
meager plantings; who thus destroy the protective forest without putting in its stead farms,
towns and cities; rather, they abandon the sites
of their annual ravages, take despoiling toll of the
forest somewhere else; floodpours down the naked
hills they leave behind them, and carries havoc
to the civilized settlements. Thus the millions
of uncultivated acres in the Philippines cannot
be saved to posterity by keeping the scientific
husbandman off of them; if he would expend
his millions of dollars and convert these fallow
lands into empires of productive fields, his would


“That the next decade will see a striking increase in American interest in Chinese studies
is no very daring prediction. In the domain
of politics and economics, the large number of
works daily coming from the press on current
Far Eastern affairs and the activities of such
organizations as the Institute of Pacific Relations demonstrate the growing realization of
the truth of John Hay’s dictum that the world’s
peace rests with China.” He then says that
the Chinese have important contributions to
make to humanistic and social sciences.
“It has been estimated that prior to 1750
more books had been published in Chinese than
in all other languages combined. As late in 1850,
Chinese books outnumbered those in any other
language. Even in 1928 the largest publishing
house in the world (this is the Commercial
Press.—Ed.) is located not in New York, or
London, or Paris, or Berlin, but in Shanghai.
And little of the literature thus produced is
ephemeral, for the Chinese penchant has been
towards history, topography, philosophy, poetry
and commentary on the classics, all saturated
with a serenity and a height of tone that might
well be emulated by the more sophisticated
literatures.
“It is evident, therefore, that if we are to hope
for the final solution of our linguistic and philological problems, the satisfaction of our antiquarian or archeological curiosity, and the
construction of an adequate philosophy or a
complete historical synthesis, we cannot disregard the lessons learned by a vigorous and
intelligent people, numbering one fourth of the
population of the globe, through 3,000 years of
continued and varied culture.”
Remarking that America is surpassed by


be the risks of experimentation and the country’s
and his the gains from his probable eventual
success. This magazine has published descriptions by foresters of what goes on now, the barbarians’ spoliation of the unoccupied lands. This
information has been supplemented with other
authentic data to the effect that a capital of
5,000 pesos ($2,500) is insufficient for the planting up, in Manila hemp and coconuts, of a single
homestead of 16 hectares, 40 acres.
To subdue tropical jungle and substitute it
with hemp for which you will wait near two years
after planting for the first crop, and with coconuts or rubber for which you will wait eight and
ten years for the first worthwhile returns, is a task
recommending itself more to the able corporation
than to the individual. But the two may
thrive together, the corporation being bank and
primary market for the settler. How did Negros
and Pampanga become great sugar-producing
provinces? Practically in this way; namely,
upon the credit of corporations interested in
buying the product on the one hand, and in
supplying the machinery for its milling on the
other. Similarly the Batangas coffee industry
once thrived, and why does it now languish?
The direct interest of exporting corporations
has waned, credit has been withdrawn. The
same group of planters who were once apparently
so capable in the industry, seem now to have
lost their cunning; it is, however, rather their
credit which is the wanting factor. Were a
great corporation to go about restoring this
industry with a capital sufficient to see it through
the initial experiments, the fortunes of the planters would be rehabilitated because they would
all vicariously profit by what the corporation
did in its own selfish behalf. (Incidentally,
a new social class, aligned with the corporation,
and more concerned with bourse quotations than
with the petty affairs of local government, would
develop. This may now be observed of the
sugar industry; it is a concomitant of all plantation prosperity).
The major benefits the islands are to derive
from the concessionists remain to be stated.
They are two.
(Concluded on page 23)


France, England, Russia and Germany in revealing Chinese culture to the western world
by the media of translations, Mr. Graves adds
that in American universities at present it is
easier “to become an initiate in.the mysteries
of an ancient language whose whole record comprises a number of sculptured stones or clay
tablets, than it is to obtain the key to an immense and living literature (the Chinese) which
can boast a single encyclopedia of over 11,000
volumes.
“This is a condition that ought not to exist,
and the signs of the times portend that it will


He has read the new
Einstein theory all through
and it’s the bunk—it does
not tell why gentlemen
prefer blondes!
Junior’s own preference
is for
GoRDOl ulid
It’s best!
Judge—So you plead
guilty to taking a drink of
alcoholic liquor in a speakeasy?
Yes, your honor.
Ten years for impersonating an officer!
—Judge.
In the line of
UOO D
WARIDRA
Of course there’s a best,
too, and we sell it—
RODERISOiN


Kuenzle & Streiff
Importers
343 T. Pinpin
Tel. 2-39-36
Manila, P. I.


Changing American Policy in the Orient—
Its Manifestations in the Philippines
(Continued from page 6)


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


June, 1929


  


19


not exist much longer. The recent establishment
of the Harvard-Yengching Institute, to mention
only a single important development, is a most
promising indication of awakening interest."
After publication of the Bulletin quoted, the
subject was further taken up in the April meeting of the American Oriental Society, at Cambridge. The Bullelin outlines, for the information of the general membership of the Council,
and of others whose initiative must inaugurate
the movement and find place for it in the universities, the scope that various courses might
comprise.
Under the head of social history is a list of
subjects of which more general knowledge in
America than prevails at present, even if it


were confined to university circles, would be of
no little national value: origin of customs, history
of problems of population, clan and family organization, marriage, exogamy, surnames and name
magic, serfdom, fooi-binding, concubinage, fashions, methods of social control, social morality,
social classifications, social mobility, philanthropy (native, not missionary), guilds, community
organization, housing, communication and isolation as social but not economic factors, social
conflict, accommodations, evolution, conscious efforis to remake society, assimilation, influence
of the press (new).
The papers have been reporting the almost
total absorption by the Chinese of Manila, of
the household shoe industry in Mariquina, which


seems to have been effected by the commercial
and industrial guilds. The native craftsmen
also contributed to their own spoliation through
habits of unthrift which involved them in debt
to the Chinese who buy their shoes. Bringing
this pressure to bear, the Chinese shoe dealers
were able to compel the native shoemakers to
buy their leather and findings from Chinese
importers and tanners, their other necessities,
even those of their households, from other
Chinese merchants. Native leather dealers
did not prosper, it is alleged, since their patrons
were unable to sell to the shoe dealers. Such
problems, it would seem, ought to engage the
interest of our own scholars. But any port in
a storm.


ai

The Fanies and the Sunset
By MAUD N. PARKER


It was sunset. Donata was playing in the
rice stubble of her father’s field near Cabu.
With her was her constant companion and
friend Carmen, and Carmen’s little sister Pati,
who always tagged along wherever the two
friends went if they would let her. If they did
not let her she made such a fuss, as a rule, that
the whole family interfered and made Donata
and Carmen take her along anyway.
On this particular evening the sunset clouds
had arranged themselves as if for a lesson in
geography.
Doning and Mameng, as the girls lovingly
called each other, were busy pointing out in the
cloud picture lakes, bays, inlets, gulfs, seas,
peninsulas, capes, islands, cliffs, mountain peaks,
valleys and clouds above clouds—each one
intent upon the game of finding more features
than the other.
Pati only pointed at the clouds as she saw the
bigger girls doing and jabbered baby talk, the
meaning of which was clear only to herself.
After the girls had named all the points they
could, they turned to naming the colors of the
sky and clouds, each striving to name more than
the other.
It was easy to name blue, red, golden, white,
pink, and gray, but the tints and shades of the
principal colors were harder to name, so Donata
and Carmen merely pointed to each new color
discovered and called it that.
Pati made them laugh heartily by pointing
and saying, dat dat.
Doning had brought along her colored crayons
and a clean sheet of drawing paper. She was
very fond of drawing and was ambitious to
become a great artist, so she often tried to draw
the gorgeous sunsets that were to be seen to the
best advantage from her father’s open fields.
“How I wish I could paint a sunset just like
that one,” sighed Doning, for perhaps the twentieth time, as she looked at the drawing she had
been making and back again at the sunset she
was trying to copy.
“If wishes were fishes,
We’d have some fried.”
“What good does it do to wish unless there is
a fairy around to grant your wishes?” quoth
Carmen.
'Well, maybe there are fairies around," said
Donata, looking all about her carefully as if she
hoped to see one.
“Oh, if we could only see them!” she exclaimed, so sorrowfully that Carmen laughed with
glcrWhy not open your eyes, then, and see
them?” said a strange, musical voice at Donata’s side.
Both girls turned quickly and were startled
speechless to see a diminutive maiden of matchless beauty standing near them.
She was dressed in a gorgeous robe of cloth
of gold trimmed with scarlet, while around her
slender waist hung a girdle that looked as if
made of thin discs of pure gold.
Her eyes were large, luminous and of a graygreen color. Her lips were of a bright coral red
and her cheeks were as pink as the cloud banks
near the eastern horizon.
The Sunset Fairy, for such she proved to be,
was smiling in a friendly manner that won the
confidence of the two girls at once and put
them at their ease.


Pati, however, who was quite timid in the
presence of all strangers, held tightly to Donata’s
hand, eyeing doubtfully the maiden, who was
even smaller than she.
“How would you like to go with me and help
paint the sunset itself?”, invited the fairy.


“Oh I would like it above everything else!”
cried Donata, clasping her hands in delight,
thinking only of herself and forgetting her companions in the excitement of the moment.
Pati brought her back to earth by giving a
loud cry and clinging to Donata’s dress tightly—
as she always did when there was any question
of going anywhere.
‘There, little girl, don’t ery so,” said the
fairy, "you may go also. I am afraid, though,


BLACKSTONE Crude Oil Engine
Full Diesel—Cold Starting
11 To 600 H. P.—In One to Four Cylinder
S a power unit for ice plants, electric plants and wherever
A motive power is used, Blackstone engine rrovides
steady and efficient service. It is a four-cycle engine of slow
speed, which insures long life and economy both in fuel and oil.
More than 100 Blacestone engines ranging from 11 to 180
H.P. are now in operation in the Philippines, several of which
are repeat orders.
Ask a Blackstone owner or visit us to see
a Blackstone engine in actual operation
MIACLEODGCOMIANI


Iloilo


MANILA
Cebu


Davao


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


20


  UUKNHL


Julie, 1S49


that you will get more paint on you than on
the clouds," she added.
"Oh, Mameng, let’s go," said Donata, clasping
Carmen’s hand tightly, now that she remembered
her companions.
Carmen was not so enthusiastic as Donata
about painting sunsets, but, being a good chum,
she always went wherever Donata went and
tried to do everything that Donata did, though
sometimes only with slight success.
“We must hurry, then,” said the fairy. “The
sun waits for no one. When he is ready to go
down, he just goes, and the artists have to paint
very fast if they hope to give him a good setting.”
So saying she seemed to wave her hand lightly
toward the sunset and immediately the children
found themselves traveling swiftly toward the
horizon in the west which seemed like a band
of molten gold. Just as a firefly gives light
but not heat, so this band, that looked like red
hot metal, gave forth no heat. Donata even
placed her hand on the horizon line, when they
reached it, and was surprised to find that it felt
cool to the touch though it glowed like fire.
Here at the western horizon, on all sides of the
children, stood buckets and cans and pots of
paint of all kinds.
Large vats full of paint were being hurriedly
mixed and stirred by strange little workmen
whose cheeks were round and red, while agile
young fellows dressed like sailors climbed swiftly,
with pots of paint, up long ladders made of
lightbeams leading to the place where the artists
were at work on the actual painting of the sunset
scene.
“Where does all this paint come from?”
asked Donata, as she saw the buckets of paint
sliding swiftly to the ground, trolley like, on
long beams of light that went out of sight in
all directions.
“From fairy paint mines all over the universe,"
answered the fairy. “For example, this one
that just came in is from a mine in the moon,
which gives us a very rare tint like the shimmering, milky color of a good moonstone—such
as those found in Ceylon. To get the best
results, this color from the moon must be mixed
by expert paint mixers, with a white powder
from a mine on the Milky Way. This small
package here could not be bought with all the
gold that has ever been mined from the earth.”
Donata felt very much awed by this information and was almost afraid to hold the bucket,
which the fairy handed her. She was surprised
to find it so heavy that she nearly dropped it,
and was glad when the fairy placed it again
among the other paints.
“These fiery red paints that you see piled up


in such large quantities," she continued, “come
from volcanoes all over the earth. They come
ready mixed by the volcanoes and are great
favorites with the artists, since they are easy
to apply and make a good showing quickly,
which is very essential in sunset painting.”
“For the bright and fiercest red the miners
have to go to the sun itself and to other great
star suns throughout space. That package
which just passed us like lightning was mined in
one of the star suns such as we have for our
earth. Although these paints travel at the
same rate as light travels, yet some of the miners
are so far away in distant star suns that it takes
billions of years for the packages to reach the
earth.
It made Carmen’s head ache to try to think
of such big numbers, but, Donata who was interested in every detail of how sunsets were
painted, she listened like a true artist to all
the fairy’s explanations.
In fact Donata was so anxious to learn all the
secrets of the painter’s art in order to be a great
artist, that she tried to remember every word
the fairy said.
“Now here,” continued the fairy, "are packages of ashes of roses. All the red rose petals
that fall from all the roses in the world are
carried away by fairy workers to a certain secret furnace where the petals are burned, and
this powder is thus obtained. Look over there
toward the east at that big gray cloud. See
how the side nearest us is turning to a beautiful
pink-gray. That cloud is being painted, by
the most expert sunset artists, with this color
ashes of roses. It is such a delicate tint that
only the very best painters dare to try to apply
it.
“Those big buckets there,” pointing to several
showing purolish tinges through the tough white
clouds of which the pails were made, “contain
amethyst powder from the mines of India. It
is imported in large quantities for painting the
mountain ranges in the east as you can see by
looking over there now.” The children looked
toward the mountains of Baler, and saw that
they were being painted a beautiful purplish
tinge, while above them were great piles of
white clouds being painted bright pink on top
and a lighter baby pink below.
Donata was rapidly shown many other colors,
such as old rose and red coral, mined from the
coral reefs; light green, extracted from curling
waves on long sloping sandy beaches; pale
purple and mauve taken from the trunks of
millions of coconut palm trees on rainy days;
precious gold leaf made from the gold of Benguet; and copper powder from under the earth
in many lands.


Here the Fairy explained that on certain
nights, during the rainy season, the whole
sunset sky was given a coating of this copper
paint—producing a sunset of a coppery color,
which superstitious people sometimes feared was
a warning of a great eruption of a volcano or
of the coming of a baguio.
Innumerable fairy workers were darting hither
and thither, moving with the swiftness of
the light beams on which they traveled by
simply taking hold of the beams, that were
running like belts in a machine shop—but oh,
so rapidly!
Far over beyond the horizon line, Donata
could see the colors deepening, as the artists
there put them on the blue canvas of the sky.
She desired to see the painting close up, to
learn how it was actually done, so she asked the
fairy to take her up on the scaffolding of the
sky painters to the actual place where the colors
were being out on.
"Are you not afraid to go up so high?” asked
the fairy.
"Oh, no,” replied Donata. “I often climb
the tall trees back of our house and watch the
sunset.”
The fairy laughed and said, "Well, if you are
not afraid I will take you; but it is much higher
there than the tallest tree. You may not be
afraid, but little Pati will surely fall if she is
taken along.”
Pati, hearing this, set up such a cry at being
left that she startled one of the workmen into
spilling a whole pot of gilt paint just as he was
starting for a spot high overhead where a special
artist was flecking with gold the sky above the
picture of the lake.
Luckily the paint was thick and spread slowly
and had been spilled on a clean piece of white
cloud, so it was easily scraped up and put back
into the paint pot.
This accident hushed Pati's crying for a moment, and Donata took her on her hip and told
the fairy that she would carry her while they
should be aloft.
Carmen was very much afraid of climbing
trees or going to high places, but she could not
think of being left alone, so she overcame her
fears as best she could and went along.
Now the fairy was able by a simple wave of
her hand to move her party to any place she
desired to take them. This was very convenient
for the earth children who could not travel
along the beams of light, as the fairy workers
did.
The first place they stopped was near a high
cloud cliff, at the edge of what the children called
a bay, where there were many artists hurriedly
painting the upper edges of the cliff a deep red.
The color was being splashed on roughly and
looked much different at close quarters than it
did when one was far down on the earth.
When the children looked back to the earth
from which they had come they held their
breath in amazement to see how small evervthing looked. The houses were mere dots, in
fields that looked like small green handkerchiefs
hung on a line. It made them dizzy to look
down so far, so they turned back quickly to the
picture on the sky, and the fairy artists at their
work of perfecting it.
Donata was interested in the appearance
of these artists; they were so different from the
workers who carried the paints and from the
mixers down on the horizon line, which still
glittered like a gold band though far below.
These are the student artists,” explained
the fairy “They learn to paint rough scenes
like cliffs and seashores and cloud mountains,
where the colors are plain and can be merely
splashed on."
Farther along and higher up, where the
finer touches with delicate tints are being put on
the picture, you will see the best artists of Fairyland."
As she talked the fairy moved her party
smoothly but swiftly along from group to group
of the artists, who were all too busy splashing
on colors to notice visitors.
As the groups became smaller and smaller,
Donata noticed that the artists became older
and that they all wore pointed beards, some
of which were quite gray.
Pati was now very much at home on the


E
S
A Valuable
Health Hint!
It is far better to drink plenty of milk

S
than to unduly tax your digestive powers with
BEAN ERANO!
too much heavy food. Thousands of people
in the Islands, both young and old, drink

DEAR BRAND NATURAL TILA
(Switzerland's Most Famous Product)
because they find it gives quickly the needed nourishment, repairs the
waste, and so surely renews VIM and VIGOR, without undue strain on
the organs of digestion.


Sold everywhere in large and small cans


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


June, 1929


  OF
ERCE JOURNAL


21


scaffolding and begged to be let down to play;
so Donata put her down at a wide safe place,
while one of the old artists gave her a little pot
of gold paint and showed her a place where she
could put it on without spoiling the picture.
This caused Donata to beg for some paint and
a brush, so that she could help paint an actual
sunset.
Her wish was granted and the artist gave her
a corner of the canvas just above the bay, telling
her to paint a bright red line there.
Carmen, not an artist, spent her time resting
and watching the others work. High above she
could see the master artists flecking the blue
canvas of the sky with bright gold or tinting the
pictured clouds with pale rose and mauve.
Just above the picture of the gulf stood the
new moon with a bright star near its tip
An expert artist was touching the sky canvas
with a brush dipped in pale green which harmonized perfectly with the pale blue of the sky.
Donata, having finished the task assigned
her, now stood in rapture before her work which
glowed like a living color.
“Oh, how I wish I could paint sunsets all the
time,” she sighed, as she turned a happy face
to the fairy. “Why do not the fairies paint
sunsets like this every evening instead of only
a few times in the year?
Well, for one thing,” answered the fairy,
“sunset pictures such as this, that cover the
whole sky from horizon to horizon, require a
great amount of paint and the mines would
soon be exhausted. Also the work of painting
a great picture is very exhausting for the artists
and they can not produce one great picture
after another as workmen make articles in a
factory. Again, the plans for a great picture
must be very carefully thought out in advance,
and every one given detailed instructions, so
there will be no hitch in the work. The sun
requires that pictures painted at his setting be
finished within a certain time. He withdraws
his light at the end of that time, the artists can
not see to paint in the dark, and all the bright
colors rapidly fade away.
“Who decides when a great sunset scene is to
be painted?” asked Donata.
‘The fairies of the inner circle," answered
her little guide, so solemnly that Donata felt
somewhat in awe.
“Whenever there is some great day, such as
the birthday of the sun or the dog star, or the
day when the moon and Venus stand near
together in the sky, as they do to-day, then the
inner circle orders a famous picture to be made in
honor of the event.
Explanations were here suddenly interrupted
by howls of anguish from Pati who was seen
coming toward them with her dress all covered
with dark red paint. She had fallen over a pot
of it, splashing it all over the canvas, much to
the disgust of the student artists occupied with
that part of the picture.
Fortunately the splash was evenly made, and,
from the earth, looked as if it had been painted
on purpose, so no great harm was done; though
for awhile it was feared that the great picture


INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBERETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
58:
La n



" ABLER'LN


had been spoiled. An old artist who hurriedly
brushed the paint here and there with swift
expert strokes, saved the situation.
The fairy felt that it might be well to move her
party away from that spot, since there was much
muttering and scowling among the student
artists—who did not enjoy the idea of having their
picture spoiled at the last moment by a toddler.
It was near the end of the sunset anyway, so
by the time the party reached the horizon line,
toward which the fairy had waved them, the
bright red colors had faded to old rose and deep
red, the bright gold had faded to old gold and
the ashes of roses had faded to pearl gray. Pink
clouds had begun to turn blue gray underneath,
only the highest tips in the east retaining their
The identity of the perpetrator of what this
department is about to quoteis unimportant.
What he says is. Interest attaches to the delinquency, not to the delinquent, so even the
name of the paper in which the piece originally
appeared, and made a point well taken, is omitted. It is enough to say that it is a periodical
in good repute, published in Manila. First the
quotation, matter for comment italicized, then
the comment:
‘The recent creation of a board of examiners
to test the knowledge of English of all university
and college graduates in the Philippines, who
wish to continue their studies in the United
States, is a novelty. It is, in a way, a unique
innovation, a tacit admission made the more
patent by the complaint on the part of the
Registrar’s Association of the United States,
that the teaching of English in our higher institutions of learning in accordance with the
Filipinization policy of the government has
not been entirely a success.
“Whatever economic advantages the so-called
Filipinization in our public schools may have
had, it has one serious drawback and that is
the teaching of English by those who have no
thorough knowledge of it. We hold no brief
against native teachers. Some of them are
exceptionally bright and are as capable, along
many lines of human endeavor, as any foreign
instructor or professor. But, without wishing
to appear unpatriotic,—the writer is Filipino—
it seems to us that the teaching of English in
the higher reaches or grades of education should
be confined to American or English teachers
alone. Like most foreign languages, the “genius”
of the English language is elusive. It can be
caught and mastered only by native born or
those who have had opportunities of learning
English at its source from early childhood.
“Whether we like it or not, the Philippines
is bound to adopt the English language. Would
it not be the better part of wisdom, therefore,
to study it to the best of our abilities, to learn it
from those alone who are competent to teach
it and who know it, as it were, by instinct?
Only thus can we expect to make our speech
intelligible, persuasive and compelling. Only thus
can itrepresent “the golden harvest that followeth
the flowering of thought.” To encourage the use
of what is commonly known as "bamboo” English either because through mistaken zeal or
economic fallacy, the government refuses to
hire real masters of English, is to choose deliberately a poor material when, at a little difference in cost, a good one could be had with
far better results."
The words and phrases which for the purpose
of comment have been italicized, may now be
gone over:
The recent. Understood, hence superfluous.
The knowledge of English of. Cumbersome,
the test is in English.
Comma rule violated after Philippines: the
adjective clause when not restrictive is set off by
commas. This clause is restrictive, it confines
the allusion to those alone who wish to continue
their studies in the United States.
In a way, a unique innovation. Superfluou
and redundant, as comparison of the meaning
of novelty, unique, and innovation will show.
On the part. Superfluous, a manilaism.
True, things are always being done here on the
part of someone other than the one doing them,
TS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN


pink color unchanged.
Another wave of the fairy’s hand, after reaching the earth, and the party moved in a flash
from the horizon line, now only a dull gold, to
the stubble field of Donata’s father near Cabu.
Here the fairy vanished without a word just as
the last bright rays of the sun were withdrawn
from the west, leaving only a dark red glow low
down on the horizon. The children ran home
in the dusk of evening, in answ er to the call of
Donata’s mother, to whom th eyechattered so
much about sunsets and sunse t fairies that she
soon gave them their supper and packed them
off to bed. In their dreams they made the
journey with the sunset fairy all over again,
and it seemed just as wond erful as before.
Haphazard Studies in the English Language
that is, they are frequently done by proxy; but
that comes of the government’s being much in
the news, and doing a great deal here. The
ways of governments, especially of bureaucracies,
are ever devious. Diction, however, should be
direct—particularly when expository.
Registrar's. This should probably be Registrars', the plural possessive form.
Filipinization. This is a coined word, but in
good repute and essential to the filling of a
void; but there seems no good reason to keep on
capitalizing it. There is a tendency the other
way, which makes transatlantic, transpacific
and similar terms correct without either hyphen
or capitalized initial letter. (The comma after
United States seems superfluous).
And that is. In apposition, should be set off
with commas—or omitted.
Some of them are exceptionally bright and are.
The second are is superfluous.
Along many lines of human -leeor.
expression, lines of human endec er, too trii.
: Seinothing
enjoy good repute, means, if any
The anfhor
analogous to career or professicihe whols
does not wish to convey this, li
phrase is superfluous. The a. dees non
cachers are
intend to say that some Filipideficieut as
proficient in other lines, and o
teachers. Such expressions der!  fron politicians (not to confine the term those in the
islands) and tend to intrude in good diction,
where they have no place. Tha they may likewise occur in decisions from t bench is no
defense, since the bench also is crien bombastic.
Foreign instructor or professe.. Pardouabiy
the author has here avoided icpeution, bul
fallen thereby into an inaccuracv Insiructar
and professor are not precise synonyms of teachein the sense the word is employ l: they imply


The
AN
Philippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS SURETYSHIPS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest
Call or write for particulars
Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
P. O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


22


  


jurie, 1329


what they purport to imply, the instructor and
the professor, who rank above teachers. Colleagues from abroad conveys what the author
really wishes to say.
In the higher reaches or grades of education.
The phrase is too general to be clear, and in
our higher schools does better.
Confined. Preferably confided, which means
entrusted.
American or English teachers. The correct
conjunction is and.
Like. This properly gives way to As with
or As is the case with. No language is like
another; languages merely have points of similarity, and it is their dissimilarities which distinguish them from one another. Correctly,
the author is not comparing languages, but a
characteristic common to them. This word
like is often carelessly employed. One should
avoid doing so. It is an introductory word for
similes.
Foreign (as an adjective modifying languages).
Superfluous, hence should be omitted—a characteristic genius pervades every language.
“Genius”. Erroneously placed within quotation marks, whereas the author uses it in a


A poor material. The article should be
omitted. The same applies later in the same
sentence to the expression a good one, of which
only the word good should be retained.
Purged in partof fault, the pieceis, inthe opinion
of the commentator, one of the most commonsense statements he has read anywhere on the
question of providing our higher schools with
competent teachers of English. It now
reads:
“Creation of a board of examiners to test in
English all university and college graduates in
the Philippines who wish to continue their studies
in the United States is a novelty. It is a tacit
admission made the more patent by the complaint of the Registrars’ Association of the
United States that the teaching of English in
our higher institutions of learning in accordance
with the filipinization policy of the government
has not been entirely a success.
“Whatever economic advantages the socalled filipinization in our public schools may
have had, it has one serious drawback, and that
is, the teaching of English by those who have
no thorough knowledge of it. We hold no brief
against native teachers. Some of them are
exceptionally bright and as a capable as their


colleagues from abroad. But, without wishing
to appear unpatriotic—the writer is a Filipino—
it seems to us that the teaching of English in
our higher schools should be confided to American and English teachers alone. As with most
languages, the genius of English is elusive. It
can be caught and mastered only by those to
whom it is a mother tongue, and others who
have had opportunities of learning it at its
source from early childhood.
“Whether we like it or not, the Philippines is
bound to adopt the English language. Would
it not be the better part of wisdom, therefore,
to learn it from those alone who are competent
to teach it, who know it, as it were, by instinct?
Only thus can we expect to make our speech
intelligible. Only thus can it represent “the
golden harvest that followeth the flowering of
thought.” To encourage the use of what is
commonly known as bamboo English, because
the goverment, through mistaken zeal in economizing expense, refuses to hire real masters of
English, is deliberately to choose poor material
when, at a little difference in cost, good could
be had with far better results."


usual and correct sense.
The English language. In this phrase the
article and the noun language are superfluous,
hence should be omitted. A facility of English
is the ease with which nouns convert into adjectives and verbs, adjectives into nouns, etc.,
and this exemplifies it. The genius of English
is elusive.
Native born. If used at all, this expression
requires the definite article the preceding it.
But some such expression as those to whom it is
a mother tongue is preferable.
Or those. The correct conjunction is and;
and, better than those, others.
And who. The best usage avoids and who,
and which, and analogous expressions, which
usually may be done by omitting the conjunction.
Persuasive and compelling. As an expression
apposite to the word intelligible as used in the
context, this expression falls short; and as intelligible serves the full purpose of the author,
it is only weakened in purport by adding anything to it. Nothing should therefore be added.
Or economic fallacy. The vagueness of this
term rules it out. It is also repetitious, since
the mistaken zeal alluded to is one of economizing
expense: the author does not question the zeal
of the government otherwise, and of course not
the filipinization policy.


Something About The Asuang
FRANK LEWIS MINTON
The writer accepts no responsibility for the authenticity of this article, as it
is compiled from a number of more or less garbled accounts of the
origin of the asuang, by Bisayan storytellers.—M.


The evolution of the asuang apparently began
among the sun worshippers who settled long ago
on Panay and other southern islands, among
whom the custom of human sacrifice was common. These are frequently mentioned among
Bisayan raconteurs as the bad people, to distinguish them from the good people, who worshipped Bathala, the god of goodness. When the
sun was angry, that is, when severe storms buffetted the country, or when epidemics scourged
the settlements, priest and chieftain would
select a young man and maiden, or young children to be sacrificed on the altar of their god;
but first the livers and hearts of the victims
were removed, roasted and eaten by chieftains


Brilllantshine mietal 1 olisn


For cleaning and polishing brass, nickel, aluminum, and other
metals, fixtures, chandeliers, bath trimmings, musical instruments, automobiles, etc.
Used extensively not only in homes and factories, but in large
quantities by steamship and railroad companies.
Brilliantshine acts instantly when merely rubbed with a dry cloth,
and leaves a luster that is silver-bright and lasting.
Exclusive Agents
WHOLESALE DEPARTMENT
Philippine Education Company, Inc.
101-103 Escolta
Second Floor
Manila, P. I.


and priests. This is a widespread primitive;
it was not limited to the Philippines.
Noting the relish with which the heads of
church and state devoured these human giblits,
the people became envious and demanded that
they, too, be allowed to share in the sacrificial
feasts. Their demands were promptly and
emphatically denied on the ground that only
semideities and those endowed by the sun god
with superhuman powers could be allowed to eat
sacred foods. The leaders of the malcontents
were suitably punished, and the incident was
considered closed. But the curiosity of the
people had been aroused, and they soon began
killing children and practicing the cannibalistic
religious rites secretiy. Finding the flavor of
human flesh much to their liking, they revolted
and began destroying their offspring openly,
in defiance of priest and chieftain. Later,
deciding that it was wasteful to burn the sacrificial
victims, they began the practice of eating the
bodies entire.
That famine had more to do with the institution of cannibalism than these folk tales
indicate, is extremely probable. The fact that
protracted periods of extreme hunger will cause
cannibalism and mob insanity has been demonstrated too often to admit of dispute, notably
during the past year in China. And that these
early settlers, impoverished, improvident and
restless, with very limited knowledge of agriculture, suffered severe food shortages, is practically certain.
To the ignorant sun worshippers it seemed that
they had discovered a novel method of replenishing their larders. Children and youths were
plentiful. The body of an adult, or a slain
enemy occasionally augmented the meat supply.
But as the generation grew older the number of
children decreased rapidly, and there were no
more young men and maidens suitable for the
sacrifice; so they began harrassing neighboring
tribes in search of the gruesome game which
their perverted appetites, by that time, demanded.
The raids on the nearby settlements were
conducted with great stealth, and at first the
unsuspecting good people believed that the
youths and children who so frequently disappeared, never to return, were victims of crocodiles; but eventuallv the atrocities of the sun


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


EO


munc,


Changing American Policy in the Orient—
Its Manifestations in the Philippines
(Concluded from page 18)


Periodically, at times when farm products are
depressed in America, henceforth these islands
will face the danger of forfeiture of free trade with
the mother country. Their protests will avail
them little, but an investment of a billion dollars
of American money in their plantations
might always be a preponderant influence; at
least it would always be on their side, even
though it were concerned with rubber and the
threat was immediately against sugar; for it
would sense the danger in such precedents. It is
American investments in Cuba which firts
obtained for her, and now secure to her, a tariff
differential, or drawback. This money is inimical to Philippine interests, but a billion put into
these islands would offset it and probably always
checkmate it.
The islands will be pretty safe in the free trade
controversy so long as the industrial element
in America is not pitted against them and the
farmers have to contend alone; for prices will
never remain depressed, perhaps, long enough to
gain the farmers their point, and as soon as prices
rise the gorge of the farmers against tropical
competition will subside.
The major benefit of all, to be derived from
concessionist interests in the Philippines on a
large scale—such as the changing American
policy toward the islands contemplates—is
the neutralizing influence it would have upon
industrial agitation against Filipino migration
to the mother country. Back of this movement
is an urbanite, no farmer—a man organized with


his fellow men, easily brought into meetings for
the expression and reiteration of opinion. When
such men mean business, they are a force to
reckon with. When, however, they should cry
the alarm of cheap labor, if great American plantation and industrial interests existed here,
employing Filipinos in the production of products
selling wholly or mainly in the United States,
these interests would exert their influence against
the propaganda and might be the deciding factor:
certainly alone Filipinos could do nothing. On
such occasions, too, American capital in Cuba
and that in the Philippines would not be natural
enemies, but natural friends.
So there is something decidedly to say for the
concessionists. Only, these are the questions
they care about—tariffs and trade, egress to
market—not questions of local government,
be it good, bad or merely indifferent. For it does
not much concern them. And since they and
their welfare qualify materially the present
American policy toward the Philippines, it is
easy to see why the primary objective of government, the administration of wholesome laws
applicable to all alike, is neglected. Betterments now can’t be expected.
Concessionists are often victimized, sometimes
by their own anticipations—too grandiose.
They are wary, it is really a game to land them.
It is reminiscent of someone’s recipe for dealing
with fleas, beginning—first catch your flea! That’s
what the government is doing now.
—W. R.


worshippers were discovered, and all the followers of Bathala made common caus, against
them. They were utterly ostracized, pariahs of
society to be killed without trial or moarcy,
wherever and whenever encountered.
Their numbers greatly diminished by the
avenging raids of their furious neighbors, the
sun worshippers of Panay fled to a secluded
little valley in the foothills, in which now stands
the old town of Duenas, still believed by many
to be the birthplace of the asuang. They were
led by their deposed chieftains and priests, to
whom they had turned for aid and advice in
their extremity, like unruly children seeking
the protection of parents when in trouble. To
save their people from the wrath of the followers
of Bathala, the leaders of the sun worshippers
now publicly tabooed human sacrifices, and
modified their religious rites considerably, substituting animals and fowls for youths and
children; but tales of cannibalistic orgies in the
hills back of the tiny settlement, probably much
exaggerated, were still bruited about among the
good people, and the ostracized tribe remained
practically social outcasts for centuries.
The Spanish priests induced the tribe to
accept, nominally at least, the Catholic faith,
and baptisms were frequent; but some, notably
older folk, continued to practice strange rites
in secret, and were branded as witches. Fear
of their suspicious neighbors made those accused
of witcheraft and cannibalism ever more secretive in their habits of life, avoiding social
intercourse, confining themselves to their huts
by day, and only venturing forth at night, on
furtive excursions in search of food. This very
secretiveness increased the suspicion of the
community and fanned the fires of hatred. They
were credited with supernatural powers and
termed asuangs; persons possessed of devils and
given superhuman power to harm normal beings,
and to transform themselves at will into birds,
animals, or reptiles, with the exception of the
sheep and the pigeon.
The asuang, according to lingering superstitions, is a human being, not actually a spectre,


but one who is possessed; who has been given
supernatural power to harm other human beings,
by the evil one; a monomaniac whose obsession
is an abnormal appetite. The asuang is said
to devour young children and even adults. It
steals the dead, putting in their places banana
stalks transformed into exact, life-size replicas.
There are two varieties: the prowling asuang,
who hunts on the ground, and the flying asuang,
or mananangal, which severs its body in the


madie mang tne lene nal Vnle tne UDDa
portion flies about in search of food, like some
great night bird. The asuang is believed to
transform itself into bird, animal, or reptile,
instantaneously, at will.
A gentle young woman named Hyde
Ate too many apples and died—
The apples fermented
Inside the lamented
And made cider inside her inside!


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS
14-16 CALLE DAVID
MANILA, P. I.


THE VVIMTE EMRRESS OF MEMCiFio


24


  


juile, 923


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, Dollar Steamship Line Co.


Since our last report,
the cargo situation from
the Philippines to Mediterranean. U. K. and
Continent has continued
steady. It seems owners
are having little, if any
difficulty obtaining fillings, even where full cargoes are required from
the Philippines. The
coming 30 days hold out
the hopes of owners,
TAN many fixtures for full or
part cargoes having
already been closed. A similar situation exists on
the Atlantic and Gulf berth where several charters have been loading full cargoes of sugar the
past four months to relieve the regular lines from
a surplus they cannot handle. It is not antici;
pated that regular lines will find a surplus during the next 30 days, as the peak of the sugar
export season has already passed and in fact
some of the millers have already completed their
shipping, while others are cleaning up. There has
been, however, a rather unusual amount of
sugar held back this vear owing to the very low
prices existing. It is believed that when the offseason is reached prices will take a firmer position in the stock market and those millers holding back will benefit.
The movement transpacific to U. S. and Canadian ports has held up fairly well, although there
has existed right along during the period under
review ample tonnage to relieve all offerings.
The same condition has existed with exports
to nearby countries, such as China and Japan.
There appears to have been a slight increase


during the past few weeks in the tonnage imported into the Islands. This increase is particularly noticed in the imports from Europe.
Owners regularly serving the Philippines and
the Far East continue to improve their services
by more frequent sailings and newer and faster
liners. The N Y K recently announced that
they will place, early next year, three new motor
ships on the Seattle-Orient service named the
Hikawo Maru, Hiye Maru and the Heian
Maru—vessels of 11,700 tons gross, 10,000 tons
dead weight cargo capacity, including 250 tons
refrigerator space. These vessels will have accommodations for 86 first class, 70 tourist and 140
third class each. Their length is 535 feet and
maintain a cruising speed of 16 knots with a
reserve of 2 additional knots.
The Dollar Steamship Line likewise recently
announced a building program of six new liners
costing approximately seven million gold dollars
each. These liners are reported to excel anything today in the Pacific in every respect.
Details as to their capacity, length, etc., were not
published with the announcement.
A short time back Matson Navigation announced a Pacific excursion tour, employing their
flag ship Malolo for the purpose.
This vessel has been plying between San
Francisco and Honolulu and is one of the finest
and largest ships on the Pacific. She is expected at Manila with 350 passengers October
28 and 29. The tour is arranged by the Matson
people in cooperation with the San Francisco
Chamber of Commerce and the American Express. It is the first tour ever attempted on
purely the Pacific and is expected to be a forerunner of many following similar excursions.
While the S. S. Malolo is in Manila the Columbia Pacific Shipping Co. will act as agents of the
vessel and the passengers will be looked after
by the travel department of the American Express, Manila branch. The vessel cost more
than $7,000,000; she has a speed of 22 knots
and is especially designed for comfort in semi

tropical waters. She is a steel, twin screw steamer, 17,232 tons gross and 8,305 tons net.
The Barber Wilhelmsen Line announced a
monthly sailing from Philippine ports to New
York, via Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe, Yokkaisha, Yokohama, San Francisco and Los Angeles. The service will commence with the
sailing of the S. S. Tai Yin next September, and
will be followed monthly with similar motor
ships. Five motor ships in all make up the
service, each with a sea speed of from 14 to 15
knots, making the voyage Manila to New York
in around 45 days. Macondray & Co. are the
Manila agents.
Since certificates of public convenience were
discarded through legislation almost two years
ago, there is seen a decided improvement in
interisland shipping conditions. Several new
ships have been built for the more popular routes
and no less than half a dozen second hand ships
have been brought to the islands for interisland
service. These second hand ships are not what
one would call the most modern but they are
a decided improvement over most of the much
older ships that occupied a monopoly of the
trades. It is generally understood that at least
two responsible owners contemplate building
new ships for the interisland service, such ships
according to announcement to be the very latest.
The improvement, already noticeable, with a
program of this kind being realized in the near
future, general conditions in the islands must see
a great improvement. There will likewise be
an attraction to the tourist, who seldom reaches
points other than Manila and occasionally Zamboanga, when one of the larger tourist ships calls
at that port.
Passenger traffic continued heavy during the
month of May, there being an excess of both
first class and third class over space available.
First figure represents first class, second figure
steerage: To China and Japan 256-466; to
Honolulu 2-616; to Pacific coast 145-1347; to
Singapore and Straits Settlements 20-11; to
Mediterranean Ports 41-5.
The month of June will find Filipino passenger
traffic on the decline, while homeward traffic
from China and Japan ports will be on the increase. This is due to vacationists endeavoring
to get away from the warm summer season.
Steerage traffic especially will be on the decline
due to heavy rains, making it possible for the
farmers to begin work on the coming rice crop.
This traffic will not be exceptionally heavy again
until after this season is over.


J. Harold Dollar, Vice-President of the Dollar
Steamship Line and Vice-President of the American Mail Line, arrived in Manila May 9 aboard
the S. S. President Taft and sailed by the same
liner en route to San Francisco May 11. Mr.
Dollar, accompanied by Mrs. Dollar and their
four children, has been on a three months’ inspection trip of Oriental branches.


W. S. Jones, Claim Agent, The Robert Dollar
Co., Manila, announced the arrival of an 8-172
pound boy at his home on May 28. Mr. Jones
celebrated the occasion with a bountiful supply
of smokes.


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig S von Knobelsdorff
Agents


90 Rosario, Manila


Phone 22324


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Junc, 1328


  


25


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers
the Manila hemp market for the month of
May with statistics up
to and including June
3rd, 1929.
U. S. Grades:—The
New York market at
the beginning of the
month was weak with
importers asking: D,
14-3/4 cents; E, 14
cents; F, 12-1,8 cents;
AWNG, 8 cents; I, 11 cents;
J1, 9-148 cents; Si,
11-548 cents; $2, 10-348 cents; S3, 9 cents.
The first half of the month very, little business
was transacted and importers were extremely
anxious to do business. Buyers, however, continued to hold off expecting lower prices and
quotations dropped to: D, 13 cents; E, 12-344
cents; F, 11-374 cents; G, 7-748 cents; I, 10-
7,8 cents; J1, 9-1/4 cents; $1, 11-548 cents;
S2, 10-348 cents; S3, 9 cents. Toward the end
of the month manufacturers purchase a fair
amount of hemp but confined their buying almost entirely to the medium and lower grades.
As a result, the market closed with the tone
steady to firm with importers quoting: D, 14-1/2
cents; E, 13 cents; F 12 centsG, 8-1/2 cents;
I, 11-3/4 cents; J1, 10 cents; Sr, 11-578 cents;
$2, 10-1/2 cents; $3, 8-548 cents.
In Manila the market for the better grades
was very dull at the beginning of the month with
shippers not at all anxious to buy. Dealers
were storing what hemp they could hold and the
nominal market was: D, P34, E, ₱30.50; F.
P36.30; G. ₱16.50, 1, P24, J1, ₱19.50; 8-
P25.50; 82, P23; 83,₱18.' There was very
little change by the middle of the month. High
(PA(S HAG (OCHHEO WHHO OHIO OILWO Ol THO


lower grades had advanced slightly. Shippers
were buying at: D, P32; E, ₱30; F, ₱26.50;
G, ₱16.75;1, P24; 51, ₱i9.75; s1, P25.50;
S2, P23; 83, ₱18. By the end of the month
the market was fairly firm and the lower grades
had advanced considerably. The high grades,
however, continued to decline Practically ail
shippers were buvers at: D, P30.50; E, P29.
F, P27; G, ₱17.75: 1I, P25; J1, P21; S1, P26;
$2. P24; 83, ₱18.50.
U. K. Grades:—London dealers were out of
the market the first of the month but importers
were not pressing sales. The market was fairly
steady with importers offering at: J2, 236.10;
K, 231.5; Ll, $31.10; L2, 229; MI, 229; M2,
E25; DL, #26; DM, E23. During the first
week of the month there was a fair amount of
business and prices advanced but toward the
middle of the month the market quieted down
and shippers’ asking prices were: J2, 237; K,
232.10, L1, 232.10; L2, 230.10: Mi, 230.10;
M2, 225.10, DL, E26.5; DM, E23. During the
last half of the month business was irregular but
shippers continued firm in their ideas and at the
close prices were: J2, 238.10; K, E34; L1, 234;
L2, E32; MI, E32; M2, 227; DL, 226.15; DM,
#23.10; with a fair amount of business being
done.
On the first of the month the market in Manila for U. K. grades was quiet with neither
buyers nor sellers showing any interest. Nominal quotations were: J2, ₱16.25; K, Pl4;
LI, ₱14; L2, P12.25; MI, ₱12.25; M2, ₱10.75,
DL, ₱11, DM, P9.50; By the middle of the
month there was a better undertone and exporters were buying at: J2, ₱17; K, ₱14.50; Ll,
₱14.75; L2, ₱12.75; MI, ₱13; M2, Pil; DL.
PI1- DM, ₱9.50. The market continued
steady throughout the last half of the month
and closed with buyers paying: J2, ₱17.75;
K, ₱15; L1, ₱15- L2, ₱13.25; MI, ₱13.50;
M2, ₱1125 DL, ₱1125; Dil, Flo.
Japan:—This market took a fair amount of
hemp during May and was interested in the
better U. K. qualities. They also showed some
interest in Y3. They are still carrying a surplus
stock so we will hardly see an active market for



Leyte will undoubtedly keep up the production
of damaged hemp which will prevent Y3 from
making any material gain.
Maguey:—Cebu Maguey continues in full
production. The market was extremely quiet
during the first half of the month but toward the
end prices advanced about Fl a picul on the
average. The Manila Maguey season is about
over. The heavy buying by local manufacturers ran the price beyond the value of Cebu
Maguey and consequently shippers were unable
to market their purchases so buying was more
or less restricted. Local speculators in Ilocos
Norte and Ilocos Sur have been more active
than usual this season and it is estimated not
less than 25,000 piculs will remain in store
during the rainy season. It is understood the
local mills have purchased sufficient stocks to
carry them over until December when shipping
again opens.
Production:—Receipts continue heavy and
the estimate for the first half of June is 56,000
bales. We continue to get reports from the
provinces that production is falling off and very
little hemp is being offered for sale but notwithstanding this, the hemp keeps right on
arriving at market. The total for the five
months is 150,000 Bales ahead of last vear.
Stocks, however, show an increase of only 57,000
Bs. which is not overly heavy.
Freight Rates:—There is no change in the
Ocean rates on hemp. Effective June 15th, 1929,
the inland rail rates from Pacific Coast Ports
to Mississippi Valley points was reduced from
$0.85 Gold per 100 lbs. to $0.75 Gold per 100
lbs. The trans-Continental rate from Pacific
Coast Ports to Eastern territory remains unchanged
Statistics:—The figures below are for the
period ending June 3rd, 1929:
1929 1928


Manila Hemp
On hand January 1st....
Receipts to date........


Bales
Bales
158,452 139,632
750,811 596,620
900,263 736,252


AVERICANN MAIL ERINE
BOLLARSEAMSHA LANNE


COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILINGONCE A
WEEK


The "President”' Liners Offer
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


TO SAN FRANCISCO
AND
LOS ANGELES
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE FRIDAYS
24 Calle David


ROUND THE WORLD


President Adams -
President Harrison
President Johnson
President Monroe
President Wilson -
President Van Buren
Sailings every fortnight


June 19
July 3
July 17
July 31
Aug. 14
Aug. 28


MANILA


VICTORIA
AND
SEATTLE
via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS
Telephone No. 2-24-41


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


26


  OF COMMERCE


JOURNAD





REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
BY RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


The less May market
opened with buyers 'of
USs TT at 3,8% premium but as the Banks
cash positions improved
rates gradually strengthened until by the middle of the month there
were buyers at 548%
premium and sellers at
748% premium. The
firmness became more
pronounced and at the
lmonth end Banks were
purchasers of USs TT.
ready and forward at 3,4% premium and sellers


at 1-1/8% premium. At the close settlements
were being made on the basis of 144% premium
for on demand credit bills and 7,8% discount
for 60 des D'P bills.
The following purchases of telegraphic transfers have been made from the Insular Treasurer
since last report:
Week ending April 20th.. $25,000
Period from April 20 to May
Nil
18th......... . . . . . . . . . . .
The Sterling market opened with buyers of
TT at 2,-578 and sellers at 2,-1 2 and closed
with Banks offering to buy at 2,-9.16 and to
sell at 2,-7,16.
The New York-London cross-rate closed on
April 30th at 485 5416, was high for May on
the first of the month at 485 11, 32, receded to
a low of 484 7.'8 on May 23rd and closed at the
month end at 485. Sterling has not shown the
usual upward seasonal trend, owing to the
heavy remittances of Sterling funds to New
York where advantage can be taken of the high
interest rates prevailing.
London Bar Silver was quoted at 25-3,16
ready and forward on April 30th, touched a
high of 25-1,2 ready and 25-9 16 forward on
May 7th and reached a low of 24-5,S ready and
24-11,16 forward on the last three days of the


month.
The closing quotation for New York Bar
Silver on April 30th was 54-344. The rate
reached its peak for May at 55 on the 7th of the
month, receded to a low of 53-1,8 on May 28th
and closed at 53-1/4.
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on May 31st:
Paris, 12.45; Madrid, 144 344; Singapore, 114-
1,2; Japan,90 348; Shanghai, 83 144; Hongkong, 93 1,8; India, 135 3,4; Java, 123.


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Eddition


Many totals are the
largest for that month
since 1918 with the one
exception of 1923 when
May sales excceded this
month’s total by only
P239. The total for
1919 (the best vear of
which we have record),
January to May inclusive was P8,534,007.
The total for the same
month this vear is
₱9,857,458 which beats
the record by P323,361.
Sales City of Manila
April, 1929 May, 1929
₱ $49,388 ₱ 117387
341,500
907,117
47078
128,500
36133
203,002
450,029
120,242
15,100
20,367 13,251
40,500
70000
E
65,648
28040
113,509
145,334
16,307
20,441
2,570
2,550
21,823


VAMEAG PIANIS


THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz Nuera 1
Director, Rice Producers' Association


Prices since the last
report have stiffened
for both palay and rice,
the former now bringing from P3.70 to P4.20
S 
according to class and
the latter from P8.30
to P9.30 according tograde-at buying points.
There was a reduced
volume of palay moved
to market over the railMM
road during the month
but this was due in
part to lack of immediate demand, which came of the slow movement
of export crops. We can confidently expect
the latter movement to accelerate as prices
seem to remain about the same with little chance
of upward trends.
In this connection we see that purchasing
power has something to do with the price of rice;
however, as pointed out, this will be remedied
shortly, as consuming stocks are low at centers
devoted to export crops whose credit has been
stretched. A small market flurry occurred this
month by the throwing on the market of some
9,000 sacks of rice known as the Aparri brand
from coarse Ilocano palay. This was sold at
₱7.80 Manila as against its equivalent, No. 3
at P8.20. It did not affect the general market
at all.
Preparations are under way for the new crop.
Climatic conditions to the present are favorable.
Invisible stocks are reported to be less than


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


ORLD
IDE.
IRELESS
RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


9 PLAZA MORAGA


Phones:


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Sta. Cruz..
Binondo....
San Nicolas.
Tondo......
Sampaloc...
San Miguel.
Quiapo......
Intramuros..
Ermita......
Malate......
Paco........
Sta. Ana....
Pandacan...
Sta. Mesa...


junic, 1349


  


27


normal, which is always the case when prices
are favorable.
There has been some more talk about establishing rice centrals and cooperative marketing
associations, but the small spread between palay
and rice (the prodifcers’ and consumers’ problem)
is so small that it would appear that any move
to improve such a state of affairs—in favor of
the producer—is doomed to failure from the
start. When spreads are abnormal between the
raw and manufactured product, there is reason
for cooperation, and on this count only. There
is no golden age for producers of such a vital
commodity. Their problem is to concentrate
on better yields and not to enter a cheap, efficient marketing business. As a matter of fact,
optimism, to exist, must have some sort of an
optimum to go by.' Cooperation, like the words
crisis and diversification can be parsed from
many angles.


incorporation of the first sugar central in Cagayan will probably curtail future tobacco planting
in a region which up to now has been almost exclusively devoted to tobacco.
Shipments abroad during May were as follows:
Raw leaf, stripped tobacco and


Kilos
scraps
192
Australia.............. . . . . . . . . .
1,505
China....................
27,098
Gibraltar................. . . . . . .
52,594
Hongkong.......... . . . . . . . . . . . .
11,si5
Japan..........................
North Atlantic (Europe).........
125,958
3,469
Straits Settlements..............
Tonkin............. . . . . . . . . . . .
111,375
United States............... ...
334,094
Total............. .. . . . . . . .
May 1928..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . 2,079,184


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporation


Copra.—The decline
in all markets for copra
still continues with no
improvement insight.
Local prices have been
cut approximately P1.00
per picul during May,
and while producers are
complaining that the
manufacture of copra
at present prices is not
profitable, it will certainly be necessary for
them to trade at even
lower prices before the end of the present vear
or permit their coconuts to rot. Copra arrivals
at Manila during the month of May were approximately 295,942 bags. We quote froin
latest cables:
Manila, buen corriente P8.50; arrival resecada
₱9.50 to P9.75; San Francisco, $.03-748; London, F. M. M., in bags, C19,/1570.
Coconut Oil.—The U. S. market for this item
during May was wholly a buyer’s market and
notwithstanding the lack of heavy selling pressure prices dropped an additional 1,2 to 5 8
cents per pound. As a result of heavy supplies
of coconut oil as well as competing fats and oils,
we hold very little hope for any material improvement in the coconut oil market for the
balance of the year. Latest cables follow:
San Francisco, $.06 348 to $.06-142 f. o. b.
tank cars; New York, $.06-344 c. i. f.; London,
no quotations.
Copra Cake.—As a result of general market
weakness in grains and other feeding stuffs, the
continental copra cake market for the month of
May has been extremely dull with a further reduction in prices. At this writing there is practically no demand from Hamburg and only small
inquiry from Scandinavian ports at #7,5/0 to
E7/10/0, dependent upon freight.. Latest quotations follow:
Hamburg, dull, E74070 nominal; Scandinavian ports, #7/5J0 to E7,1070; San Francisco,
Meal, $32.50 per ton of 2000 Ibs. nominal. June
4, 1929.


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


Raw leaf:—The market in tobacco for local
consumption continues quiet. Consignments
abroad during May registered a considerable
slump due to the fact that nothing was shipped
to European regies. Present estimates of the
1929 crop in Cagayan and Isabela anticipate
a smaller quantity than last year. The recent


Cigars:—The unsatisfactory condition of the
United States market for Philippine cigars
remains unchanged, with no improvement in
sight. Comparative figures for shipments to
the United States are as follows:
May 1929.... about.......... 11,700,000
April 1929.................... 9,738,331
May 1928. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 12,012,290


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By L. ARCADIO
Acting Traffie Manager, Manila
Railroad Company.


The following commodities were received in
Manila April 26, 1929 to May 25, 1929, both
inclusive, via Manila Railroad:


April


May


Rice, cavans.........


234,250


136,687


Sugar, piculs.........


315,784


139,328


Tobacco, bales........


4,560


13,140


Copra, piculs.........


115,550


130,800


Coconuts........ . . ...


. 2,421,650


2,533,300


Lumber, B. F.......
Desiccated coconuts,


357,750


453,600


caseS.............


15,170


14,432


Then there’s the Scotch couple who, expecting the stock, moved into the coun ry, where
there is R. F. D.


Hark to Maryanna Jones,
Her life was full of terrors,
An old maid born, an old maid died—
No hits, no runs, no errors.
—Life.


“North
Coast
Limited”
A
GIAN
"Finest”
“the finest train in the wvorld and I have
traveled on all that are worth talking
about”—Samuel Hopkins Adams,
Auburn, N. Y.
“Best””
“equipment the very best, service splendid—a wonderful train"—N. A. Peterson, San Francisco.
TOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between
IN the North Pacific Coast and Chicago! Leaves
Auy
Seattle at 11:00 A. M. for all the principal cities of
W
the United States. Iwo days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel is its
diner service. New-style Observation-Club car with deep, restful
lounge—cushioned chairs—library—writing corner—club rooms—
showers—and maid and valet service.
The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos.
Cook &: Son, Shanghai Commercial Gu Savings Bank, or any transPacific steamship company willgladly furnish additional information.


Oswald Crawiord, G. A.
1 Granville Street
Vancouver, B. C.


R. J. Tozer. A. G. P. A.
o L. C. Smith Blda.
Senttle, Waah., U. S. A.


E. E. Blackwood, G. 4
912 Government Strose
Victoria, B. C.


NorthernPacificRailway


(352)


"First of the Northern Transcontinentala"


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


23


  


-


MAY SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


New York Market:—
The improvement in the
American sugar market in the latter part
of April was not long
2
maintained, since on
the first day of May an
abrupt fall in prices was
recorded from 1-15/16
cents c. and f. for Cubas, equivalent to 3.71
cents l. t. for P. I. centrifugals in the fourth
A
 N
week of the preceding
month to 1-27,432 cents
c. and f. (3.61 cents l. t.) on May 1st when 2,000
tons of Philippine centrifugals were sold and resold by the buyers at the same price the following day. The first week of the month under
review was characterized by depression and
anxiety to sell, in consequence of which prices
sagged and the quotation for the second week was
1-13,16 cents c. and f. (3.58 cents 1. t.), at which
price there were sellers but no buyers for Philippine centrifugals. On the 9th however, sales
of 10,000 tons of P. I. centrifugals were effected
at 3.58 cents I. t., but were resold by the buyers
at the same price within the same week. The
weakness of the market was ascribed to the
European bears forcing sales, and the tired bulls
disappointed with the delay in the deliberations
over the tariff legislation in the U. S. Congress.
An improvement became evident in the third
week when small sales of Cubas were made to
refiners at 1-27432 cents c. and f. (3.61 cents
l. t.), and 2,000 tons of P. I. sugar for June-July
shipment at 3.72 cents I. t. It was noted that
speculators showed more disposition to buy
P. I. sugar regardless of the Sugar Exchange. It
was stated that the only hope for an improvement was in a rally in sympathy with tariff legislation; otherwise, the sugar market was very
much influenced by large visible supplies. Most
of the available warehouse space in Eastern
ports were filled with sugar bought by speculators. Prices were fluctuating in the latter
part of the third week, ranging from 1-13J16
cents c. and f. (3.58 cents 1. t.) to 3.68 cents
l. t., at which price 2,000 tons May-June shipment of P. I. sugar were effected at 1-25732
cents c. and f. (3.55 cents I. t.), although P. I.
sugar was available at 3.52 cents 1. t. There
were sellers but no buyers for Cubas at 1-25432
cents c. and f. (3.55 cents l. t.), which situation
was produced not by price consideration but by
the slack demand by refiners who had large
supplies on hand. On the 24th however, there
were large transactions at 1-13/16 cents c. and f.
(3.58 cents 1. t.) owing to the rumor that the
sliding scale was killed by the House of Representatives. In the latter part of the month,
there were no new developments. Willett &
Gray expressed the opinion that no alteration
was likely in import duty on sugar for the current vear. The month under review closed dull,
and Czarnikow resold 10,000 tons at 3.52 cents
I. t. One important factor influencing the market
was the extent of available stocks in Cuba and
the United States estimated at 3,870,000 tons.
The visible stocks in the U. K., U. S., Cuba
and European statistical countries at the end of
May were 6,062,000 tons as compared with
5,385,000 tons last year and 5,135,000 tons in
1927.
Futures:—Quotations on the New York Exchange during May fluctuated as follows:


1929


High


Low


Latest


May..-----


---- 1.90


1.67


1.67


July.------


--- 1.96


171


1.7


September.-.--


--- 1.98


1.80


1.80


December---


--- 2.04


18.7


1.87


1930


January..---


--- 2.06 1.88


1.88


March----


---. 2.11


1.94


1.94


May..-------


- 2.06


2.01


2.01


Philippine Sales:—During the month under
review, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the
Atlantic Coast—afloats, near arrivals, and for
future deliveries—amounted to 30,400 tons at


prices ranging from 3.52 cents to 3.72 cents I. t.
as compared with sales amounting to 40,000
tons during the same period last year at prices
ranging from 4.30 cents to 4.60 cents landed
terms.
Europe:—The first estimates issued by the
two leading statisticians of Europe place the
beet sowings in Europe including Russia for
1929-30 at from 2,610,000 to 2,637,000 hectares
as compared with the beet area of 2,618,955 for
1928-29 (F. O. Licht’s). It is noteworthy that
the area estimated for 1929-30 is less than the
sowings last year. It is stated moreover that
in consequence of the delay in the beet sowings
in most of the countries in Europe, the estimates
of this year’s European acreage are subject to
alterations which may bring down the figures
materially.
At the meeting of the Economic Committee
of the League of Nations held in Geneva between
April 4th and 6th, it was resolved by the Committee to undertake the following:
To undertake a thorough study ef all factors and measures influencing the production and consumption of sugar;
2. To prepare a report to the Council, in order
that the latter may be able to judge whether
concerted international action could further
the solution of the problems under consideration.
The two principal measures which appeared
to enlist the attention of the majority of the
sugar experts who attended the meeting were
as follows:
a. The stabilization of production during a
period of three or four years;
b. The making of efforts to increase the consumption of sugar.
Local Market:—In sympathy with the American sugar market, the local centrifugal market
was weak, with quotations at the beginning of
the month at from P8.75 to P9.00 per picul
down to P8.00 per picul at the close of the
month. The muscovado market was likewise
weak with quotations ranging from P4.75 to
P6.00 per picul for No. 3. Manilas were quoted
at P5.25 and Iloilos at P6.00 for No. 3.
Crop Prospects:—Due to the unusually favorable weather conditions, coupled with the conversion of muscovado sugar into centrifugals
in districts where muscovado mills have been


OX Y GEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure


HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hydrogen
99.8% pure


ACETYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes


WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops


BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
Electric StorSUROR
age Batteries
Phiippine Acetyiene Co.
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.


replaced by Centrals, the production e
hilipvil
pine centrifugal sugar for the 192
be larger than the 1927-28 crop. Th
of the Centrals have already finish
and although there are a few large
grinding, it is not likely that the tota
of Philippine centrifugals will exo
metric tons. There will be
22,000 tons of muscovado suga
The result of the delibera
and Means Committee ofU. S. Tariff, increasing the pr
WContinued on page


Heres h
get Man


Genuine


Manila


Hand Made


Long Filler
Cigars are


obtainable


in your city


or nearby


List of


Distribut
furnished
upon
request


to—


C. A. Be
Philippine T
Agent
15 William
New York Ci
or


Collector of Ir
Manila,


Manilas
satisfy your t


RN.
IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MEN
INV
4l
ER


June, 1929


  


29


Franciscans in the Bisayan Islands


We have journeyed with the mission-founding fathers of the Franciscan order throughout
Luzon, and now gb with them into the Bisayan
islands: more lonely isolation, more fortitude
more devotion bent to the raising of substantial
temples of worship for the villages converted
to Christianity—villages which are soon to
become towns, and some of them important
ports and capitals of provinces. In the old
life, isolation is of primary significance; and all
the customs uphold it: they inculcate pride of
village, loyalty to villagers and the village
chieftain, and encourage mating and marriage
within the village for the rearing of warriors
in its defense. Polygamy plays its part, and
concubinage. Whatever conduces to the strength
of the village, is good; and the gods, of
course, sanction it. Let us not condemn, rather
let us understand: blessed will be that day when
every eye reaches the printed page unblinded by
any prejudice whatever; yea, and every hand so
writes. Truth is, what early tribes did in the
Philippines for preservation against nature and
other enemies, and what isolated tribes do now
to the same end, is of a piece with what tribes
did elsewhere and merely repeats a familiar
chapter in the story of all mankind.
Far from being a source of embarrassment,
this should be a source of pride and carefully
traced as the more remote ramifications of an
heroic heritage. It is remote, and we have
wandered in making it cause for comment.
Anyway, Christianity was to erect the villages
into towns. The new priest had no quarrel
with his fellows in neighboring villages, they
were all teaching identical forms of worship
of the same god. They were equally arrayed
against the old gods. Their mystic practices
inspired no village hosts to nocturnal vengeance,
rather their worldly sense marshalled the vil.
lagers into companies making common defense
with similar forces from neighboring villages
against the Mohammedans who refused conversion, and the outlaws who departed to strongholds in the hills. Chieftains were restrained
from offensive forays and sanguinary reprisals
by their awe of the new faith, which taught that
such was sin; relinquishing the absolute authority
they exercised in their own right over their
villages, they were proud to become village
mayors, gobernadorcillos under the powerful
sovereignty of Spain. They were more commonly brought to this decision by the exhortations of the friar, exposed unarmed to their
mercy, than by the superior arms of the Spanish
soldier.
Thus it was that villages could become towns,
and towns might to be formed into districts
and provinces the governments of which were
responsible to Manila. We have here something
Christianity did for the Philippines, sometimes
by spiritual power alone, sometimes in alliance
with the arms of Philip III. Nor is it strange
at all that the Philippines cost Spain the least
blood of any of her colonies: they are the only
one she established in the orient, birthplace of
Christianity; this is a mystic religion, and to a
people who are mystics, the Filipinos, it was
very readily acceptable. They could not penetrate its mysteries. Who can? But they made
nothing of believing them so thoroughly as to
act on that belief.
The friars beheld their labors bearing abundant
fruits, so loyally the cross was borne aloft by the
converted people. On they went then, replacing thatch chapels with substantial churches,
guarding exposed shores with armed watchtowers, opening roads to neighboring settlements
for easier communication and succor in time of
need. No architects, they still built well.
Their work still stands; only half in ruins, maybe
it will hold together until a revival of faith
repairs it. If people are to believe, and few
philosophers have argued otherwise, then what a
splendor upon the people would come of falling
to and saving the religious edifices the friars
and their penniless flocks built in centuries past.
Perhaps fifty years remain in which to see a
change from the present indifference—the
walls and foundations of the churches are solid
enough to wait.


Materials utilized for these churches, a wonder
of the modern world, vary with their availability.
They are of stone wherever stone was to be
found; they are of brick where stone was distang
but clay was suitable; and failing both stone and
brick, hardwood was made to serve. There is
evidence enough that Chinese craftsmen were
employed, who taught their trades to native
workmen. Chinese ideas of tool-making were
also borrowed: the friars introduced the modern
crafts into the islands, and commerce came of
their indefatigability.
In turning from Luzon to the Bisavas, Father
Huerta speaks very briefly of Cebu: “The
bishopric of Cebu was established in 1595 and
includes Cebu island, where is found the city
(Cebu) of the holy name of Jesus, the bishop’s
residence, and Samar, Leyte, Panay, Negros,
Bohol, Paragua (Palawan), Mindanao, Basilan
and Jolo, with many others of minor note, and


(o NTER America at Seattle via
Othe short Trans-Pacificroute—
or at San Francisco. Then travel
east from Portland or Seattle to
Chicago on the Oriental Limited
in 68 hours. Enjoy the kind of
service you’d expect only of a fine
hotel—yet pay no extra fare! Enjoy 1200 miles of clean, cinderless,
scenictravel behind either oil-burning or electriclocomotives—60miles
of it along Glacier National Park.


the Marianas islands. These islands are all
south of Luzon and constitute various provinces,
of which the Franciscans administer the following:
"Island and Province of Samar.—This province
has always had two names, Ibabao for the
eastern part and Samar for the western, though
in official documents it is known only as Samar.
With the islands of Capul, Viri, Lauang, Catalaban, Homonjon, Soloan, Parasan, Buat, Dalupiri, and many others which are uninhabited,
it forms a single province ... It is about 35
leagues long and, at its widest part, some 14 or
15 leagues across. The surface is extremely
broken but the mountains present no especially
elevated peak; only Mount Capotoan stands
much above the rest.
There is an abundance of woods of every
variety, a diversity of palms, rattans, bamboos,
fruits, edible roots, and a tree whose leaves, roots,
bark and every part vield the equivalent of
garlic, being quite equal to it as a condiment in
food. (Happy circumstance for the nostaligic


Enroute see the illuminated New
Cascade Tunnel, longest tunnel in
the Western Hemisphere—8 miles
through the Cascade Mountains
—shortening the distance across
America on the Great Northern
Railway. And at Chicago make
connections withfast deluxetrains
for Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburgh,
Philadelphia, New York, Boston,
Washington, D. C., and other
American cities.


CLEAN. CINDERLESS, LUXURIOUS, SCENIC ROUTE


Apply to Tourist Agencies or Trans-Pacific
Steamship Ydnes or write
J. Wesley Young, Gen’l Agent, Pass’r ept., 1205 4th Ave., Seattle, Wash.
A. H. Hebb, Agent, ol6 Government St., Victoria, B. C.
Edw. A. Dye. Gen'l Agent, 607 Hastings St., Vancouver, B. C.
C. A. Gerken, Gen’l Agent, 1009 Hearst Bldg., San Francisco, Cal.
M. J. Costello, West. Traf. Mgr., Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hillrail


A Dependable Railway


The
AEIIA


EIIVITPED


Across America


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERIISENENIS PIEASE MENTON TRE ANERICAN CRAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


30


  


June, 1929


T5e
E
SIOE


mrinaminaninininuniniganimuiuil


For


Commercial Printing is a silent but


Comfort &


powerful messenger, and your letter

heads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build


—OR office and street wear this
model is a favorite with most


up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.


Close personal attention to every phase


men. Roomy, neat, well designed


of a printed job is an invariable feature


and made of fine materials through

of McCullough Service, and our repu

out. See them at any HIKE


tation for producing good printing


store. Wear a pair for comfort.


merits your patronage.


HIKE SHOE FACTORY


MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


STYLE CREATORS
286 SAN MARCELINO
MANILA, P I.


friar!) Coal also abounds, and wild hogs and
deer, with a multitude of birds and monkeys
of divers varieties. The islands’ valleys, many
of them fertilized by powerful rivers, are susceptible of producing every variety of crops,
although, because the interior is inhabited by
infidels, only the lowlands along the shores are
cultivated. And these only on a small scale,
because the indolence of the inhabitants is more
than satisfied with a little rice, coconut oil,
camote (yams), palauan and abaca, the
only products produced on the island to this
day (1865), and even this due to the zeal of the
religious, especially the abaca (Manila hemp)
which within a few years will have made admirable progress.
“Capes and secure ports plentifully indent the
coast, which vields game fish, shells, pearls,
amber and a hundred other singular products
in abundance. (And no wonder, then, the
indolence of the people: remarkable, rather,
their energy to cultivate the soil at all).
“It is also worthy of note that each year at
the change of the monsoon in September or
October, remarkably high water is experienced
on the eastern and northern shores, the natives
calling it dolo. This great tide, or inundation,
is often aggravated by strong winds and even
baguios (a fact of which Colonel Stimson is also
now aware), and at times, though not often,
it comes without wind. It does not always
come at the same point, but at times encroaches
upon Guiguan, at the south, and is dispersed
toward Leyte and Cebu; in which case it is less
dangerous, because it encounters wide seas.
At other times it makes for Lanang and Borongan, or, turning more to the northward, Tubig,
Oras, Paric, Palapat; and sometimes it pours
through San Bernardino strait, endangering
Catarman, Calbayog, and all the villages on the
western coast. So overwhelming is the volume
of water it brings that it ordinarily rises 60 to 70
feet above the usual tide; for this reason the
inhabitants are compelled to resort to row boats
and rafts and retire to the hills. Considerable
damage is caused to the fields and towns, and
even to people careless enough to be caught in the
flood, which, however, lasts but a single tide.


M an a sanag kdg ta tlae nal
of the Jesuits, who administered it spiritually
from 1596, when they first raised the cross there,
until 1768; at which time, and by order of the
superior government, its administration was


A gate in
t he old
walls of
Manila—
the postern
gate.


In Spanish times this gate was for governors and archbishops only
entrusted to our province of St. George, the
Great, possession being taken October 17 of
that vear, of the pueblos making up the province,
which were Catbalogan, Paranas, Umauas,
Borongan, Sulat, Tubig, Catubig, Palapat,
Catarman, Capul and Banhajon, which with
numerous settlements counted only 5,299 tributos (families paying tribute) and 23,802 inhabitants. But now the saie province comprises
the following towns.”
Here Father Huerta proceeds to list the towns
of Samar with some details concerning each,
his practice throughout his summary of the


Franciscan chronicles.
Catbalogan—On the west coast; climate is hot
but healthful—provincial capital. Coastal communications only, and mails irregular. Church
built by the Jesuits, burned in 1760; repaired
by Fr. Felix Carrion in 1814, and further improvements by Fr. Martin de Yepes in 1840.
Patron, St. Bartholomew. “In 1769 our religious
established an infirmary here, which was originally put in the charge of a lay brother, Fr.
Jose de Jesus Maria. It no longer exists, and I
am ignorant of what may have occurred to cause
the abandonment of such a useful establishment.”


May Sugar Review
(Concluded from page 28)
cents per lb. to 3.00 cents, meaning that Cuba
would pay 2.40 cents as duty instead of 1.7648
cents per lb. as at present, was received by Philippine sugar men with equanimity. The tariff
bill approved by the House is not discriminatory
against Philippine sugar, as was proposed by
Representative Timberlake. It is rumored
that the Senate will try to restrict importation
of Philippine sugar; if they fail in their efforts,
there will be no change in the present tariff.
Philippine Exports:—Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for the 1928-29 crop from November 1, 1928, to May 31, 1929, amounted to
380,182 metric tons, segregated as follows:
Metrie Tons
Centrifugals--- 361,462
12,795
Muscovados.------
Refined.---------------- 3,921
Total................. 380,182
Jara Market:—The Java market was dull and
although spot quotations had improved slightly,
June-July—August delivery quotations were
unchanged. The following are the latest quotations;


Superiors—


Spot.----------


---Gs. 15-1 8—


₱5.12


June...


13
----


7.02


July—August.-


--.-- " 13-34—


6.85


Lead Sugar—


6.50


SpOt.-------


..--. " 12


Junc...-


-... " 11238-


6.18


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Junc, 1929


  


31


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


March, 1929


March, 1928


Monthly average for 12 months
ending March, 1929


Quantity


Value


5


Quantity


VN


3


Quantity


Value


5


nA


89,929,72
₱14,096,359
 *


79,877,251 ₱12,736,57


2


47,641,204 I


 7,870,01


30.0


MAnD..


19,321,758



5,164,144


16,346,36


2,23


.7
12


15,063,987


13,343
4


.9


Coconut Oll..


17,184,755



5,613,


7,014,937


,381,870


13,047,159


4,274,69


OB


13,614,531
. . .. * *


2,532,67


7,550,7


3,277,043


af:


20,137,804


4,02


B


Cigars (Number)............................


15,449,286
*... ....


19,094,748


317,15


18,206,434


M


Embroidery....


* ...........


644,52


0,2





Magusy.


1,492,452
*.......


B


1,562,026


312,:
550,938


1,405,060


A


Leaf Tobacco....
*  * ......................


243,36
*........


45


255,010


1,685,494


7,142


Desiccated and Shredded Coconut.....................


2,775,86
*


RA


2.-


,326,62


483,006


1,668,244


619,38


Hats
Number)..
...................


1126,4
* . .......


534,301


10


489,408


36,127


64,201


2.3


Lumber (Cubic Meter).................. . . . . ..


14,12
* . * * .....


143,90


17


76,314


4,194


45


opra Meal.....


10,757,647
*. ...... . * *


763,81


.9


4,258,41


27


7,567,100


553,87:


Cordage....



765,136
* *.......


436,456


1.0


667,652


350


339,076


3o1
02


Knotted Abaca.
 * ........................



65,766
......


237,17a


.4


11,58


158





38,526


7
67872


Pearl Buttons (
* .........................


54,277
*.......


49,204


I


69,385


2,87


O


64,513


Canton (low grade cordage fiber).......................


441,869
...


6.052


543,961


26,7


o


583,271


106,06


All Other Products........





1,305,224


3.5


788,932


2


826,272


3.0


Total Domestic Products...............................


₱35,342,378
..... *..


99. 3


P29,253,051


99.5


TACAL OINA


99.6


United States Products...............................





65,940


24


117,142


0.2


Foreign Products......................................


*.


69,189


0.2


17,389


0.1


34,674


O.1


" "    


P35,677,807



100 0


P29,390,681


100 0


P26,842,390


100 0


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


Monthly average for
March, 1929
March, 1928
Articles
12 months ending
March, 1929.


Value


25


Value


7


VAN 


75


Cotton Cloths.........


T EMANO


14.4


₱ 3,411,185


151


₱ 3,531,579


15.9


Other Cotton Goods....


935,531


4.5


1,087,915


.4


1,178,715


5.2


Iron and Steel, Except


Machinery..........


1,750,698


8.0


892
2,5
P2


9.3


1,938,887


8.6


Rice..
.......


772,706


0,801


577,701


2
5


Wheat
L.


1,487,000


1,165,350


86,41


3.


Machinery and Parts of..


613,469


.9


L,1


.8


1.457,6


Dairy Products.........


88


2.0


636,56


Gasoline...............


A


Silk Goods.............


720,311


3.4


686,36
764,80


Automobiles.



936


P


/egetable Fiber Goods..


690,504


3.2


Meat Products.........


452,257





516,81


Illuminating Oil.......


367,98


eno
285


.2


296.00


Fish and Fish Products..


403,564


1.8


o75


370,2-


Crude Oil..............


1,886


0.5


37,843
5



i


197,2






Coal.......


678,217


3.2


730,878


2.9


403,572


1.8


Chemicals,
es, Drugs,


te
......


320,098


434,143


403,07


Fertilizers..............


23,99


4.2


403,971


2


302,704


14


Vegetable......
* 


388,184


1.8


359,848


373,381





Paper Goods, Except


Book
.


413,597


1.9


572,071


2.3


424,457


1.9


Tobacco and Manufac

tures of..


581,696


.6


523,238


2.1


546,226


2.2


Electrical Machinery..


318,322


4


405,682


383,395


1.7


Books and Other Printed


Matters.....


245,323


147,721


212,148


0.9


Cars and Carriages, Ex

cept Autos..



149,105


76,413


202,185


Automobile Tires.......


185,911


22


9,658


3 and Nuts........


7,566


TIenoa


en Goods..........


115,38


0.5


119,048


H


Leather Goods.......


213,66


241,726


..1


Shoes and Other Footware


151,023


EI


29,097


O.5


Coffee .

u


123,319


0.5


167,489


156,423


7


Except
Breads


Wheat Flour..........


198,722


O


213,245


0.8


180,760


Eggs...
*


260,322


1.2


260,465


1.0


195,183


38


P
"and Other
tumel


Toilet Goods.........


166,471


O.


140,700


135,856


Lubricating Oil........


94,470


0.4


274,175


..I


194,274


35


Cacao Manufactures, Ex

cept Candy...
 *..


161,196


179,524


143,375


1.6


Glass and Glasswar
e....


149,405


83


159,898


Ba


171,036


0.8


Paints, Pigments, Var

nish, Etc....


106,318


191,498


155,580


trately listed.
Oils not s


157,549


94


233,067


63


152,112


53


Earthern
Stones and


Chinaware..


137,705


0.6


104,176


122,804





Automobile Ace


115,966


84


153,882


O.7


Diamond and Other Pre

cious Stones Unset..


121,925


0.5


149,184


123,171


0.5


Wood, Bamboo, Reed,


Rattan...
 *


75,926


0.3


111,323


118,682


0.5


India Rubber Goods....


85,97


0.4


125,873


63


116,060


0.5





0
216,0


O


7,956


180,42


Matches............. ..


51


94,213


0.4


31,994


O


Sattle.................


2


O.1


8,458


O


Explosives.............


2,559


70,149


0.3


39,423


0.1


Cement................


84,092


.4


110,147


89,196


.4


Sugar and Molasses.....


42,991


2


115,364


0.4


84,760


0.4


Motion Picture Films....


20,37


.1


24,243


O.1


2,7


0.2


All Other Imports......


2,256,274


10 2


1.883,646


7.5


2,025,020


9.2


Total..........


₱22,098,701


100.0 P24,929,796


100.0


₱22,788,577


100 0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average fol
months ending
March, 1928
Ports
March, 1929
Maich, 1929.


Value
76
VAN
Value
76
20


66..
₱37,653,724 69.6 P32,989,325
.... P39,439,498 68.
Manila..........
6,895,069 13.9
8.789,594 15.3
,129,940 14.9
loilo..........
6,401,801
6,538,567
1.3 5,666,444 10.
Cebu..................
1

597,5.
569,76
Zamboanga...........
584,13
0,139
4
60,955
2,455
Jolo..
1,311,08
836,008 3.
1,510,654
Davao...........
729,025 1.3 1,216,793 2.6
1.0
545,955
Legaspl................


Total.: ₱57,776,208 100 0 P54,320,509 100 0 P49,631,050 100 O


CARRYING TRADE


IMPORTS


Nationality of Vessels


March, 1929


Monthly average for
2 months ending
March, 1928
March, 1929..


Value


5


VN 


7


Value


5


American..............


₱ 9,612,205


₱11,434,579


45.9


TOMAIN


British................


4,900,570


1


8,375,730


3.6


7,739,03:


Japanese...............


1,431,470


6.4


1,270,782


945,7.


utel...


1,011,551


4.5


1,017,592


42


652,701


German................


2,176,676


9.9


1,698,847


6


44,943


Vorwegian............


1,406,840


6.4


79,28


1.2


00,037


Philippine.............


36,011


0.2


los,866


O.


27,371


panish................


181,757


.8


118,960


.5


156,01


hinese.........


70


0.3


36,071


0.2


61,681


o


Swedish................


3,297


82,693


0.4


14
46:


Dannish...............


670,708


3.0


92,37


0.2


Csechoslovak..........


1,340


French................


56,27


O.)


By Freight........... . .


P21,503,964


3


P24,423,410


97.6


₱22,172,606


Tt


By Mail...............


594,737


 7


506,418


2.4


615,971
SN


2.5


TOtal.


P22,098.701


100 0 P24,929,828


100 0


P22,788,577


100. 0


EXPORTS


Monthly average for
12 months ending
Nationality of Vessels
March, 1929
March, 1928
March, 1929.


Value
Value
Value
2
9
75


American.............. ₱15,483,510 44.0 ₱11,643,189 39.0 ₱12,533,143 47.
28.6
9,031,022 30.3
8,349,364 23.6
7,547,85
British.................
2,600,350
14.8
5,232,56
2,566,056
Japanese............. . .
914.796 3.
962,353
1,044,60.
3.2
2.*
erman................
1,376,571 4.8
694,547
364,133 0.9
Norwegian.............
128,012
.2
6
101,26
1
468,3
Spanish................
2
816,58
.9
812,329 2.1
571,26
Dutch.................
6.5
571,186 2.1
216,,
hilippine..............
1,2
38,454
O.E
hinese................
359,80
1.0
941,497 2.5 1,057,280 3.8
Swedish................
,8
French................
516,042
1,814,763 5.0
Dannish...............
By Freight............. P34,549,566 97.0 P28,523,460 97.0 P25,755,03
96.2
1,087,353 3.8
867,221 3.0
1,127,941 3.0
By Mail...............


Total 135011507 100 0 P29 300 681 1000 P28.812390 100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for
March, 1928 12 months ending
March, 1929
Countries
March, 1929.


Value


36


Value


5


Value


5


United States........


.P40,483,898


70.


TOONS


67


₱34,494,795


69.


United Kingdom.....


1,
* 


92,4


Japan...............


3,768,486
* *





3,3


hina.......



2
3,2


L


1


French East Indies...


* 4


3,:


Germany ............


1,395,5:
*


,22


1,235


Spain................


35,
* .


1,68


1,


Australia.............


S
359,9



British East Indies....


1,065,078


Dutch East Indies....


20,65





l

France................


556,8



,33-


8,469


Netherlands..........


32
*


Italy................


* 


4


BA


Hongkong............


2,362
**


Belgium.............


* *


LA


60,19


Switzerland..........


'9,022


0.5


87,8-


Japanese-China......


117,910



92


Siam................


64,56
* 


19gat


Sweden..............


165,346



8a





5,0


Canada..............


,86


,9


10-
093


Norway...............


2.919


81


41,.


2,570


0.2


Austria...............


,96


51,4:
5,072


0.1


6,72


Denmark..
*


*


O.1


Other Countries.......


PES


0.5


308,976


0.6


255.472


Total.


.₱57,776,208


100.0


₱54.320,509


100 0


₱49,631.050


1O 5


32


  Or CUMmEroL JOcris.


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
T?
“SILVER FLEETExpress Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Chaco Bldg.
Phone 2-14-20
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigerated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Calle Echague
Manila, P. I.


5 REPP
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18
BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


Mr. MANUEL VALENTIN
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.
244 Plaza Sta. Cruz
Manila, P. I.
Phone 2-61-30


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


Y
LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
P. O. Box 1423
Manila, P. I


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: "SALEFIBER"


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


EE
UT


E


NO
M
9


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
₱26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE


110 P. Faura


Tel. 5-69-44


Telephone 22070
P. O. Box 1394
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Investments
Collections
Income Tax
121 Real, Intramuros Manila, P. I.


REMEMBER
The JOURNAL is a mighty good
publication to send to someone in
the United States whom you wish
to keep informed regarding the
Philippines!
P4 Yearly Does It
Send name and address to
The
American Chamber of Commerce
Journal: P. O. Box 1638,
Manila, P. I.


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


IN RESTONDING TO ADVERTISEMENIS FLEASE MENTION THE ANERICAN CRANBER OF COMMERGE JGURNAL


SHALL TOLA LAECCIOR SEA DANA.


You make a Will so that the needs of your dependents may be
adequately provided for. You make it now because you know the
uncertainties of human life.
These reasons argue forcibly for the appointment of a corporate
Executor under your Will. A bank does not become ill, die, or move
away. It does not go to the United States or to Europe on an
extended vacation. Its facilities do not become impaired by time or
accident and its decisions are the result of collective judgment.
This Bank makes a business of managing estates. Its fees are
the same as would be paid any other executor.


INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION
TRUST DEPARTMENT


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to bel) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


TRUNKS


RIU HERMANOS —623-ESCOLTA-623


FBNico IAObatly OUT
915 M. H. del Pilar
Manila, P. I.
BI
xa
Speela sdheray " Aud Hoilaso Hotier Yor
Business Men: 8 to 9 a.m.; 3 to 5 p.m.
Week-days: 7:30 a.m. to 12 m.; 1:30 to 5 p.m.


Manila Wine Merchants, Ltd.
Manila, P. I.
174 Juan Luna
P. O. Box 403
Phones: 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


Recommended By Leading Doctors


Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake


TEL. 5-73.06


Nature's Best Mineral Water


N N N ANENENE EEEENAN TE ENN EE


Extra power, extra strenot
t19
V
Extra speca-G.M.C. ITucks
amk.

SAGaN
P
62960
ghMerilo
APEA


YUILT for the severest kind of service—
D for long hauls, for rough or sandy roads,
for hill climbing—the Model T-19 2-ton
G. M. C. Truck is the outstanding transportation unit on Philippine highways.
Pile on a load to capacity rating, disregard
distance or condition of roads,—you can be
sure the T-19 will eat up the miles in record
time with low cost of operation per ton-mile.
Plenty of reserve power is provided in the
T-19. Timken rear axle and bearings give
strength and stamina. Four wheel brakes
insure safety and instant control. Here is
a truck that relieves you of all worry by delivering the highest type of efficient service.


Capacity Ratings


Lbs.
T11
Gross Capacity...... 3,800
Chassis weight....... 1,980
Body allowance...... 800
Pay load. ....... . ... 1,220
T 19
Gross Capacity..... 8,000
Chassis weight....... 3,000
Body allowance...... 1,000
Pay load............ 4,000
T-30
Gross capacity....... 10,000
Chassis weight....... 4,160
Body allowance. ..... 1,200
Pay load............ 4,500
T-42
Gross capacity.. . . . .. 12,000
Chassis weight.. ..... 4,760
Body allowance. ..... 1,500
6,740
Pay load


Call today, or write for complete information
Automotive Sales
Company
G. M. C. Truck Distributor for the Philippines
Pinpin and M. del Banco Nacional


N MAEEINg NO MaaMaNng Mang MaEang ng Maana Mana a aana Ma


Leonard Wood’s Vision: Leprosy Eradication.—Wealth from Exotic Plants, P. J.
Wester.—From One Friend to Another,
Anne Miltimore Pendleton.—Three More
Poems by Gilbert S. Perez.—Things
Gilmore Has Got Done in the Philippines.—Tariff Making Without Method, by
Thomas Walker Page, a Chapter from His
Book.—Editorials: Business As Usual;
Farther North; A Decade As Against a
Century.—June’s Leading Newspaper
Editorials.—Other Features and the Usual
Reviews of Commerce and Industry.
For Students of English:
First Installment of Farquson Johnson’s
“Common Errors in English Corrected”


TRULY . A MAGAZINE  PREEMINENT


INTHE PHILIPPINES


TABACALERA


The word “TABACALERA"
on a cigar is just as significant
as the word "Sterling" on silver


Your tobacconist
will gladly
supply y ou


SHALL YOUR EXECUTOR BE A BANK?
You make a Will so that the needs of your dependents may be
adequately provided for. You make it now because you know the
uncertainties of human life.
These reasons argue forcibly for the appointment of a corporate
Executor under your Will. A bank does not become ill, die, or move
away. It does not go to the United States or to Europe on an
extended vacation. Its facilities do not become impaired by time or
accident and its decisions are the result of collective judgment.
This Bank makes a business of managing estates. Its fees are
the same as would be paid any other executor.


INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION
TRUST DEPARTMENT


ANCN V ANNNNNN EN TENEN TEO NEEAN ANNAN O CONNNE A


July, 1929


  


1


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM
can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Isiands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.



A


A Snappy Card in the Street Cars
BRINGS RESULTS


A High-class
Advertising Medium


Telephone
A. B. TIGH
2-19-11
Advertising Manager


PLUMBING
We do Sanitary installation per
specifications or per wishes of
the owner.
Only first class plumbing goods
and materials are used and
first class workmanship labor
employed.
No matter how difficult the work
or how complicated the planing of your plumbing, don't
worry; just give us a call—
HENRY MUSSER—Tel. 2-10-44
We do our best to satisfy the customer, and we correct errors of
any plumbing installation of
every plumbing system, however difficult it may be.
We do also any kind of Sheet
Metal work, kitchen appliances,
ice boxes, etc.
HENRY MUSSER
Plumbing and Sheet Metal Works
662 Rizal Ave.
Tel. 2-10-44


WHY QUALITY?
When you think of purchasing a new range
you are confronted with a problem that
requires some considerable thought. The
buyer of a LANG RANGE does not make
his or her choice haphazardly, but investigates the merits of the range along the following lines:
First, QUALITY, which is exemplified
in every detail of the LANG. From the raw
material to the finish range, nothing is sacrificed to produce the very best range that can
possibly be made.
Second, APPEARANCE. The LANG, on
sanitary legs, with smooth top in durable
nickel trim, enamel trimmed or all enamel
construction if wanted, in blue, gray, or
white, will please the most exacting requirements
Third, ECONOMY and EFFICIENCY
must be considered and a range that is proven
fuel saver (accomplished only in a LANG
with its exclusive hot blast features and direct
application of heat) will, over a short time,
repay the purchaser many times over a cheap
and wasteful range not to mention the guaranteed cooking and baking satisfaction.
The LANG is particularly adapted for the
fuel conditions where gas could not be obtained. Wood and soft coal are burned
more satisfactorily in this Western Patented
firebox.


The First Choice of Every
Ho me
The Lange Ranges
Enjoy the Range Comfort
Specify Lang Range
Sold by
HENRI MUSSER
662 Rizal Ave. Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  


July, 1929


SCHOOL OPENS!
JUNE 10
For School Books and School
Supplies of All Kinds go to the
Philippine Education Store
on the Escolta, second floor,
and make your selections.


Philippine Education buys
in the largest quantities
and sells at the lowest prices
Philippine Education Co., Inc.
101 Escolta
Manila, P. I.


It’s a Great
Refrigerator
ELECTRO LUX
GAS REFRIGERATOR





Light the tiny gas flame and forget about the
problem of efficient refrigeration in your home.
Dependable, efficient, economical, clean.
Four handsome models from which to select; priced
from P495.00 and up with liberal time payments if
desired. Come in and let us arrange to install one
in your home and let us look after the refrigeration
for you.


Manila Gas Corporation
Main Office:
Downtown Showroom:
Calle Otis, Paco. Tel. 5-69-34 7 Calle David. Tel. 2-16-43


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigareite Mfg. Co.
31 Tayuman
Manila, P. I.
IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLED!


NL EEE O ENEEENN EN EIMNA E ENNCNU EEENNEE


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
The American Chamber of Gommerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.
Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
P A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, Vice President
B. A. Green, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
I. C. Roctwel
Kenneth B. Day
Alf Welhaven


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Frank W. Butler
Wm. H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
H. L. Heath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Carl Hess.
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
. A. Meyer, Chairman
Alf Welhaven
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wison.


COMMITTEES


FINANCE
J.L. Headington, Chairman
Wmn. H. Rennolds
F. W. Buter"


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
L. L. Speliman"
M. M. Saleeby


PUBLICATIONS
. A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy e. Bamia
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, Chairma
W. J. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, Chairman
W. Butler
F.
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
B. A. Green, Chairman
J. R. Wilson
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
Bradiore
P E. Nant
INVESTMENTS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
B. A. Green


FROM GOVERNOR DAVIS'S
INAUGURAL SPEECH
(Manila, July 8, 1929)
“I regard this warm welcome as a happy augury of that close, cordial
and constructive cooperation under the organic law which I hope will be
the keynote of my administration, a cooperation with your political, business, journalistic and spiritual leaders for the sole purpose of promoting
the welfare of all your people. ... Were I merely to give expression to my
personal gratification at such a cordial reception you might well feel that
I had missed the broader significance of this occasion, had failed to sense its
unmistakable evidence of the friendship on the part of the people of the
Philippine Islands for the people of the United States.
“. . . Determination of the political future of the islands does not
come within the province of the governor general. However, problems
directly affecting the foundations upon which that political future must
rest do confront us for solution. If these foundations are not strongly and
firmly built, any structure of government, no matter what its character,
will inevitably fail.
“One of the conerstones of the foundation of any government is the
honesty of its officials. Public office, it cannot be repeated too often, is a
public trust. Dishonesty among public servants must be fearlessly suppressed. If it is not detected and punished it spreads insidiously throughout the whole service and corrupts those who condone it as well as those
who connive at it, and it dissipates the public moneys so seriously needed
for essential improvements. The public official who betrays his trust is
not only unfaithful to those who honor him by election or appointment to
office; he is faithless to the children who must grow up without educational
opportunities, due to the lack of revenues, to the sick who cannot get hospital treatment, to the unfortunates in eleemosynary institutions, and to
all of the people who benefit by the public improvements vital to their
welfare. The responsibility for the elimination of dishonesty from the
government rests not only upon your officials but also upon the people
who themselves are the principal sufferers. If public opinion demands
honesty, it will get honesty. If it condones dishonesty, it will get dishonesty. I confidently rely upon the support of the press and the public
in the insistence that public officials be faithful to their trust.
“Closely related to this subject is the most effective use of the available
revenues. Efficient economy must be exercised in every department of
the government. I assume that it is being practised today. I am confident
that every administrative official will cooperate to this end. If any official
is unable or unwilling to do so he should and promptly will be replaced.”


RSCS
The Choice of the Motorists
Who Know Tire Values
We stand behind every tire sold


MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY CO.
MANILA
CEBU
BACOLOD
ILOILO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  


July, 1929


Things Gilmore Has Got Done
in the Philippines


Outstanding among Vice Governor Gilmore’s
achievements during the several periods when
he has been the islands’ acting governor—especially the long period between Wood’s departure from Manila May 27, 1927, and Stimson’s arrival in Manila March 1, 1928—are the
several acts by which the long-persisting shipping monopoly was broken and egress into the
marine commerce of the islands was made for
American vessels. This signalized a new era
in local shipping, a modern era, and Gilmore
might rightly be known as the father of modern
shipping in the Philippines. To effect the
reforms most vital, it was necessary to secure
action by the legislature; the situation which
Gilmore corrected had baffled governors for
thirty years.
The basis of the monopoly was that the utility
commission controlled routes and rates, and that
the shipping companies owned by Spaniards in
the Philippines were, as they still are, prevented
by law from acquiring new ships. Before a vessel
could operate on any route in the islands, it had
to obtain a certificate of public convenience
from the utility commission, and the commission,
when it issued such a license, decreed the rates
to be charged. Agitation begun with the launching of the proposal that the foreign interests
be permitted to replace old tonnage with new,
and opinion for and against developed inside
and outside the legislature. The outcome was
a triumph for public opinion, and public welfare
over private welfare. The renewal-of-tonnage
project was abandoned, and a bill suppressing
the utility commission’s powers to fix routes
and rates was passed in the closing hours of the
1927 legislative session.
Ships now choose their own routes, and fix
their own rates, being restricted only by a maximum.
The next step was the port bonds issues for
Iloilo and Cebu—enough in single acts of the
legislature to modernize both harbors.
The third step has just been taken and its
outcome depends upon Governor Davis. An
agreement has been effected, subject to Davis’s
approval, putting the wharfage revenue into
a permanent port works fund to be used only
in harbor improvements. This revenue is
about P2,000,000 annually—enough to improve
many ports within a few years. As it derives
from shipping, it is wholly reasonable to devote
it to this industry.
The remainder of this paper must be mere
summarization.
1. The $5,000,000 bond issue for the better
sanitation of Manila.
2. The $5,000,000 stock purchase in the
Manila Railroad (authorized) for extending the
lines northward.
3. An act authorizing a commission to ascertain the physical and economic resources of
Mindanao and draft plans for their exploitation.
4. An allotment of $150,000 to publicity for
Philippine cigars.


5. An allotment of $250,000 to promote
vocational and agricultural education.
6. Suppression of the wharfage tax of $1 per
ton upon exports of ore, coal, timber and cement.
(While of little immediate benefit to the industrial Philippines, this is wise prevision).


GILMORE'S METHOD
As an executive of the Philippine
government, Vice Governor Gilmore did
not settle the City-Metropolitan (Water
District) controversy himself, his fiat
did not extend so far; he got the contending parties into conferences where
they reached an accord. He did not
deprive the utility commission of its
powers over interisland shipping, which
is beyond an executive’s prerogative;
he got a majority of the legislature to
do it. He did not wave his hand and
summon the Monroe school-survey
commission to the Philippines, for he
had neither authority nor funds for
such an enterprise; he got a majority
of the legislature to vote the funds and
authorize the survey, and to vote an
additional sum when the first proved
insufficient.
The law disperses authority here and
there, and Gilmore’s gift is to energize
this authority wherever he finds it
placed, and to counsel it wisely and concentrate it upon matters affecting
public welfare which press for solution.
So it falls out that men everywhere
in the government, and many outside
of it, share in all his executive achievements; and the press shares in them
preeminently. It equally falls out, the
editor believes, that here is a truly
eminent civilian executive: one familiar
with the law and the means of effecting
its purposes.—Ed.


7. Loans to towns and provinces for public
works.
8. Revision and compilation of the election
law of the islands.
9. A rescidivist act.
10. The new marriage act, which, while in
need of amendments, is serving its main purpose,
that of suppressing abuses of the privilege to
perform marriage ceremonies.
11. Authorization of cooperative marketing
associations—a measure which received Gilmore’s approval, but was not his proposal.
12. The workmen’s compensation act, permitted to become law without Gilmore’s action; not
the measure he would have wished for, but
one embodying a principle for which he stands.
13. Greater tax autonomy to towns.
14. The interisland shipping committee, headed by the director for the orient of the U. S.


shipping board, which furnished timely technical
information to the legislature that was fundamental in gaining a majority for the shippingreform legislation.
15. An act making wireless equipment compulsory on all interisland vessels.
16. The accord between Manila and the
Metropolitan Water District, settling out of
court a prolonged legalistic controversy. (The
diplomacy here manifested comports with that
exercised in the shipping legislation).
17. Summary recall of a foreign consul who
officiously intervened directly with the legislature to prevent passage of legislation recommended by the executive. (Another instance
of the skillful aid rendered Governor Gilmore
by the Manila press).
18. Tightening up the enforcement of the
immigration law, and the coincident suppression of the so-called tong conflicts in Manila.
(This has occurred since Colonel Stimson’s
departure from the islands in February, and it
occurred very early after that event).
19. Cordial relations between the executive
and the legislature, without forfeiture of the
executive’s independent prerogatives. “. . . . Insisting always on what was his and at the same
time respecting that which properly belonged
to others,” is Senator Osmena’s description of
Gilmore’s attitude. He adds that "such a
government will necessarily work harmoniously
and successfully.”
20. Repeal of the peonage act. An act
passed about 22 vears ago had for 20 years fostered peonage, though this was not the legislative intention when it was passed. When a
workmen went into a man’s employ and received an advance payment against his wages—
the procedure which is the basis of peonage—he
was practically bound to that man until he was
square on the books; and in practice pains were
taken to see that he never should be free to quit
his job. If he did quit while in debt, it was a
criminal offense and the constabulary rounded
him up and turned him over to the courts to be
jailed, or turned him back to his master. This
convenience of plantation management must
now be foregone; advancement from it is decreed
by the act of repeal.
THE SCHOOLS
The vice governor’s portfolio is that of the
public-instruction department the most important one in the number of its personnel, the
amount of money expended and the scope and
influence of its jurisdiction. The vice governor
is ex officio chairman of the University board of
regents, and also of the board controlling the
teachers’ pension fund. The Philippine health
service, the education bureau and the quarantine
service are under his department, for which
the annual appropriations run to nearly 30%
of the total insular revenues—the personnel approximating 30,000. Schools appropriations
have increased by an annual sum of about $3,-
000,000 during the time Vice Governor Gilmore
has been in office' the value of school property
has increased $9,000,000; school libraries have
doubled in number and books in school libraries
tripled in number. Teachers with normalschool training have increased from 4.18% of the


The result of over
half a century of
refining experience



SE
 B
MOTOR OILS AND MOTOR GASOLINE


Remember that SOCONY is Standard


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


5


number employed to 21%; six normal schools
have been built and a training-department
building added to the parent school in Manila.
In 1925, the legislature provided for an expert
survey of the islanes’ schools which was carried
out by the Monroe commission (headed by Dr.
Paul Monroe of Columbia University). The
original sum provided being too little, more was
voted at a subsequent date. The legislature
checked up on the report with a survey of its
own, and agreed with most of the fundamental
conclusions of the Monroe report, which is a
book of 700 pages.
The surveys had a wholesome effect. Though
the schools administration is an entrenched
bureaucracy, it is no longer heresy to voice a
reasonable criticism of the schools and some
eventual good may come of the public information imparted by the Monroe and legislative
reports. Some good has already come, in fact,
in the grant from the legislature for employing
experts in rural vocational education, curriculum
construction, elementary education, teacher
training, and health education. There is valid
argument on the side of the schools administration which discounts the enormity of an abnormally large proportion of college students going
in for law, medicine and other professional cour
ses whose graduates might be expected to join
the parasitical class; for the attractiveness
of other professions consists largely in there being
opportunities for professional employment in
them, and in the Philippines such chances are
few. Besides, here the lawyer buys a farm as
soon as he is able, and the doctor does so too;
so there is a working back to the land from professional life.
Gilmore realizes that for the farm-school
graduate there should be a career in farming


During the first half of this year 400 cured
lepers were set at liberty from Culion, and
nobody knows where they have gone or how they
are faring. This is almost equal to the total
number cured and discharged during 1928,
which was but 480; and it is 10% of the lepers
under treatment at Culion, who number 4,000.
It is expected that fully 800 lepers will be cured
and discharged from custody at Culion during
this year; that is, it is believed that the record
of the first half-vear will be equaled during the
second. The Philippines are on the way to
mastery of leprosy. Since Culion was reorganized under Wood’s leadership in 1922, no less
than 2,000 lepers have been cured there.
Where are they? The whereabouts of but
few of them are known. It is important to the
science of leprosy treatment, as well as to the
sociological side of the work, to ascertain where
these cured lepers are living, how they are making
a livelihood, and under what conditions they
have been received into the communities where
they are to be found. The Philippine AntiLeprosy Society plans to undertake this investigation with a corps of field workers on full
time. To this end it is seeking financial aid
from the public; it wishes to raise P20,000 to be


awaiting. In setting aside the reservation for
the pineapple industry he stipulated that among
the homeseekers applying for lands on the reservation, farm school and agricultural college
graduates should be given preference. Controversy aside, he inaugurated a movement in
education which will be more thoughtfully
guided than the progress of Philippine public
education has been guided in the past. There
is at least some thought given now to what the
schools are doing; formerly the public was practically constrained to be satisfied with the mere
fact that the schools functioned.
It is just that Leonard Wood’s name be associated for all time with the leprosy work which
was such a dominant interest of his administration. He took all the leadership in this, only
the details of carrying out projects falling to
Gilmore as head of the department. Gilmore
has been directly instrumental in establishing
a system of provincial hospitals, in providing
the hospital for the insane at Manila, and in
effecting other betterments in the health service.
On June 27, but a few days ago, the plans of
two years came to fruition in the incorporation
of a governing entity—associated with the
government, but independent of it—to create
fifty fellowships in the field of research in pure
science. An objective is, to give applied science
the benefit of this research. It is a reasonable
hope that Manila will thus become a center of
scientific investigation along many lines. Money
for the work is to derive from private sources
in the Philippines and the United States the
expectation being that the laboratory, library
and other facilities of the government will be
available to the fellows in research.
—W. R.


devoted solely to the cured-leper survey.
Progress in curing leprosy, then, has reached
the stage where the fate of the cured patient
becomes important. He numbers so very many,
and soon there will be an augmentation of 1,000
a year in his ranks. Necessity must find a way
of looking after him, if he needs looking after.
If he doesn’t, what a credit it is to the islands
that they accept the verdict of science on leprosy
and take the cured leper back into their communities. The exact situation in which the cured
leper finds himself should be reliably known and
reported.
The Philippines have 4,900 lepers under
medical treatment at present: Culion, 4,000;
Cebu, 200; Manila, at San Lazaro, 400; Iloilo,
100. There are 1,600 lepers at Culion who are
not under treatment, so the total number segregated is 6,300.
Treatment consists in the regular injection of
chaulmoogra ethyl esters with iodine (1/2%)
into the patient’s blood. The technic has been
improved recently at Culion by making the
injections directly into the leprous lesions, instead
of just at any convenient point on the body.
Under the new method, lesions sometimes disappear entirely within three months. After a


patient shows no further clinical and laboratory
signs of leprosy—when all lesions are gone, and
microscopic examination of the blood reveals
no leprosy germs—he is kept under observation
at Culion from six months to two years before
being discharged as cured. There seem to be no
recurrences of the disease, in persons pronounced
cured, but only the careful survey proposed to be
carried out by the anti-leprosy society can determine this point scientifically. Is the disease
unique in this respect, as it is in others—does
it recur after the lapse of years? It seems no
one knows, at least no one in the Philippines.
The leper expert would like ever so much to
know; he would also like to know that patients
cured and discharged are keeping up self-treatment as a precaution against reinfection, or
recurrence of the old infection. Absolute
triumph over leprosy waits upon this data.
It is known that the health service has had to
permit fifty cured lepers to return to Culion,
they being unable to fit themselves into life
outside the colony.
Room is being made for more such residents
of the island. Dr. Simplicio Chiyuto, colony
chief, used lepers at the colony and built a road
two kilometers along the coast, to Bayani. This
gave access to some fields that can be tilled.
The Leonard Wood Memorial Fund was then
drawn upon to extend the road over the coastal
hills to Baldad, about six kilometers, opening
more fields to the colony market; and the antileprosy society is extending this road five more
kilometers, at the cost of about P20,000. Altogether, the road opens considerable grazing and
farming land up for settlement. Culion, an
island 140 square miles in area, can support a
much larger population than it is now supporting,
if the road system is made extensive with the
island’s boundaries and the skill of the forester
and engineer is brought to the settlers’ aid.
Fishing might employ many. If thousands
of cured lepers were settled on the island, they
would be accessible to scientific observation at
all times—all doubts as to the permanency
of the cure could be cleared up for all time.
This seems to be an ideal solution of the difficulty the cured leper presents, but it depends
upon the charity of the public. Then too, if
a cured leper does not wish to live on Culion,
if the cure is permanent there is no reason why
he should live there; perhaps there is no legal
way of holding him there. Five years hence,
if the public is liberal, more about what may
safely be done with him will be known.
Properly, the Wood fund may only be spent for
scientific research in the treatment of leprosy:
using a little for the road may have been stretching a point rather hard, though it does get cured
lepers under convenient observation in conditions normal to life outside the severely regulated
colony. Therefore, the economic development
of Culion as a place of residence for cured lepers
must, in bulk, fall upon other resources than the
Wood fund. This fund, it is expected, will be
$2,000,000 (₱4,000,000) before the end of the year.
Leprosy exists in every part of the Philippines,
but is rarer in some regions than in others. It
is rare in Zambales; it is frequently encountered
in Ilokos, the Bikol region, Cebu and Panay.


Leonard Wood’s Vision: Leprosy Eradication


Retail
Wholesa
ine American Drug
Importers
Agents
ophAPI
o.
BOTICA BOIL
MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
We have been selling drugs for 98 years
 
ISPOM  ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


6


  


July, 1929


It vields quickest when treated early, quite
readily in the incipient stage. This means, of
course, that treatment stations ought to be in
operation in the various parts of the islands
where leprosy is frequent; there are such stations
at Manila and Cebu, and should be others at
Legaspi, Iloilo, in Ilokos and in Mindanao.
Dr. Jose N. Rodriguez has charge of the Cebu
treatment station, just being completed with the
Eversley Childs fund of $180,000.
That’s about what the bill will be for any
duplicate of this unit, but it is a well-equipped
station and equal to its task. Dr. Rodriguez
reports that lepers voluntarily go to the station
for treatment. It seems reasonable to expect
that among the patients will be many incipient
cases, which diligent treatment can arrest in
comparatively a short timeWhat about the P20,000 for the check-up
on cured lepers? The JOURNAL sends its small
donation, wishing the movement well. The


government is probably giving to leprosy about
all that may be expected from a popular treasury
subject to pork-barrel invasions; it is giving
₱1,500,000 this year, about 1,3 of the total
appropriation for the health service. The, generalization seems to hold, that no funds asked of
charity are more carefully and sensibly expended
than those asked for the leper work in all its
branches. None of these can be dispensed with,
either, without injury to the work as a whole.
Having mentioned two names, one or two more
are in order. Dr. W. H. Wade, who was interviewed in preparation for this article, is chief
pathologist at Culion. Technical medical work
there is under Dr. Casimiro B. Lara. The
chemical work is under Dr. Howard I. Cole,
who succeeded Dr. Perkins. In Manila, at the
science bureau, Dr. A. P. West has been engaged
for years on research in the chemistry of chaulmoogra oil. His work is in the field of pure
science, and very thorough-going.


Tariff Making Without Method
BY THOMAS WALKER PAGE


During the twentieth century American commerce with foreign nations has grown in volume
and has changed substantially in character
and in composition. Changes of no less moment
have likewise taken place in nearly all branches
of domestic industry. The proper adjustment,
therefore, of commercial legislation to business
needs has become more delicate and difficult
at the same time that it has been assuming
more vital importance. There has been increasing urgency in the demand that, in shaping
legislation, instruments of greater precision
should be substituted for the broadax and saw
that have too often been used to roughhew
measures for business regulation and to fit
them into the structure of party politics. Particularly in regard to the tariff has this demand
grown pressing. For twenty years it has been
current in such expressions as “take the tariff
out of politics," or "make it scientific”—vague
expressions which really mean that in some way
the tariff, whether enacted for revenue or for
protection, should be adapted more accurately
and quickly to the varying exigencies of the
United States Treasury and of American business.
No little dissatisfaction with the manner in
which the tariff is made grows out of the business disturbance caused by the prolonged uncertainty about the rates of duty. It is true
that some disturbance must result whenever any
effective duty is imposed or removed, but it is
needlessly increased by protracting the anxiety
and insecurity that prevail between the beginning and the completion of a tariff revision.
Industry and commerce tend to adjust themselves to meet such new conditions as the revision may bring when once the conditions are
known; but until the rates of duty and the


The accompanying article is Chapter
Lin Making the Tarif in the United States, by Thomas Walker Page, of the
Institute of Economics, Washington,
D. C. The book is published by the
MCGraw-Hill Book Co., 370 7th Ave.,
N. Y., and if memory serves the price
is $2.50. The book is in its second
edition. It is quite an informed and
complete disquisition on the American
tariff, and designed to inculcate knowledge about better ways of making the
tariff than the method described here,
which is the one which has always been
followed.
President Hoover has had occasion
to denounce the 1929 tariff, just enacted,
as in no wise his; indeed, it almost
ranks as a foundling among Federal
laws, no one wishing to acknowledge
authorship of it. Dr. Page is well
worth reading on the tariff, and all Institute books are erudite unbiased treatises. Thisone has 273 pages and an index.
The Institute of Economics is a Carnegie foundation. It is vitally interested
in the situation of the Philippines in relation to the American tariff. Dr. Page
himself is interested, so here are friends
at court.—Ed.


ang a Maang nag Ma na maan
adjustment is impossible, commitments are
precarious, and business is enveloped in an
atmosphere of insecurity.


The Eleventh Hour
ANHIS week is the deadline—the elevI enth hour—the last moment of
preparation for the girls and boys who are
venturing forth in search for wisdom.
You, parents see to it that they are
properly prepared to do the ardous tasks
before them.


Make sure their eyes are right by
having them examined now.
Always the best in quality
but never higher in price


While Congress is preparing to legislate,
radical and reactionary proposals are sure to
find some advocacy in committee or on the
floor, and the publicity given them adds to the
general uneasiness. All serts of rumors of
impending action gain currencv. The papers
are filled with the baseless predictions of interested parties. Partisan spokesmen put out
misleading estimates of the effects to be expected
from the contemplated revision. Some members of Congress are accused of being swayed
by unworthy motives; others are suspected of
lacking decision, and pressure in many forms is
brought to bear upon them to control their
votes. Innumerable delegations and individuals
visit Washington to argue, persuade, threaten,
and plead. Many organizations open offices
there to watch proceedings, keep their members
informed, and mobilize all possible forces that
might aid in securing the kind of tariff that
would serve their particular needs. Intense
jealousies and controversies arise among the
conflicting interests and are reflected in committee deliberations and debates on the floor.
So bitterly are they sometimes expressed that
public welfare seems to be outweighed by personal antagonisms. “Blocs" and factions are
formed to work primarily for some special advantage to particular industries or sections.
Unrelated topics are dragged into the discussions
both in Congress and in press in such a way as
to becloud the issue and to prevent a reasoned
and intelligent understanding of the particular
matters under consideration. Doubt remains
until the last vote is taken in regard to the outcome of a procedure attended by so much confusion, acrimony, and personal interest. The
damage thus done to the orderly prosecution of
business has compelled those that suffer from it
to take thought on the need for a simpler and
safer way of revising the tariff.
No revision since the Civil War has met with
general approval. After the passage of any
new tariff, dissatisfaction naturally continues
among those whose hopes and efforts have
been disappointed. It is natural, also, that,
knowing the circumstances under which
the act was framed, they should impute its
unfavorable features to improper influences.
And since few obtain quite all they have wished
for, the dissatisfied are always a majority.
No matter how closely a new tariff may conform
in plan and policy to platform pledges and
campaign promises, its details are so numerous
and it affects such a multitude of interest that
it invariably offends more people than it pleases.
The general discontent offers a fruitful field for
work by the press and by spokesmen of the
opposition party to discredit the act and all who
are responsible for it. But when, as has sometimes happened, the opposition comes into
power and itself undertakes a revision the result
has been not so much to lessen the amount of
discontent as merely to shift a part of it from
one group of interests to another. Under control
of neither of the two great parties has Congress
succeeded in making a tariff that commanded
enough approval to give promise of stability.
Disappointment with the numerous revisions
of the last thirty years has fostered the belief
that Congress must either radically reform its
methods of making the tariff or must empower
some other agency to shape a measure that so
intimately concerns the business welfare of the
country.
The damage caused by the confused and contentious activities that accompany tariff making,
the disappointment of selfish interests, and the
chagrin of some groups at their own failure and
at the success of others in the use of personal
and factional influence account for much of the
prevailing discontent with the usual unmethodic
procedure.
A stronger ground for criticism is found in the
outstanding truth that every one of the siz general
revisions of the past thirty years has contained
numerous rates and provisions that were in accord neither with the public welfare nor with the
policy announced by the party entrusted with
power. It would be invidious to specify such
instances of offense in successive acts, although
some are notorious and have been almost universally admitted. Indeed, no act in a generation has found defenders willing to assert that


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


it did not swerve in important details from the
line of equal justice. The utmost claimed for
each of them has been, first, that it was better
than the law it supplanted and, second, that if
time were given, its inequalities would be eliminated by the gradual adjustment of business.
The first of these claims has always been disputed, and the second has never been verified
by experience; indeed, a contrary tendency has
been manifest. The longer the life of a tariff,
the more widely has it diverged from the principles announced by its framers and the more
unequal have become its effects on the interests
touched by it. Very few years, therefore,
have usually sufficed to arouse in the country
such an outraged sense of justice and of business
necessity as to compel another general revision
in spite of the harmful disturbance attending it.
The repeated failures of Congress to meet more
closely the needs of American industry and
commerce have done more than all else to stimulate the demand for some different method of
making the tariff.
The cause for these failures are numerous;
but two, each vital in itself, are most persistent.
The first is the difficulty of ascertaining the
precise rates and provisions that will accomplish
the purpose desired. The second is that some
members of Congress are chiefly concerned in
satisfving their own constituents and must be
conciliated by compromises, bargains, and special
concessions before votes enough to pass any
tariff bill can be obtained. In some measure,
of course, the treatment of the tariff by these
members as a local issue is due to prejudice or
to a wish to remain in office, but in greater
measure it rests on less unworthy grounds.
The average member feels more acutely and
understands far better the special needs of his
own locality or industry than he does the more
remote and intricate needs of the country as a
whole. It does not necessarily mean a lack of
patriotism, therefore, when he refuses to give up
benefits that are certain and substantial for
others that appear doubtful and thinly diffused.
He yields to local and political influence, not so
much because of self-interest, as because he
does not have the wide and precise information
necessary for understanding the bearing of the
tariff on the nation as a whole. At every stage
in the making of a new tariff the influence of
these two reasons for the failure of Congress can
be seen.
The preparation of the bill begins in the
Committee on Ways and Means, which is the
most powerful committee of the House of Representatives. The composition of this committee has little relation to the nature of its
work. Places on it are eagerly sought and have
to be awarded with caution. Unfortunately
the members are not selected with a view to their
special fitness for their duties, but, apparently,
on the principle that in qualifications all members
of the House are equal. The choice among them
usually recognizes geographical and factional
divisions in the House, but except for that restriction it is determined almost wholly by seniority of service. In other words the senior member
from a certain section or recognized party group
is considered to have a valid claim to a place on
this important committee. It is rare, therefore,
that a member, when he first joins the committee,
has the sort of knowledge and aptitude that the
committee’s work peculiarly requires. And as
tariff revision has been seldom undertaken except as a result of a party change after an election, it has usually been made at the very time
when the membership has the largest proportion
of new men.
The organization as well as the composition
of the committee is likewise controlled by seniority. The chairmanship is usuaily determined by length of service, and the division of
work among the subcommittees goes more by
seniority than by merit and industry. To deny
the chairmanship to the member of the party
in power who can show the longest unbroken
term of committee service is an extremely rare
violation of precedent. Age, inaptitude, stolid
indifference to economic conditions are seldom
considered. Seniority and party regularity
are the only essential requirements for the chairmanship. It can easily happen that the best
men on the committee have little influence on its


proceedings and that the work is really dominated by the more prejudiced and politicallyminded members.
Once revision has been begun members of
the committee have little or no opportunity
to make up any handicap in knowledge or experience. The information needed for fixing
duties is sometimes available only in a form
that the committee as composed can not readily
use, and sometimes it is not available at all.
And even when it can be procured, other demands on the time of committee members distract
their attention and divert their energies. Correspondence with their districts, social attentions
to visiting constituents, interviews with job
hunters, attendance at meetings and conferences both in and away from Washington, the
necessity of giving some attention to a multitude
of measures before other committees—all these
and many things besides, added to their official
duties, leave no leisure for persistent study and
meditation. When they venture to neglect the
outside calls on their time, they do so'at the risk
of defeat in the next election. They can make
insufficient use, therefore, of the materials
relating to economic conditions that numerous
agencies have already assembled.
No other government in the world has accumulated such a vast amount of trustworthy
information about industry, and commerce as
the government of the United States, but to the
average member of Congress its very volume
and detail are appaling. Not many men either
in or out of Congress are able to follow through
an intricate investigation, interpret elaborate
statistical tables, and draw sound independent
conclusions from them. Such work requires
special aptitude, training, and long practice.
To most members, therefore, a bulky government report remains metaphorically as well as
literally a closed book. Usually, it is true,
there are a few men on the committee who can
do work of this kind, but owing to lack of time
they have to limit their attention to a small
part of the task. When it is remembered that
the tariff covers the whole field of industry and
commerce, embracing many thousands of items,
each of which demands individual attention;
and when it is further remembered that public
opinion and business stability require that the
revision be completed within a few months, it
becomes clear how hopeless it is for a committee
member to find out what he needs to know by
the ordinary methods of systematic study.
The committee resorts, therefore, to public
hearings as the quickest and simplest means of
getting information. But in the great multitude
of matters to be heard little time can be devoted
to any of them.
The men who testify at the hearings are
frequently warned to be brief in their remarks.
Their whole purpose is to use the time allotted
to them so as to make the best case they can


for the interest they represent. That is to say,
they are really advocates and not informants.
They are not sworn and are not required to tell
the whole truth, but may limit themselves to
such part of it as sustains their case. They are,
indeed, liable to be cross-examined by members
of the committee and admissions are sometimes
drawn from them that throw light on the other
side of the matter in hand. But the crossexaminations often degenerate into confused
disputes filled with unsupported statements and
expressions of suspicion, and frequently wander
off into unimportant details. Many elaborate
briefs are presented; and letters, affidavits,
newspaper clippings, one-sided excerpts from
official and unofficial reports, and all sorts of
extraneous materials are admitted. The whole
undigested mass is finally printed, and the committee is thus furnished with many volumes of
confused and contradictory evidence in which
significant facts are apt to be obscured by irrelevant matter and positive denial. The tariff
hearings before the Committee on Ways and
Means preparatory to the existing law filled
more than four thousand printed pages. Such
evidence is not designed to overcome sectional
or factional bias. It merely furnishes a ready
deposit from which any member may dig the
materials to support his preconceived ideas or
the wishes of his friends. No better way could
be found to strengthen prejudice and stimulate
misinformation and intrigue. When trustworthy
information is lacking, other influences are free
to sway the opinion of those who frame the bill.
After the hearings are finished the committee members of the majority party go for
many weeks into executive session. Here an
earnest effort is made, with the aid of clerks,
statisticians, and selected advisors to draft a bill
that will honestly and reasonably carry out their
party’s policy. But that policy is given different
interpretations by the different members, who
have been intentionally chosen to represent
different sections and different party groups.
Lacking exact information, and free to choose
from the mass of conflicting testimony, each
of them naturally gives first place to the views
of his own constituents. It is only by a series
of concessions and bargains, therefore, that it
becomes possible to report out any bill at all.
There have been at times chairmen of the committee who have possessed enough talent for
leadership to give the bills thus drafted a considerable degree of consistency; but as every
factional disagreement in the committee is
certain to reappear on a larger scale in the House,
even the strongest chairmen have been compelled to make many sacrifices of consistency
in order to get a measure that would not stir up
insurgents.
The bill is voted on by the House under ironclad rules after being framed in committee with
a view to conciliating enough diverging opinions


VVO Tave
The Largest and Most Complete Stock
of Drygoods in the Philippines
If you need silks, linens, cottons, or
notions you can serve yourself best
by choosing from our large stocks
We also carry haberdashery, and
make men’s suits and shirts
Manuel Pellicer y Co., Inc.
44 Escolta, Manila
Phone 2-11-06


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


THE AMEKICAN UHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


July, 1929


to insure its passage. Few amendments on the
floor are tolerated. Debate is brief and most of
it is perfunctory. In the main the members
have to accept on faith the views of their party
representatives on the committee, for they have
neither time nor means to form an independent
judgment on so elaborate and technical a measure.
Here and there on both sides a few recalcitrants
break away from party lines, and there is no
little grumbling and discontent even among the
faithful. But in the end the bill is passed with
negligible exceptions by a strict party vote.
Proceedings in the Senate duplicate in large
measure those in the House. But in some respects conditions are different. So long as the
bill is in the House Committee on Ways and
Means the public is ignorant of its terms. But
when that committee reports it to the House it
is published, and the brief debate that follows,
though it contributes little to the result, does
direct attention to its salient features. By the
time the bill reaches the Senate, therefore, every
interest it affects is roused to more strenuous
efforts, some to maintain what they have got,
others to get more and many to defeat provisions
that they consider unfavorable. The press,
now furnished with a distinct mark at which to
direct its comments, devotes less space to generalities and more to the specific provisions of the
bill. Public discussion is diverted from broad
tariff policies and fastens on significant particulars. Numerous adjustments are demanded
by opposing sections and interests.
Open hearings are conducted by the Committee on Finance of the Senate, to which the
bill is referred, in much the same way as by the
Committee on Ways and Means, of the House.
They seldom develop many new and helpful
facts, but as feeling has grown more bitter the
hearings are usually marked by greater arrogance among the claimants and resentment
among the disappointed. Without exception
the country has always appeared to receive a
House tariff bill with disapproval. Protests
come from some quarter against so many of its
details as to give the impression that its enactment into law could not fail to oust the majority
party from power.
Accordingly when the majority members of
the Finance Committee of the Senate go into
executive session it is with a clear understanding
that for party safety they must make the bill
more widely acceptable. To do so usually
involves many hundreds of amendments and
sometimes so radically changes the bill as to
make it recognizable only through its title and
number. In most of the recent tariffs these
amendments have commonly been in the nature
of an increase of duties, either directly by raising
rates or indirectly by changing classifications.
This is done because high duties tend more than
do low duties to conciliate those opponents who
are most active.
The committee is smaller than the corresponding committee of the House and there are fewer
new men on it.. Owing to their longer political
experience the members are readier to make
concessions to expediency, are more amenable
to leadership, their proceedings are more dignified and less contentious; agreement, therefore,
is more easily reached. But political considerations weigh even more heavily in the Senate than
in the House; and interested Senators do not
wait until the bill is on the floor before exerting
their influence. Even during executive sessions
of the committee it is not infrequent that Senators who are not members of the committee
interrupt to argue and persuade and to introduce
constituents who want a chance to present er
parte statements without being embarrassed by
publicity.
The work does not progress far before the
position of practically every Senator is known,
and the committee is made aware of the particular provisions in which each is interested. It
then becomes its task to arrange compromises
in such a way as to secure a majority when it
comes to a vote on the bill. Unfortunately,
such compromises can not be in the nature of a
general moderation of policy or a consistent
and systematic adjustment of terms throughout;
they consist rather in distributing disproportionately high or low duties in such a way as to
satisfy "bloes” and individuals whose votes will
be determined not by the merit of the bill as a


whole but by the manner in which it covers the
special interests that concern them.
When the bill reaches the floor of the Senate
it usually appears that agreement by majority
of the committee does not mean that the bill
will be accepted practically unchanged by the
Senate as is usually done, however disapprovingly, by the House. Debate is not cut short
by the Senate rules; it is long and searching, and
the committee must make more than a perfunctory defense of its proposals. Furthermore, sectional and factional influences are fully as strong
and much more vocal in the Senate than in the
House, and under the Senate rules insurgency
is easier and more prevalent. In the main,
the committee’s recommendations are sustained, but amendments proposed on the floor by
individual Senators are sometimes adopted
that are quite inconsistent with the rest of the
bill. In this way maladjustments and inequalities are apt tobe further increased. On the
other hand, the long debate occasionally shows
up discrepancies in the committee’s proposals
that the Senate sees fit to smooth away. All
in all, however when the vote is taken in the
Senate on the bill as a whole, it usually shows
less of logical arrangement and systematic adherence to a common standard and a definite
policy than at any previous stage.
From the Senate the bill goes to conference


in a committee composed of an equal number
of members designated by each house. Meetings
are held behind closed doors and sometimes
continue for several weeks. Numerous concessions are made by both sides. Many of them
are of minor significance, but some of them give
to whole paragraphs and schedules a form quite
different from that in which they were passed
by either house. New information is seldom
sought or offered. In deciding the points at
issue less attention is given to their relation to
the declared principle of the bill than to the
impression that the action taken will make on
the respective houses. Much effort is made
to have it appear that each house yields in
about equal degree to the other, and this sometimes leads to the sacrifice of important provisions. Sometimes agreement is difficult and
settlement is determined in large measure by
endurance and bluff.
The bill reported back by the conference committee is almost invariably voted on as a whole
regardless of the changes made in it. Extremely
seldom is it sent back to conference by either
house for further adjustment; and although in
its final form it is safe to say that no man in
either house gives it unqualified approval, and
that few even know just what it contains, yet
it has never happened that a bill getting through
the stages described failed of passage by Congress.


Useful Plants in Foreign Lands
By P. J. WESTER


industries have been built up on the native
heath of the species concerned. Brazil lost her
one-time rubber monopoly to tropical Asia, but
built up her chief industry, coffee, from the
importation of a plant from Abyssinia, where
coffee is of little or no importance. West Africa
once had a monopoly of the oil palm that is now
being threatened by the modern plantations
in Sumatra and other parts of Malaya. Sumatra, by the way, has also been the first to
seriously contend with our Abaca, so long a
Philippine monopoly. The tea industries of
Ceylon and Dutch Malaya are based on the
introduction of plants from China and Assam.
In considering the Philippines in relation
to plant introductions, we find that all our plant
industries except that based on Manila hemp
are based on foreign plants imported at one time
or another. All our commonly cultivated ve

Atantit uun ant r aemit Co.
OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


Wisely directed plant introduction is one of
the most potent and significant factors in the
improvement of agriculture. More than that,
it creates new empires, nations and industries,
destroys old ones and revolutionizes age-old
world commerce and trade routes.
Corn and tobacco excepted, every important
crop in the United States has been transplanted
from some foreign country. Wheat spread from
Syria through the temperate zones. The potato,
originally from the highlands of South America,
has become the world’s most important starchy
vegetable. The citrus fruits from the Orient
transported to Florida and California have
created new industries in a once barren unproductive land. The alfalfas introduced into
America from Europe and Asia have proved of
incalculable value.
Of no less interest is the fact that few plant


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


9


getables, with the exception of the tongo, are of
foreign origin, true also of our best fruits and
nuts, with few exceptions, such as the pili,
kubili, tabu and litoko.
We owe a vast debt of gratitude, which never
can be repaid, to the unknowns who introduced
the coconut, sugar cane, rice, mango, lanzon,
and a host of other fruits and vegetables, but we
can continue their work by introducing some
of the many useful plants of foreign countries
whichstillhavenot found their way to our shores.
Of the varied activities by means of which the
agriculture of a country may be improved none
is more fascinating than plant introduction.
It satisfies the craving for achievement at the
same time that it appeals to the gambling instinct in human nature. By no other means
can betterment be so quickly and cheaply accomplished if wisely directed. For successful
plant introduction does not mean merely the
haphazard importation of foreign plants. The
would-be-successful plant introducer must first
ascertain under what climatic conditions, altitude, soil and rainfall, the "prospect” thrives;
its exploitation or uses in the country into which
he proposes to introduce it must next be considered, and in the case of staple crops if it can be
profitably produced in competition with other
countries in which it is already established.
For if this cannot be done the money expended
in introducing a given crop obviously would be
wasted. Suppose we find, for instance, that
flax and wheat thrives in Baguio. Where is the
land where these crops could be grown in competition with the vast level fertile plains of the
United States, Canada and Argentina? With
fruits and vegetables the problem is more simple,
for in this case any additional useful species
would be an asset to whatever community it was
introduced.
Most important crop plants adapted to our
climate have been introduced into the Philippines, but an immense amount of plant introduction work still remains to be accomplished
in importing better varieties of crops already
grown. Then there is still a bewildering number
of vegetables, in the broadest sense of the
term, and of fruits and nuts, that play a more or
less important role in the diet of the people in
other countries which could to advantage be
imported into the Philippines. Brief descriptions of such plants will be given in these articles for the information of those who may wish
to try them.
Zizania latifolia.—The coba is a coarse perennial grass up to 2 meters tall, growing from coarse
underground runners. It ranges from IndoChina to Korea and Japan, growing in swampy
land and shallow stagnant water with a muddy


bottom. The tender sprouts make an excellent
vegetable of pleasant nutty taste. In China
the coba has been in cultivation at least since
the 10th century, and it also is in cultivation in
Indo-China. In Van ho, near Hanoi, it is grown
on a large scale, the sprouts being marketed
from October to January. In the Hanoi markets the coba is sold tied in bundles of ten somewhat like asparagus sprouts, but the coba is
larger, 25 to 30 cm. long and 25 to 40 mm. across.
Litsea sebifera.—The malai is a large handsome tree to 20 meters in height, native of the
Malay Archipelago. The leaves are large,
lanceolate to ovate-oblong, up to 45 cm. long


Ag. Bu. Photo
Sugar can
troduced into the Philippines
have made fortunes for progressive planters.


THE TOKOHAMA SFECIE BANN
ELTD. E
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
Capital (Paid Up) -
100,000,000.00
Reserve Fund
105,500,000.00
9,346,622.43
Undivided Profits
MANILA BRANCH
600 DASMARINAS, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager
2-37-58—Export, Current Account, Cashier
PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER PHONE(2-37-55—Import, Accountant


and 12 em. broad, and silvery velvet below when
young. The fruit is roundish, flattened, 3 cm.
or more across, reddish, with oily sweetish pulp.
It is eaten steamed with rice by the natives.
Europeans have found it of good taste mixed
with lemon juice and madeira or brandy. It is
also eaten after boiling water has been poured
over the fruits until their color fades. The
malai is one of the most commonly planted
fruits in Banka, and comes into bearing at the
age of 5 to 6 years. It is a close relative of the
avocado.
Momordica dioica.—The vahisi is a perennial
climber growing from a large tuberous root, a
native of India and the Malay peninsula below
1500 meters. The large yellow flowers are
followed by oblong fruits up to 8 em. long, covered with soft spines. The vahist is cultivated
as a vegetable in India where both the fruits
and the tubers are eaten. It is related to the
chayote, which has proved so successfulin Baguio.
Borassus flabellifer.—The palmyra palm is a
stout robust palm 30 meters high, with a trunk
nearly a meter thick; probably a native of tropical Africa south of the Sahara desert, but of
ancient introduction into India to Indo-China
and the Malay Archipelago, thriving from sealevel to about 750 meters altitude. The leaves
are fan-shaped, with spiny petioles. In general
appearance this palm resembles the Philippine
buri, from which it differs in that the large flower
clusters grow from the leaf axils like the coconut.
The fruits are roundish and black—about 20
em. in diameter, and contain one to 3 large
seeds. The palmyra palm is one of the principal
sources of palm sugar in India, obtained by tapping the flower stems like the nipa and coconut.
The tree begins to bloom at the age of 12 to 15
years, continuing for a period of 50 years. The
tapping is done during the hot dry season and
continues over 4 to 5 months, with a yield of
200 to more than 400 liters of sap per palm,
which, aside from sugar, also is made into arrack
and vinegar. The soft jelly-like pulp of the
immature seeds is eaten raw. The sweetish
flesh surrounding the seeds is also eaten raw,
made into a refreshing drink, or it is pounded
into pulp and diluted with water into a soft
mass which is spread on leaves and sun-dried,
in which form it makes an important food. In
Bengal the flesh is mashed and mixed with flour
and made into cakes and fried. The large seeds
are covered with a shallow layer of soil, and as
they germinate the tender sprouts are eaten as a
vegetable or pickled.
The leafstalks furnish a good brush fiber and
the blades are used for making hats, mats,
baskets and many other articles.
The palmyra palm is the most important
palm in south India and northern Ceylon, and
plays a more or less important role in the economic life of the people in Siam, Indo-China and
the Malay Archipelago. It is very drought resistant, and should be a useful tree in all parts
of the Islands having a long dry season.
Cavanillesia arborea.—The barrigude is a
large tree with a trunk up to 20 meters high,
related to the kapok tree, native of Brazil.
The broadly ovate leaves, about 15 em. long,
are clustered at the end of the twigs. The large
red flowers bordered with white, are followed
by five-winged fruits, 13 em. long and 17 em.
across, each containing a single big seed or nut of
good taste eaten roasted.
Couepia uiti.—The uiti is a small tree belonging
to the rose family and is also a native of Brazil,
The small leaves are oblong and pointed, leathery and shining above, and white and velvety
below, up to 6 em. long. The yellow fruit
is egg-shaped, pointed at both ends, 12 to 16
em. long, containing a yellow pulp of unpleasant
odor but of good taste and much appreciated.
Dioscorea bemandry.—The bemandry is a
twining vine related to our ubi and tongo, found
in northwestern Madagascar. It is peculiar
in that a plant always produces twin tubers,
which are long and smooth, 40 to 80 em. long
weighing 5 to 6 kilos each. They are tender,
sweet and juicy, resembling a watermelon in
taste, and are well liked in their native home,
Dioscorea trifida.—The yampi is also a twining
vine related to the ubi, but a native of South
America and the West Indies where it is generally
cultivated. The tubers are relatively small.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


10


  


July, 1929


Vol. IX
July,
UEO
1929
No. 7


WELCOME, GOVERNOR DAVIS!
Governor General Dwight F. Davis arrived in Manila on the President
Taft Monday morning, July 8, when we were going to press with this issue;
brief excerpts of his inaugural speech appear on page three. Everyone
joins in bidding him welcome, and in the ideals of insular administration
he has expressed. We shall all observe the progress of the islands under
his executiveship with marked interest.
BUSINESS AS USUAL
Sugar is in the cellar. Other export commodities are not very far
from it, lumber excepted, yet the country displays an astonishing buying
capacity and business proceeds as usual. The perceptible slump in the
retail trade appears to be little more than the seasonal one always experienced at this period of the year. Rains are heavier, trade lighter for the
time being. Men in piece goods are not happy, perhaps, from the piecemeal manner in which merchants are buying. There are overstocks, which
tend to be distress stocks; staple cottons may be bought cheaper in Manila
just now, at least certain lines of them, than in New York. This is a bad
condition, but piece goods will come back if the general level of business
keeps on as it is.
Dollars are at premium demand, the market does not keep pace with it,
and banks resort to the treasury for transfers. That is, the value of export
bills offered falls short of the import bills which must be taken up in gold.
Another bad symptom this, but not actually terrifying.
Confidence persists. The Philippines are so productive that they
cannot easily be bankrupt, and the fact is becoming known. Confidence
inspires confidence, and optimism has been aided by the outcome of the
tariff legislation in Washington. The islands are left free entry for their
products into the homeland market. There should be no banking on this,
however; the situation has been temporized with, the fundamental question remains as it was. There has been gain on but one point, which
Osmena brought to the fore in the discussion: it seems to be accepted among
advocates of a tariff against the Philippines that independence should
precede such action. That this alternative is not given serious thought,
either here or in Washington, is truly a source of confidence.
Vicente Villamin may yet contrive to win the admiration of his countrymen. His disquisitions on Philippine economics never cease, he reaches
the American public through the periodical press and from the platform,
and he is now invading the land of cotton with the case for copra and
coconut oil.
It never rains but it pours, and it neither rains nor pours but that it
later shines. Sugar has been a dismal outlook for a long time, but there
is a bright lining to the cloud in the effect this has had on the machinery
market. If a generally lower standard of prices is to prevail, then machinery must be utilized on the plantations in substitution of the buffalo.
The machinery market is good. We believe, however, it is not a tenth
of what the market will be ten years hence. One man’s success in adapting machinery to his plantation needs implies the efforts of all his neighbors
in the same direction, and we are just at the beginning of this movement.
Again, every new machine lifts, if but slightly, the level of plantation wages.
The man who drives a buffalo has nothing to buy from anyone; he wears no
shoes, nor even chinelas; he makes his own hat, and his other clothes are a
cotton undershirt and a pair of knee-length red-calico breeches. But the
man who drives a tractor is middle-class; he must wear stout clothing,
and he has a family to provide for.
The money being expended on public works, of which there seems
never before to have been so large a steady volume pouring out of the
treasury, is of course favorably influencing business; for it all goes into
active circulation.
Another factor in the puzzling situation is the extension of banking
facilities, a process now quite definitely underway.
But little money is coming into the islands, that upon which business
is operating is for the most part directly from the soil of these islands. A lot
of this money is coming into active circulation in the form of bank deposits, where heretofore it was hidden away.. This growing use of banks


reflects the public confidence which really goes far to explain the fact that
business in the Philippines proceeds much as usual during a prolonged and
general market depression affecting all major commodities excepting
lumber and rice. How long the volume of trade will keep up, with commodity prices down, is any man’s conjecture. But it may be remarked
that all commodities of the farm and plantation still pay a net profit on
the year’s operations. Sugar is not selling below production cost, where
good management prevails; nor is copra, nor is hemp.
Tobacco is a crop apart. Buying in the Cagayan valley has already
begun, at prices well over those of last year because of the better quality
of the leaf. Our leaf sold abroad goes principally to Europe, where a
gradual industrial recovery may help toward higher prices.
Prosperity in the Philippines moves with that in America, when the
movement is upward, but it sometimes maintains a unique equilibrium
when the trend in America is downward. The rent system prevailing
here may account for this in part. It is the share system. Land taxes
are moderate. If the renter gets little, he still lives; and if the landlord
collects but little, at least a goodly share of what he does get is profit. It
may not be a scientific profit, but it is one he is willing to spend; so the
immediate effect is the same as if he were a good bookkeeper.
Spend how? Why, traveling about, educating his children, courting
lady luck, indulging pleasures, acquiring urban property and building a
town house. These are all business stimulants. And prices may slump,
but the planter who has moved to town stays right in town and finds ways
and means of making both ends meet and keeping up two establishments—
if not indeed half a dozen. He helps makes business as usual.
FARTHER NORTH
Under its authorization of two years ago, the railroad is going to expend a million or two dollars in extending its main line north from Bauang
Sur to San Fernando, La Union, and improving the port of Poro, where
ocean ships may dock. These facilities ought to pay the railroad, they
certainly will benefit the country. They will afford passenger ships carrying tourist parties an opportunity to get their patrons into Baguio within
an hour or two after leaving ship, and obviate the fatigues of the long
motor ride (or train trip) from Manila to that mountain metropolis. While
the primary objective of the project is local patronage, the fact that such
conveniences will one day gain the islands the trade of the world traveler
must never be lost sight of.
When the Bikol line stretches unbroken from Tutuban to Legaspi,
and San Fernando is a northern terminus, why not the railroad take a
leaf from the history of the American transcontinental lines and establish
a system of railroad hotels, places in keeping with the best the road can
furnish in the way of rapid comfortable transportation? Very probably
this experiment would turn out as Baguio has—provided for the American,
patronized at last by the Filipino more than by all others together.
ONE DECADE FOR TEN
Director Hilado of the lands bureau comes forward with a plan to
borrow $30,000,000 from investors in bonds in the United States and
utilize the sum in completing the cadastral survey of the entire Philippines
within one decade, instead of going ahead at the present rate and taking
more than a century for the work—a time too long to be interesting to any
single generation. We believe the JoUrNAL was among the first of Manila
periodicals to advocate this plan, and to endeavor to enlist the interest of
the government in carrying it out. It is something that ought to be done.
Involving no additional taxation, since the cost of the work is all finally
recovered from the land owners and settlers, valid objections to it seem
too few to count.
The lands director rightly states that clearing up the cadastral work
will result in sound titles to land, and better farm credits. It will terminate
litigations over land claims, and give value to farm mortgages. It should
reduce the exorbitant interest on loans the farmer now pays, and give homesteading the precise impetus which has been lacking, i. e., definite knowledge
of boundaries and the government’s real ownership of the tract homesteaded. Nothing else is of greater economic importance to the islands than
this, the final recommendation of Gilmore’s second ad interim term as
acting governor of the islands. We are expertly advised that the plan is
entirely feasible. Sound land titles attract Filipinos as readily as they
do other peoples. Observe how briskly the various suburban additions
to Manila are selling, the vitalizing element being the reliable titles the
purchasers procure. These buyers are no sooner free from the mortgage
to the real estate company, than they obligate themselves for a house.
They pay high interest, perhaps 12 per cent, but they pay as they are able,
monthly, and they are adquiring homes. With similar opportunities, Filipinos would eagerly acquire farms. The Hilado plan is another means
with which to tap the islands’ hidden wealth.


  OF COMMERCE
July, 1929
Four Best Manila Newspapers June Editorials
WASTED BRAIN POWER
He wants his offspring to belong to the lettered


School days are again with us.
In cities, towns and barrios, universities,
colleges and grade schools will, until the end of
the present school ear, be teeming with the youth
of the land, in search of education.
What education?
Engineering colleges and institutes, medical,
pharmacy, dental and law colleges will be overcrowded with young men and young women,
all going through the mill for a degree and a
diploma.
It is most inspiring, this educational race of
the young people, everybody fired with the ambition to belong to the lettered class.
Far be it from us to discourage the youth from
turning back.
Let all the people have a college degree, if that
were possible.
But let not such a degree stand between them
and their own material well-being.
In many instances it has come to that.
Many a young man possessing a college degree
has been rendered useless because of it.
There are many, many wandering lawyers,
pharmacists, dentists, scientific farmers, engineers and other professionals who are forced
to be at leisure even in the face of starvation,
for the dignity of their college education will
not permit them to engage in occupations which
are considered lower than their professions.
Why should such a condition come to exist
among us, precisely at this stage of our national
development when everybody is called upon to
exert an effort in the common endeavor, in
whatever capacity one can be useful, despite
one’s education or college degree?
* * *
But that is the fact.
And obviously things have come to such a
pass through some errors or, perhaps, because
of the lack of an effective system to guide the
youth in acquiring an education that will be
useful to them and to the country.
Often, we hear lamentations of the waste of
our manpower.
Why is education?
Why does a young man or a young woman go
to college?
In many instances he or she does not know.
Many a young person goes to college with not
even a notion of why he is there.
All he cares for is a degree.
And the lack of a purpose naturally leads to
his idleness after college.
We believe that universities and colleges
should be more unsparing, not only in the selection of students who show fitness for higher
education, but also be more solicitous of the
welfare of the youth seeking education by helping them to discover in what line of endeavor
they will be more useful to themselves.
College education would, indeed, be meaningless as it now happens to numerous college
graduates who wander around seeking the end
of the rainbow, were it not applied to some constructive work.
College faculties should guide the students to
discover their own inclinations, in what work
they could be of utmost service, what they love
to do.
And after they have been properly trained
and made fit for such work, it is to be expected
that, when the real commencement of their
actual and practical life sets in, there will be
less faltering and vacillations as to what they
should do, and therefore, less idle professional
wanderers and less waste of brain-power.
To some extent the parents of young persons
who go to college are to blame for the growing
number of idle professionals.
A baker or a butcher or a shoemaker or a
tailor who has made a fortune in his trade sends
his son to college to study law or medicine or
pharmacy
His ambition is to make a professional of his
son.


class.
He wants his heir to be cultured, to be ac
quainted with the Greek classics, to wear a cap
and gown so that his picture in such academic
garb may decorate his parlor.
He would not have his heir learn the secrets
of his trade, which has brought him wealth.
Perhaps he considers his trade too lowly for
his son.
Perhaps his neighbor’s heir is now a lawyer.
And his own son must also have a title.


EDITORIAL SELECTIONS FOR
JUNE
Tribune, June 18.—The Davis Platform. Selected by Professor Carl
N. Taylor.
Herald, June 2.—Wasted Brain Power.
Selected by Professor Vicente M.
Hilario.
Times, June 28.—The School Tax.
Selected by Professor Cristino
Jamias.
Bulletin, June 8.—No Time to Stop.
Selected by Professor Verne Dyson.


With the departure of Dr. George
Pope Shannon from Manila, the JourNAL wishes to acknowledge his courtesy
as the head of the English department
of the University of the Philippines in
arranging for a committee of English
professors to judge each month the
newspaper editorials and select the best
one from each of the dailies published
in English in Manila. A new hand will
be at the helm next month.—Ed.


This foolish idea of keeping up with the Joneses is killing our small trades, the nerve centers
of our bourgeoisie.
And it is partly responsible for the growing
number of our intellectual wanderers.
Culture!
One need not go to college to get acquainted
with Plato, Aristotle or Aristophanes, or with
Virgil, Seneca and Marcus Aurelius.
Even a baker or a butcher can converse with
them out of college.
But what good can a speaking acquaintance
with the ancient masters to do a college graduate
if he lacks the solid comfort that a rich butcher
or baker enjoys?
For the sake of their children, rich traders
should think also of this aspect of life outside
the university campus.—Herald.
THE DAVIS PLATFORM
Governor General Davis has made public
what may be regarded as the central plank of
the platform of his administration. The new
chief executive is for industrial development
largely, if possible, with Filipino capital as its
cornerstone, but jointly, if needs be, with outside
help. He also gives his official assent to the new
trend in education, vocational training in the
schools.
This announcement of what he intends to do
here for the people of these Islands should be
considered a policy intended for the present and
for internal Philippine affairs. That would
simplify matters. That would keep the next
administration free of political entanglements,
and the Filipino leaders as free, we believe, to take
up the question of major political import direct
with the Washington authorities.
One of the results of the Harrison administration, it would seem, is to create here a delusion. He gave the impression that a governor
general is powerful enough to tell both the
President and Congress what to do and what not
to do with respect to independence. On the
face of it, that is absurd. That is erecting hii
dictator over the executive and the legislative
departments of the American government.
As former Governor General Stimson has well
said, political separation from America is a
question that is within the exclusive incumbency
of Congress. The governor general is simply
out of the picture.


11
JOURNAL
So the nationals of this country cannot be
mistaken in limiting the significance of the
announced policies of governors general to the
realities of the present and to objectives having
bearing on in internal questions before the
country. Industral development is such a
reality, and is, in objective, properly of internal
import. The Filipinos, if they know what is to
forge ahead in terms of the life of progressive
countries, cannot afford to look askance at any
governmental action tending to hasten their
industrial development. Thus, even if Governor General Davis did not make mention of it,
it would be only natural that the Filipino leaders
find acceptable his program of industrial progress
for the Philippines.
In a sense, the Davis policies are a second
chapter to those of former Governor Stimson.
The emphasis in them is on material progress.
Only the impractical dreamers, with their feet
dangling leagues over the solid earth, will quarrel
with the effort to hasten that material development among the Filipinos as a problem purely
internal and divorced from the national movement for independence.—Tribune.
THE SCHOOL TAX
The two bills prepared by the department of
finance, one providing for a tax of one peso on
every male resident of the Philippines from 18
to 60 years old and the other setting aside 15
per cent of the gross income of each province,
the fund thus accumulated to be devoted wholly
to school purposes, are worth seriously considering by the legislature when it reopens next
month.
Objections may be raised to the one peso tax
as it may constitute an added burden on the
poor. But then it may be argued that unless
the poor show more willingness to help the
schools it will be impossible to accommodate
their children who year in, year out, knock in
vain at school doors for admittance. It is
about time to thrust home the need of the mass
as well as the well-to-do to help the public
schools.
After all, it is preferable for the father of a
poor family with, say four or five children, to
contribute one peso a vear to the school fund
rather than to see his offspring remain in abject
ignorance. And it happens in most cases that
the poorer a family is the more children there
are in it. An additional tax of one peso may be
earned by increased efforts and the education
the children will get in exchange certainly cannot be measured in terms of money.—Times.


NO TIME TO STOP
Some persons of the higher political strata
are reported to be rather worried over the present
graft investigations. The worry appears to be
based upon political considerations. In other
words there is political fright.
Washing soiled linens in public is not the most
delightful pastime for one in politics, because
of the fear of furnishing ammunition for political
enemies. But if the linens are dirty and growing
dirtier the most practical thing is to get the
laundering—disinfecting also if necessary—
done as speedily as possible. Although it usually is not realized, that is the safest course in the
long run.
Those getting rather shaky at the knees in
connection with the present investigations would
do well to remember that they will fare far
worse if their political enemies ever get in
power and start the house cleaning. Or to
bring the matter more directly down to cases,
the Nacionalistas who now hardly know what to
do should think where they will be if the Democratas come into power. The Democratas
certainly would make capital if they only could
get the seats the Nacionalistas now have, if they
could get control of the present investigations.
In self defense, if for no higher reasons, the
ones now in control should go though with what
they have started, making the cleaning thorough.
That is the most practical and effective means
of strengthening their own position. This is no
time to waver, no time to think of calling off the
investigators and calling in the whitewashers.
-Bulletin.


12


  


July, 1929


Babe and the Moon
By HENRY PHILIP BROAD


As soon as the emergency operation on Major
Dexter was over, Colonel Gardner, chief surgeon
of the military hospital, called aside Lieutenant
Mary Howard, the gray-haired, pink-cheeked
chief nurse who had stood at the door of the
operating room, efficiency itself from whitewinged cap down to rubber-heeled shoes.
nft will be urgent, Lieutenant, to detail a
nurse, a special nurse on the case,” he said.
“A reliable nurse—I am very much concerned
about Dexter. This fall from horseback!”
He shook a lean, disapproving head. “And the
hot season full upon us!” Swiftly he dashed
the rubber gloves into a basin which the nurse
held out to him.
You have someone handy, Lieutenant?”
“I think I have, Colonel,” said the chief
nurse, after a little pause. Then, puckering
her attractively dark brows, “There is Miss
Low, just back from the States and then there
is Miss Hermann....
“With roses in their cheeks, and the latest
wrinkle in dance-steps, what?” the chief surgeon
interrupted, crossly.' “This is no ordinary case,
Lieutenant. Very much depends on the person
who takes care of him, especially at night.
Pil be mighty glad if the wound sets up nothing
worse than a violent fever.” He sighed wearily,
and then, turning to the nurse again, continued
his arrangements. "What I have in mind,
Lieutenant, is a nurse —well, a nurse—not too
young ... and... er ... er... and above all
things, not in the least good-looking!”
Lieutenant Howard bent her fine gray head
to hide an amused smile.
Poor Colonel Gardner! Ever since his own
son had fallen for a pretty face under a winged
cap he had been of the obsession that nurses
had nothing else on their minds but the capture
of desirable husbands. Not that he was altogether wrong. Still there was a limit to everything, even to such a complex. Well, she’d find


the right person and allay his worried apprehensions.
‘There is Babe Martin, Colonel,” she
said.
He threw up his hands in horror:
“Babe, Babe! Lieutenant, What I am looking for is a nurse—and not a debutante!”
Here she burst out laughing heartily. “Excuse me, Colonel, but the idea of Babe as a
debutante... 37
“But her name? Ever heard of a nurse with
a name like that?
“It’s because she’s small, Colonel. And
something in her face—something about not
caring for anything but her work.... You
know the tvpe, Colonel.”
“How old? Been out here long?”
“Old? Why, thirty-five at least, but at that
she manages to look older than it is well for any
nurse to look. A very good nurse though,
very conscientious. The tdeal nurse, I may say
—the kind you read of and that you so rarely
find in actual life.... Her term? I think it
expires in September. She insists on going
home. All the others have asked for an extension of their stay here in Manila. Strange, she
does not like the islands."
With her gray, gold-flecked eyes she looked
up at her superior officer and added:
“No fear with Babe, Colonel. Babe is no
drawing-card with men.”
'Well, she seems to qualify. I am rather
sorry for poor Dexter, though.” Then, with a
chuckle, he said: "Still, itll serve him right to
be taken care of by an ideal nurse. The old
madcap is always ready to fall for a pretty face.
But let’s not be too hard on him, Lieutenant!
Put this Babe person on night duty.”
That’ll be ideal, Colonel,” was her final
response, as she handed him his gold-corded
Stetson.
Babe—or as the records had it—Miss Martha
Martin, Second Lieutenant, Army Nurse Corps,


U.S.A., was in the room she shared with Sally
getting ready for another night of duty. How
oppressive the heat! Even the night brought
no relief.
Just then Sally came in, wilted from afternoon-duty. Poor Sally, thought Babe. So
little suited to be a nurse, especially in the Philippines! Pretty, vivacious and always in love!
Sally pulled off her dank white garments,
throwing them in a heap on the floor; then, in
her kimono, "Say, Babe, are you making yourself beautiful for your gentleman case tonight?”
Babe, pinning a cap on her pale-blond hair,
did not reply. It was not the first time that
Sally had teased her; nor was Sally the only one
to indulge in the sport.
“Evelyn says his fever ’s gone up something
fierce.” Sally went on.
“So you see, Babe my love, you needn’t bother,
he won’t notice you.”
“You must be tired as tired can be, Sally,”
Babe retorted. “When you are as mean as
that I know you are worn out. You had better
go to bed and sleep it off."
“Go to bed, your great-grandma!” Sally
shouted from the door. "What do you think?
Don’t you know I am expecting a couple of
callers?”
Babe crossed the small garden in front of the
nurses’ home and walked over to the hospital.
She looked at the chart in the office. Fever
had gone up, sure enough, but otherwise no
change. How would it all end? Poor Major
Dexter, lying there so helplessly, so hopelessly, she feared. Such a handsome man and
so popular! Popular, ves, with his own set, of
course, especially with the young married women
of the regiment. ... She sighed and cautiously
stepped into the sick-room. It was a long and
narrow room, off which there was a screened
sitting porch facing the front. The nurse in
charge withdrew and Babe was alone with her
patient. Pathetically thin he lay on the white
army bed; his eyes were closed, yet he did not
seem to sleep, for on the cover-let his hands were
fidgeting restlessly. Poor worn hands, Babe


CONNFIDENOE

ENCIRCLES THE GLOBE!


TANSAN
is more than a
delicious tablewater,
it is a
Great Natural
Tonic
Impregnated
with
RADIUM!


BEWARE
OF IMITATIONS!


TANSAN
IS
100
PURE!


It is absolutely
free from every trace
of microbic
life and earthy
deposits


N N
TANSAN


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


13


thought, in a man not vet forty. She sat down
near the bed and slowly, rythmically began to
stroke those hands.
Now, apparently, he was sleeping quietly
and she withdrew her hand; but almost immediately he grew restless again. Her hand seemed
to infuse him with quiet. And thus she sat
for ten nights, stroking him into blissful oblivion,
with strained watchfulness on her part, lest the
slow unceasing rythm might lull her to sleep.
As the days and nights passed still there was
no change in Major Dexter’s condition. The
chief surgeon was at his wits’ ends as he confided
to the smiling head nurse: “The patient should
be dead or alive, according to all known precedents.” And just now, he was neither. The
reports on the chart repeated themselves in endless monotony, restless at times—asleep; restless at times—asleep. This was the night
nurse’s report. One night Colonel Gardner
had gone to visit his patient at an inordinate
hour and had found the head nurse’s judgment
entirely substantiated. That pale blonde, that
forgotten old maid would never make an impression on Dexter if he ever took an interest
again in women.
The night that Babe was never to forget settled
upon Manila in an ineffable halo of moonlight.
As Babe unobtrusively enough passed the sala
on her way to the hospital, Sally comfortably
ensconced in a deep, becoming Bilibid chair,
called out: “Don’t get excited, Babe my love,
if anything happens tonight. They say he is
at his lowest.”
“Miss Martin," said the day-nurse, “orders
from Colonel Gardner to call him in case...
of any change. He will be at Mr. Lowe’s until
midnight, and later at his quarters.”
“Yes, it’s in the chart,” Babe answered, very
much perturbed. Fever had gone to such height
that it seemed impossible to have it and still be
alive. The crisis, surely. She looked at her
patient as he lay there so spent, so still. Even
the hands twitched no longer. Like poor windblown leaves they rested on the sheet. All
strength gone already? She bent down to him.
His pulse was slow, very slow . . . but it had been


slower before. A last flicker of vitality? A final
summing up of forces, perhaps? It might be
a matter of hours, perhaps of minutes. She
would have to call the Colonel soon. So she
rearranged bottles and glasses on the small table
near the bed, set things to rights again on the
tiny dresser, and smoothed over the light blanket. Babe was a conscientious nurse.
Outside the world lay under the silver effusion
of the moon. The flame-trees in the hospital
courtyard wore wraps of shimmering gold through
which the fire-flies wove an endless thread of
glittering splendor. The acacias had folded
their green-and-silver leaves as if in prayer.
A hush had fallen like a heavy mantle upon all
things. Only the gecko-lizards from their leafv
fastnesses pierced with their weird staccato call
the night that had not quite become day.
The awful, awful stillness, Babe thought.
The terrible quiet! As though the heart of the
universe had ceased to beat. The, eeriness of it.
She felt painfully and utterly alone in an unfriendly world. She would have given anything
to have heard a human voice, to have had someone to talk to.
It was just as Babe had reproved herself for
an unbecoming case of nerves that the patient
slowly opened his eyes.
She watched him intently. This was a change.
Hadn’t she better call the chief surgeon?”
Very slowly he turned his eyes upon her,
looked long and intently, then closed them once
more. A smile crept into his face, a smile of
regret, she thought. The smile lingered, sadly
illuminating the ravaged features. To her
own amazement Babe’s eyes filled with tears.
It was so sad to see a man die who knew he was
dying, she explained the tears to herself, dashing
them away excitedly.
Before midnight the chief surgeon dropped in.
The nurse reported the change. He waited a
while, then left, shrugging sympathetic shoulders. “It might take bim until morning or even
longer.... Iam to be called, nurse, in case....”
'Yes, Colonel.”
The door had scarcely closed on the physician
than the patient opened his eyes once more and


directed their full glance upen the nurse standing
by the bedside. His lips were moving and she
bent down to him. High up in the star-strewn
firmament stood the moon.
Very distinctly, in the perfect stillness of the
night, she heard him whisper and bent closer
to him. “Margaret”, he breathed. “Margaret!”
Babe drew back. Delirium was setting in.
Too bad, too bad. With brimming eyes she
reached for a small bottle, poured some of its
contents into a spoon and approaching him said
gently, “This will do you good."
He took it meekly, looking at her steadily,
and then lay back. But the drug did not have
the desired effect. A quarter of an hour passed
in silence. Once more he directed his glance
upon her. His eyes looked out pleadingly from
the pale face, and moved by their mute insistence
he sat down on the edge of the bed. He stretched out his hands to her: “Margaret!” He
whispered again, “oh, my Margaret!”
Now he took her hands and stroked them and
she let him do it. Suddenly, with a weak, yet
determined gesture, he raised her hand to his
lips. She hastily withdrew it, brushing the
bandaged forehead as she did so. Then with
infinite reproach in entreating eyes and in a
voice barely audible he pleaded: “You said you
loved me, Margaret.”
From high above the moon poured bewitching radiance into the room; and once more into
the velvety stillness of the night his words
cut a plaintive refrain: “But you said you loved
me Margaret!”
Then something altogether unheard-of happened. Babe bent down to the sick men, she who
had never bent to a man before! With a gesture
infinitely tender she put her arms around him
and into his ears, softly and sweetly, she whispered: “I do love you, dear.” Then he drew her
to him and kissed her lips and she returned the
caress, her first and—as she shiveringly told
herself—his last! Twice more during the night
he asked her if she loved him and each time she
said she did, sealing her pledge with a kiss.
(To be continued)


ALACE TIELAR
(VICENTE G. ALBERTO, Prop.)
CALLE RONQUILLO, STA. CRUZ, MANILA
TELEPHONE 2-64-49


We aim to give the
best in the way of
Perfect Entertainment


Exclusive Philippine Distributors for
“EXCELLENT" and "GOTHAM"
Productions


Dunlop experience of tire making commenced forty-one
years ago, when they made pneumatic tires for the old high
bicycles. Since then it has embraced tire performance on every
variety of vehicle running on every kind of surface.
ONLY DUNLOP EXPERIENCE COVERS THE
WHOLE HISTORY OF THE PNEUMATIC TIRE


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


14


  


July, 1929


Recent Developments in
Among the recent developments in the life
insurance world has been the life insurance trust.
This form of trust dates back very few years, and
only within the last three years has it assumed
large proportions.
This development requires the close cooperation of both life insurance and trust companies,
and in a few words, is generally arranged by
depositing life insurance policies made payable
to the trust company as beneficiary in trust for
the person who is to receive the benefit of the
trust. When the policies mature, either by the


Life Insurance Practice
In the case of a partnership, the question of
buying out the interest of a deceased partner,
if the business is to continue, is not one of desirability but one of necessity. The death of a
partner spells legal death for the partnership.
Even if there is a partnership agreement providing for the purchase of a deceased partner’s
interest, this agreement is only as good as the
ability of the surviving partners to carry it out.
It is therefore very clear that substantial funds
must be available if the interest of a partner is
to be purchased at his death and the most prac

policy is written in two forms. Either to provide
a monthly income for life for the beneficiary,
guaranteed for a minimum term of years in the
event of the beneficiary’s death, or to provide a
guaranteed income for a certain term of years
until the beneficiary can adjust himself or herself
to changed conditions. The income policy
is usually one of at least two policies taken out
by the head of the family to provide for the
future. The other policy, calling for a lump
sum at death to pay unpaid bills, funeral expenses, hospital and doctor’s expenses which
ordinarily accumulate at death, thereby enabling
the beneficiary to enjoy the benefit from the
income policy of all debts paid.
This brings us to another development in the
life insurance world, the programming of insurance.
Today, all well informed life insurance agents
can act as advisors to their clients and by means
of a well considered plan which can be put into
force over a term of years as the client’s income
expands, provide for an insurance program
covering a “clean-up" policy, an income policy,
additional policies for each child, and policies
to cover any other particular need which may be
called for due to the particular circumstances of
the client, such as a policy to retire a mortgage.
The placing of life insurance on the scientific
basis reached by modern developments is such
that the percentage of lapsed policies is decreasing rapidly, for today the insurance agent acting
in his capacity of advisor places policies with
his clients which answer definite needs, thereby
satisfying his client and causing him to make
sacrifices to keep his program in full force. A
properly sold policy rarely if ever lapses. The
inclusion of the total disability clause making it
possible for a policy to continue in force even
though through physical disability the insured
loses temporarily or permanently whole or
part of his income, is another modern insurance
—Contributed.
convenience.


the insular nife Assurance Co., Ltd.
MANILA, P. I.





ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans onrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
FOR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


HOME OFFICE


Call or write for particulars to:


4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 11
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


HEADINGTON TREASURER


death of the insured or the expiry of the endowment period, then the proceeds are received by
the trust company properly invested and the
trust immediately begins to operate. The
advantage of this arrangement is obvious.
Instead of leaving insurance in a lump sum to
inexperienced beneficiaries, the life insurance
trust eliminates danger of poor investment and
assures the beneficiary or beneficiaries a certain
uninterrupted income for life, or for a term of
years fixed by the trust.
The insurance trust is also extensively used
for business insurance; usually, for one of two
general purposes: to provide a cash indemnity
for the loss of a key man in a business, or to
provide funds for the purchase of an interest
belonging to the estate of a partner or member
of a close corporation.
Few people realize the value of a wage earner
to his family. If a man is earning P5,000 per
annum, figuring 5% as the maximum interest
to be earned on a gilt edge security, then that
man is worth P100,000 to his family. It is
true that few if any wage earners earning the
amount above mentioned can afford to pay the
premium on a P100,000 policy to replace his
earning power after his death, but at least he
can own sufficient insurance to provide after his
death by means of an insurance trust, an income
large enough to provide the necessities of life for
his beneficiaries, if not for life, at least until such
time as his children are able to earn their own
living or until they are able to adjust themselves
to a smaller income than that received during
the lifetime of the father.
Again, referring to the value of life insurance
to those owning stock in a close corporation, it
is certain that almost any business man would
prefer to have his family receive the value of
his stock than the stock itself. Also, those
actively engaged in the management of such a
business would much rather keep the stock in
their hands than have an inexperienced beneficiary or her legal representative vote the stock.


tical way of providing these funds is through
life insurance. Properly to handle this matter,
the creation of a life insurance trust agreement
setting forth the terms of the transaction and the
agreement is essential.
Of late years, the income policy is taking the
place of a lump sum settlement it being generally
known that the average beneficiary is not sufficiently versed in financial affairs properly to
handle a large sum of money. The income


At the first directors’ meeting in July, John L.
Headington was elected treasurer of the American
Chamber of Commerce of the Philippine Islands,
vice B. A. Green, who had resigned from the post
to which he had given competent attention for
many years. Mr. Headington is an old member
of the directors’ board also. He is the manager
of the Philippine Button Corporation and excellently qualified for the treasurership of the
chamber of commerce.


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
Kneedler Building
Manila, P. I.
Telephone 2-36-74


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


15-


Origins of the Roman Catholic Church
GIBBON—(Continued from June)


IV. But the primitive Christian demonstrated his faith by his virtues; and it was very
justly supposed that the divine persuasion, which
enlightened or subdued the understanding, must,
at the same time, purify the heart, and direci
the actions, of the believer. The first apologists
of Christianity who justify the innocence of their
brethren, and the writers of a later period who
celebrate the sanctity of their ancestors, display,
in the most lively colors, the reformation of
manners which was introduced into the world
by the preaching of the gospel. As it is my intention to remark only such human causes as were
permitted to second the influence of revelation,
I shall slightly mention two motives which might
naturally render the lives of the primitive Christians much purer and more austere than those of
their Pagan contemporaries or their degenerate
successors; repentance for their past sins, and
the laudable desire of supporting the reputation
of the society in which they were engaged.
It is a very ancient reproach, suggested by
the ignorance or the malice of infidelity, that the
Christians allured into their party the most
atrocious criminals, who, as soon as they were
touched by a sense of remorse, were easily persuaded to wash away, in the water of baptism,
the guilt of their past conduct, for which the
temples of the gods refused to grant them any
expiation. But this reproach, when it is cleared
from misrepresentation, contributes as much to
the honor as it did to the increase of the church.
The friends of Christianity may acknowledge
without a blush that many of the most eminent
saints had been before their baptism the most
abandoned sinners. Those persons who in the
world had followed, though in an imperfect
manner, the dictates of benevolence and propriety, derived such a calm satisfaction from the
opinion of their own rectitude as rendered
them much less susceptible of the sudden emotions of shame, of grief, and of terror, which have
given birth to so many wonderful conversions.
After the example of their divine Master, the
missionaries of the gospel disdained not the
society of men, and especially of women, oppressed by the consciousness, and very often by the
effects, of their vices. As they emerged from sin
and superstition to the glorious hope of immortality, they resolved to devote themselves
to a life, not only of virtue, but of penitence.
The desire of perfection became the ruling passion of their soul; and it is well known that,
while reason embraces a cold mediocrity, our
passions hurry us, with rapid violence, over the
space which lies between the most opposite
extremes.
When the new converts had been enrolled in
the number of the faithful, and were admitted
to the sacraments of the church, they found
themselves restrained from relapsing into their
past disorders by another consideration of a less
spiritual, but of a very innocent and respectable
nature. Any particular society that has departed from the great body of the nation, or the
religion to which it belonged, immediately becomes the object of universal as well as invidious
observation. In proportion to the smallness of


its numbers, the character of the society may be
affected by the virtues and vices of the persons
who compose it; and every member is engaged
to watch with the most vigilant attention over
his own behavior, and over that of his brethren,
since, as he must expect to incur a part of the
common disgrace, he may hope to enjoy a share
of the common reputation. When the Christians of Bithynia were brought before the tribunal of the younger Pliny, they assured the
proconsul that, far from being engaged in any
unlawful conspiracy, they were bound by a
solemn obligation to abstain from the commission of those crimes which disturb the private
or public peace of society, from theft, robbery,
adultery, perjury, and fraud. Near a century
afterwards, Tertullian, with an honest pride,
could boast that very few Christians had suffered by the hand of the executioner, except on
account of their religion. Their serious and
sequestered life, averse to the gay luxury of the
age, inured them to chastity, temperance, economy, and all the sober and domestic virtues.
As the greater number were of some trade or
profession, it was incumbent on them, by the
strictest integrity and the fairest dealing, to
remove the suspicions which the profane are too
apt to conceive against the appearances of sanctity. The contempt of the world exercised them
in the habits of humility, meekness, and patience.
The more they were persecuted, the more closely
they adhered to each other. Their mutual
charity and unsuspecting confidence has been
remarked by infidels, and was too often abused
by perfidious friends.
It is a very honorable circumstance for the
morals of the primitive Christians, that even
their faults, or rather errors, were derived from
an excess of virtue. The bishops and doctors
of the church, whose evidence attests, and whose
authority might influence, the professions, the
principles, and even the practice of their contemporaries, had studied the Scriptures with less
skill than devotion; and they often received, in
the most literal sense, those rigid precepts of


W


ITH the coming of
Governor General


Dwight F. Davis, donor of
the Davis Cup and thrice
national doubles
champion, tennis
A
will be more in S
vogue than ever.

We have everything for the game, notably
Dayton Steel and Bancroft Rackets.


SQUIRES BINCHAMCO.
15 Plaza Goiti Manila, P. I.
Phone 2-13-01


fathers have carried the duties of self-mortification, of purity, and of patience, to a height which


CHARTERED BANK


OF INDIA. AUSTRALIA
AND CHINA
Capital and Reserve Fund............ ... ...... E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor.................. 3,000,000
MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transaoted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


Christ and the apostles, to which the prudence
of succeeding commentators has applied a looser
and more figurative mode of interpretation.
Ambitious to exalt the perfection of the gospel
above the wisdom of philosophy, the zealous


Phone


For Your Electrical Work


AVOA


2-32-40


MORA ELECTRIC CO., INC.


7 CALLE SODA


MANILA, P. I.


it is scarcely possible to attain, and much less
to preserve, in our present state of weakness and
corruption. A doctrine so extraordinary and so
sublime must inevitably command the veneration of the people; but it was ill calculated to
obtain the suffrage of those wordly philosophers
who, in the conduct of this transitory life, consult only the feelings of nature and the interest
of society.
There are two very natural propensities which
we may distinguish in the most virtuous and
liberal dispositions, the love of pleasure and the
love of action. If the former is refined by art
and learning, improved by the charms of social
intercourse, and corrected by a just regard to
economy, to health, and to reputation, it is productive of the greatest part of the happiness of
private life. The love of action is a principle
of a much stronger and more doubtful nature.
It often leads to anger, to ambition, and to
revenge; but when it is guided by the sense of
propriety and benevolence, it becomes the parent
of every virtue, and if those virtues are accompanied with equal abilities, a family, a state, oran empire may be indebted for their safety and
prosperity to the undaunted courage of a single
(Please turn to page 18)


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENUS PLEASE MENTION   


16


  


July, 1929


A Triumph of the Cross Over Majesty
By FRANCISCO DE AGUAREnA
Sometime Private Secretary to His Excellency Don Diego de Salcedo, Governor
and Captain-General for His Majesty King Philip IV, in the Philippine Islands.
1663-1668
(As Translated and Arranged by Percy A. Hill)
SYNOPSIS.—A typical prolonged dispute is developing between the royal governor of the Philippines, D. Diego de Salcedo, and the friars. A Dutch ship,
bringing friars from China, is ordered by the governor to put back to sea—Salcedo
depising the heretical Dutch who harass his king’s empire. Murmurs of inquisitorial proceedings are overheard in an inn, by the mother of the narrator’s mistress.
The narrator, clerk to the governor, is peremptorily sent for, at midnight, the governor simply writing “Come at once—Diego."


CHAPTER III
IN WHICH IS RELATED THE FURTHER DETAILS
OF THE PLOTTING AGAINST HIS EXCELLENCY BY
HIS ENEMIES WHO BANDED TOGETHER UNDER
THE ROBE OF THE CHURCH TO DESTROY HIM.


I dressed in haste, as the occasion demanded.
A ruffled jacket, pantaloons of point and a heavy
cloak, not forgetting to buckle on a sword which
had a good blade made in Toledo. Marieta
asked where I was going and I replied that Don


Diego had called me to the palace and I must
go in haste. She said she would accompany
me, as she had to return there early in any event.
The night was as dark as a wolf’s mouth and
the rain still came down in torients. We had
to traverse calles Victoria, Santa Potenciana
and Palacio before we arrived at the palace, at
the end of Palacio, between calles Postigo and
Arzobispo and the Audiencia. At frequent
intervals the stormy gusts of rain added to our
nervousness. A closed coach passed us, and,
being close to one of the hanging street lanterns,
I was surprised to see that the coachman was
none other than Padre Juan, a Franciscan friar.
Without any untoward incident we arrived at
the palace, and were halted and recognized by
the guards on duty.
Entering the palace, Marieta passed into
the inner chamber or linen room, while I remained in the antechamber until his excellency
called for me. Marieta, however, came out a
moment later, saying the governor was waiting
for me in his cabinet. Leaving my cloak and
sword, I entered and found his excellency in his
night clothes. He was seated at a desk on which
were an infinite number of papers and dispatches
in disarray. He was biting his under lip and
his clenched hand lay upon the desk. He indicated that I be seated close to the table dedicated to affairs of state, upon which were a pile
of bound archives. I sat down without a word,
and awaited his pleasure.
Some time transpired in silence. Then, in a
suffocated voice, he said:
“In the defense of his majesty’s interests and
those of Spain I have made many hatreds and
enemies. I expect that all governors in these
islands have done the same. Some have bowed
to other powers too craven to defend the interests
of his majesty, but I cannot do so. I have
confidence of loyal servants to aid me in this
task which God in his infinite wisdom has laid
upon me. I am furthermore resolved to see that
the laws of his majesty are complied with in
these far-off islands. Can I expect unswerving
loyalty and confidence from you?”
To this I replied, "I am your loyal and humble
servant in all that I can accomplish to help your
excellency and for his majesty, whom God guard
many vears. My life is his to command."
"In that case,” he continued, "I order you to
take note of all good Spaniards in wh we can
trust, but do this circumspectly and ort to
me, and may God and Spain reward yo Tomorrow go amongst the friars, and con nts,
listening to the general news circulating. R ort
this to me without altering anything, so th I
may be en rapport with all that is taking place”
Here I was tempted to tell him of the news
had heard from Marieta in the early part of the
evening, but, for a certain diffidence regaiding
my querida Lutgarda, I refrained for the moment, and I was also thinking of the sad position
I would be in, by making an enemy of the dreaded Inquisition.
A loud noise outside brought my thoughts
to the immediate present—the clash of arms,
swords and pikes, in front of the palace, mingled
with the cries of several men, after which reigned
a sepulchral silence, broken only by the falling
rain. With the rapidity of the practised officer,
I saw his excellency gird on his sword above his
nightclothes, and rush out into the main reception-hall. I grasped my sword and cloak
and joined him as he descended the wide staircase, plainly hearing the terrified voice of Marieta as she intoned the seven mysteries, in her
utter trepidation, in the adjoining chamber.
As we reached the ground floor, we saw Sergeant
Manuel de Alfenique with two of the six guards
on duty. He explained that two unknown
persons dismounted from a coach and attempted
to enter the palace, making certain signs. As
they refused to give their names to the sentinels
or disarm themselves, as in custom, a scuffle had
taken place, the strangers defending themselves
with dexterity, until, hearing us descending the
stairs, they had taken to flight in all haste.
After this incident we returned upstairs
and I repeated my loyalty to his excellency’s
orders. When leaving, I exhorted Marieta to
watch over his excellency, who was surrounded
by many unworthy enemies. After her protests
of fidelity, I left the palace. Before leaving,


THE POPULAR AND RECOGNIZED
MATON COORHNG SIOVES
REGISTERED AND PATENTED BY
CIRIACO TUASON


The "Mayon" cooking
stoves are generally used
in all parts of the Philippines, because they are
economical and can take
easily the place of any
other stove. For sale
exclusively in our factory at 1174-1188 Agno,
Manila.
We are obliged to secure
a patent for the manufacture of the "Mayon"
cooking stoves in order
that the public may not
be defrauded by the
various imitations which
are modeled after our
noted and exclusive invention.
This is the patent of
the "Mayon" cooking
stoves which is conceded
by the Patent Commissioner of the United
States to Ciriaco Tuason
and Sons.


We manufacture also different kinds of mosaics tiles,
cement pipes and gutters, roof tile, granite imitation,
balausters, flower-pots and other articles made of cement
for ornamental and miscellaneous purposes.
C. luason oz Sons, Inc.
(Founded in MDMXXI)
Ofice and Factory:
Phone off. 5-71-29
Res. 5-44-20
1174-1188 Agno, Malate


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  OF
IMERCE JOURNAL


17


however, I became aware that Marieta herself
had illicit relations with the cook of his excellency, a native of Pampanga, called Pedro
Advincula. He was of middle age, his mixed
descent was betrayed by a Roman nose, though
he was of dark complexion, but his other features
did not give any great faith in reposing any
confidence in him. Furthermore, I dimly suspected that perhaps Marieta herself had previous knowledge of the attack on his excellency,
all of which perturbed me in no slight manner."
I made my way to calle Cabildo, and, arrived
home safely, I smoked a cigar. It was then
nearly daybreak, but I had no great desire to
sleep, but laid myself down and sought rest,
in spite of the torrents of rain that lashed the
itv. Shortly I heard the clanging of the church
bells, echoed by those farther off, their tones
being carried across the Pasig by the gusts of
the tempest. It was about ten o’clock when I
awoke, or rather when Lutgarda wakened me,
bringing with her a morning cup which she
leclared was the best for wet and rainy weather.
This was a decoction of tea, sugar and ginger
 China, which she called tahu
imported
of agreeable taste, piquant and somewhat aromatic. Afterwards I dressed and sallied out
t. The calles were full of swirling
into the st
puddles; shoes were out of the question, and 1
was forced to take mine off. As the rain still
fell, few
 were abroad.
ear the crossing of Arzobispo street I met
some vendors of bananas cooked in flour and
nt a few of these to reinforce my
ard. I b
ler breakfast of tahu, but lamented this
later on as they caused me a severe indigestion.
had begun to ring for late mass and
The c
us groups of people were going in through
As for myself, I abstained from
her portals
fice, as I desired speech with the
the holy
stan of San Francisco, an old friend, from
whom I expected to gather some news of the daily
He was liked by all the FrancisPAPP"Diego Anialdo, a native of the Villa de
Arevalo (Iloilo) in Panay, had been brought to
le very young by an Augustinian
nila
He was however, in Binunduc, (Binondo), a suburb, visiting some friends, I was
y the door keeper, but to return at
nforme
lay. I waited some time, but as he did not
arrive and it began to darken up and promise
n, I made my way towards the palace.
n my way I met a number of persons in
conversation near the Ayuntamiento and recognized several of them, among others the
master of camp, Don Augustin de Cepeda who
wvas old and almost in his dotage; but like all
this country, uncommonly fond of
e and fiercely attached to the church
ami
barty. With him was Rayodoria, the arch plotter,
he burly Juan Tirado and Nicolas Munoz de
Pamplona. The master of camp said, “I cannot tolerate this suspense. His excellency was
not at morning mass, something must have
occurred at the palace, or he must be sick.”
The alcaldes Rayodoria and Munoz shook their
heads in the negative, saying, "All this suspense
is bad: that which commences bad ends bad."
Later I was to understand the meaning of these
remarks, but for the present the day passed
without extraordinary happenings, but its
events brought in their train that which led
up to the final act.
CHAPTER IV
IN WHICH IS SET FORTH THE CONFLICTS BETWEEN HIS ILUSTRISIMO THE ARCHBISHOP POBLETE AND HIS EXCELLENCY DON DIEGO SALCEDO, AND OTHER EVENTS WHICH FIGURE IN
THE HISTORY OF THE TIMES.
On August 28, 1667, I arrived at the palace
a few hours late, and after the ushers and staff
had commenced their daily routine. I was
seated at my desk copying some orders when
the chief usher announced the arrival of a certain personage with passports and credentials
from his majesty and desiring an interview with
his excellency. I was sent to lead him to the
audience chamber. I found in the anteroom
a person clad in the black habit of the Society
of Jesus, of tall stature and ruddy with the
health of middle age. He possessed an eagle
nose and his features preserved a marked serenity, while his manner bespoke the educated
man and the courtier.


He was Don Diego de Cartagena, an expelled
Jesuit (a former friend of the king who had been
sent or banished to the Philippines by his majesty’s orders, perhaps to cover up some escapade of his own, as was the custom of the
epoch. His excellency received the visitor
with marked courtesy. After taking the seat
proffered him, close to his excellency’s desk, the
visitor unrolled from a parcel he carried beneath
his arms some sealed documents and dispatches
which he delivered with a courtly bow to the
captain general.
“I ask help from your excellency,” said the
visitor, "because I expect that others to whom
I make my address will pay little attention to
y"Never mind,” said his
these orders I carry.”
excellency, while I am here the orders of his
majesty will always be obeyed by me. Whether
these will be agreeable to other personages here


who do not care for me, will be of little importance. I command here in the Philippines and
I hope to see others respect the name of his
majesty as I respect it, and shall endeavor
to have them render him equal respect.”
A short while later his excellency had me
indite a letter to his ilustrisimo the archbishop
and the ecclesiastical cabildo to dispose of the
matter relatives to Don Diego de Cartagena in
conformity with the orders of his majesty, King
Philip IV. (This was the granting of a living,
racion, within the power of the archbishop, and
so ordered expressly by the king).
While the illustrious personage was preparing
to take his leave, I hastily made two clean copies
of the letter, placed the original in the archives,
and gave the other to a guard of the palace to
deliver personally to his grace, and the other
to Don Diego de Cartagena. It was about


Did You EverWish
lou MadAThira hand.


WESTINGHOUSE Light and Power
APlantiswortha dozen hands toyoul
In addition to lighting your home, it will
supply electrical energy to pump your
water, to sharpen your tools—to do the
many things which now take your time
from pressing tasks. And the really
wonderful thing about the Westinghouse
Light and Power Plant is that it is so easy
to operate—and so econcmical to own.
Investigate the Westinghouse Light and
Power Plant today. Your dealer will
gladly give you all necessary details.
MACLEOD AND CO
154 Marques de Comillas
MANILA
Branches in
Iloilo, Cebu, Davao and Vigan.


Westinghouse


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


18


  


July, 1929


Origins of the Roman Catholic Church
GIBBON—(Continued from page 15)


three o’clock in the afternoon of the same day
when the chief usher announced the visit of
another illustrious personage, Archbishop Poblete. The usher announced him in a powerful
voice, and his excellency, in an equally powerful
voice, said, "Let him pass into my cabinet.”
Without much of the usual courtesy, his excellency desired the bishop to be seated and
inquired the nature of his visit, expressing his
pleasure in seeing the very reverend and illustrious archbishop of Manila at the palace.
Without much beating about the bush on
his part either the archbishop said, "Your excellency must comprehend that it is impossible to
comply with the order of his majesty which
your excellency has transmitted to me. The
racion desired from the ecclesiastical cabildo
cannot be given to an expelled member of the
Jesuits. Besides, it is contrary to the statutes
so provided by the church that this should be
done, from all of which your excellency sees
that it is an order impossible to comply with.”
Pallid and trembling with anger, the captain
general stood up and in a convulsive voice repled as follow :
Do all you can faithfully to comply with this
order of his majesty, the king. I as one of his
faithful vassals, as long as I have power to
govern in the Philippines, will never permit
that an order of our lord and majesty shall
remain uncomplied with. If my orders transmitted to you are insufficient for obedience, I
shall find ways and means, even to the sacrificing
of my life in his service. I shall not consent to
the fact that there are in these islands two powers
who command, for it would be fatal to all contherefore advise your grace to
cerned.
comply with the order you have received. If
not, I will see that it is complied with by force.
One must obey if he expects to be obeyed. Comply with this as a good vassal of his majesty."
The Archbishop replied hotly:
“I protest against such an imposition! Your
excellency understands that we ecclesiastics
deserve more respect, both by our office and
situation. For this, I pray vou withdraw the
“No!” shouted
order, at least for some time."
his excellency. “I will not withdraw the order!
That would be rank disobedience and vour
grace cannot dare to make a joke of the King’s
order. No, a thousand times, no! The Church
of God desires its name to be respected and
venerated, and to gain this must respect in
turn the orders of the king and not to disobey
them. Go, then, and comply with the order!”
"I protest with all proper respect to your
excellency, and must place myself on record
that it is not possible to comply with this order,
illegal and contradictory to the statutes of the
Church,” reiterated the archbishop. "Go, and
comply,” repeated the angry governor. "Guard!
Conduct this person from my cabinet! Conduct
him outside the palace. Today I will see what
means are needed for obedience to a royal order!”
One of the palace guards entered the cabinet.
Taking the prelate by the arm, after religiously
crossing himself, he conducted him out of the
chamber. Great drops of perspiration were
visible on the forehead of the archbishop, who
from age and perturbation could scarcely sustain
his footsteps while passing through the antechamber; while the equally nervous captain
general ordered me to prepare two royal provisions on parchment one of these being an
order of banishment of the prelate to Mariveles,
in case he refused to comply with the order
coming from his majesty.
The afternoon closed with gloomy forbodings
in reference to these royal provisions. The
humid weather gave signs n an approaching
storm. To make things more sad, a woman
from Ermita, named Praxedes Cuyugan, who
looked like a witch, brought the news that a
strange sickness that seened epidemic was
attacking the people of that suburb, which the
clergy referred to as a punishment from divine
providence. The night set in with heavy
winds and lashing rains as if nature itself preluded the struggle about to take place—that of
church and state. The written orders of the
captain general were approved by the Royal
Audiencia next day, and I retired quite late to
my house after the labors and excitements of
the last two days.
(Continued in August)


man. To the love of pleasure we may therefore
ascribe most of the agreeable, to the love of
action we may attribute most of the useful and
respectable, qualifications. The character in
which both the one and the other should be
united and harmonized would seem to constitute
the most perfect idea of human nature. The
insensible and inactive disposition, which should
be supposed alike destitute of both, would be
rejected, by the common consent of mankind,
as utterly incapable of procuring any happiness
to the individual, or any public benefit to the
world. But it was not in this world that the
primitive Christians were desirous of making
themselves either agreeable or useful.
The acquisition of knowledge, the exercise of
our reason or fancy, and the cheerful flow of
unguarded conversation, may employ the leisure
of a liberal mind. Such amusements, however,
were rejected with abhorrence, or admitted with
the utmost caution, by the severity of the fathers,
who despised all knowledge that was not useful
to salvation, and who considered all levity of


discourse as a criminal abuse of the gift of speech.
In our present state of existence the body is so
inseparably connected with the soul, that it
seems to be our interest to taste, with innocence
and moderation, the enjoyments of which that
faithful companion is susceptible. Very different was the reasoning of our devout predecessors; vainly aspiring to imitate the perfection of
angels, they disdained, or they affected to disdain, every earthly and corporeal delight. Some
of our senses indeed are necessary for our preservation, others for our subsistence, and others
again for our information; and thus far it was
impossible to reject the use of them. The first
sensation of pleasure was marked as the first
moment of their abuse. The unfeeling candidate
for heaven was instructed, not only to resist the
grosser allurements of the taste or smell, but
even to shut his ears against the profane harmony of sounds, and to view with indifference
the most finished productions of human art.
Gay apparel, magnificent houses, and elegant
furniture, were supposed to unite the double


LEAITAINGROR MEIN


The well-dressed man will
buy and wear Hallmark
Shirts—tailored to fit at
the neck, and under the
arms. Made of Briar


A full-line of hand-tailored
ti es—the latest from Broadway. Come in and see,
you'll stay to buy.


It’s as easy and economical to be well dressed
as otherwise!
HALLMARK
BRIAR BROADCLOTH
Quality Shirts
with
NEWDEPARTURE'
Tecuooodryy Sleruomk
Collar
PALM BEACH SUITS
Ready-to-wear palm beach suits
are better-looking than drill and
alpaca, and, cut with the precision
of style and good taste that marks
Beck’s Suits, they fit like wallpaper, and are cool, comfortable
and long-wearing. Let Beck’s be
your tailor.


Broadcloth, with New Departure Laundry Shrunk
Collars, they make any
man who wears them look
like the proverbial million
dollars.


Our Thermo garments in selected wool make outdoor sports a more
genuine pleasure—they’re handsome protection from the weather!


COLLEGIAN BELTS
with and without buckles
GYMNASIUM TRUNKS
boy’s and men’s
BATHROBES
latest wrinkles
SPORTS HANDKERCHIEFS
and Socks
THERMO VESTS
BECK'S


RAYON MEN'S UNDERWEAR
—smooth as silk, cool as cotton!
PAJAMAS
wide choice of materials, colors and
patterns
HIGH-QUALITY LOUNGING ROBES
HANDKERCHIEFS
silk, linen and cotton


THERMO COATS


DERARTMENT SIORE


ESCOLTA


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


19


Just a Word on Shannon’s Work in Manila


guilt of pride and of sensuality; a simple and
mortified appearance was more suitable to the
Christian who was certain of his sins and doubtful of his salvation. In their censures of luxury
the fathers are extremely minute and circumstantial; and among the various articles which
excite their pious indignation we may enumerate
false hair, garments of any color except white,
instruments of music, vases of gold or silver,
downy pillows (as Jacob reposed his head on a
stone), white bread, foreign wines, public salutations, the use of warm baths, and the practice
of shaving the beard, which, according to the
expression of Tertullian, is a lie against our own
faces, and an impious attempt to improve the
works of the Creator. When Christianity was
introduced among the rich and the polite, the
observation of these singular laws was left, as
it would be at present, to the few who were
ambitious of superior sanctity. But it is always
easy, as well as agreeable, for the inferior ranks
of mankind to claim a merit from the contempt
of that pomp and pleasure which fortune has
placed beyond their reach. The virtue of the
primitive Christians, like that of the first Romans, was very frequently guarded by poverty
and ignorance.
(Continued in August)


The Modern Muse
Long years ago there sat beneath a tree
A muse, possessed of lovely, winning grace;
Entwined with ivy was her hair, her face
Filled souls of men with nameless ecstasy.
And ever was she satisfied to be
Alone, as seated in some leafy place
She sent a vagrant song through space
With fingers that were light and deft and free.
But now her hair is shingled, and her eyes
Have turned from starlight to an earthy hue;
No longer does she don a classic guise,
But shows herself a Rhapsody in Blue.
She does not care to strum a harp alone,
So fashions song upon a saxophone.
—A. R. E.


GEORGE POPE SHANNON


Dr. George Pope Shannon, head of the English
department of the University of the Philippines
during the past three vears, will leave Manila
for a similar post in the University of New Mexico
at Albuquerque before another issue of the
JoUrNAL is out, so it is desired to bid him bon
voyage here, and to say just a few words about
his work. He is young, but intensely scholarly;
he is endowed with an exemplary character,


unswerving in adherence to good principles of
manhood; his personality, his native talents and
his educational attainments combine to make
him peculiarly fit to instruct youth and inspire
young men to genuine effort in search for knowledge.
Mrs. Shannon has been with him in Manila,
and in the English work at the University; both
deserve the commendation they have received,
and the friendships they have made and wili
not forget.
Dr. Shannon went about his task of directing
university instruction in English most sensibly.
The course is such as that in American universities. Dr. Shannon studied this question, but
did not feel qualified to resolve it; so he did not
destroy what had been done before he came,
but he built upon what he found established.
He encouraged his students to write in English,
with the result that the grist of English compositions of every sort, from University undergraduates, is more voluminous and of higher
quality every year. The University’s literary
annual attests this, as do the columns of the
newspapers on which Filipinos are editors and
reporters.
With correct insight, Dr. Shannon introduced a course in Greek and Roman mythology
at the University to familiarize Filipino students
with the common allusions in English literature
and enable them to grasp more fully the sense of
their English studies. The new course in medieval literature serves the same purpose. Skill
in the accurate expression of thought in English
will come of this—in time. Dr. Shannon has the
scholar’s appreciation of the long way that lies
between the beginner’s aspirations and the
seasoned student’s achievements. The permanent value of his deanship of English at the
University will prove to be the thoroughness
with which he proceeded in all the work, without
patience with loafing nor a vain ambition to
undertake too much.
-W. R.


AIE VIRIE EMRESS OF TMETOfIO


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
EMPRESS OF ASIA
EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
18400 tons
16900 tons
16800 tons
TO CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC
CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS
MANILA, P. I.
14-16 CALLE DAVIL


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


20


  


July, 29


Three More Poems by Gilbert S. Perez


Jane
Jeanne was the flickering, friendly flame
Of a candle light
That soothed me and crooned me to sleep in
The evening shadows;
But Jane is the cold and pitiless
Incandescent glare
That murders the shadows and tears down
My castle of dreams.
Bacoor
The bamboos sway
In the light gray mist
Of an early May
Typhoon;
They creak and they moan
As they lean
Over the lichen covered
Stones
Of the crumbling walls
That cradle the dead
In old Bacoor.
And Old Mother Earth
Swings her feathery
Plumes
As she croons
Her endless lullaby
Of eternal sleep;
While under a dark
Mimosa
Three paces away
From the wall,
Are the graves of three
Who knocked in vain
At the heavily padlocked
Gate.
But what they did
And how it was done
Is a secret that few can tell;
So they sleep—outside—


And the wandering goats
Graze over the grassy mounds.
Two of the graves
Are a meter apart,
And the other"
Three meters away.
Here lies the lover
And beside him Eve,
With Adam, outside Eden,
Whose stubborn gates are closed.
Or it is Menelaus,
Paris, and Helen whom they loved.


Roads of Old Bohol
How glad I was
To see once more
The coral roads of old Bohol,
The white paths by the sea
Where, with that witless recklessness
Of flaming youth,
I threw away
A year’s piece of my life;
And further on a brief day’s crumb
Of languorous existence
Beside the bubbling sparkling
Icy crystal pool
Ten meters from
The brackish sea
Beyond the Lila fishtraps
Beyond the Loay bridge.
The coral roads of old Bohol
Still wend their way
Like gleaming marble rivulets
Across the hills
And over the cliffs
And on to Anda pass.


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


Raw Leaf: —Trading
in local grades continued
very quiet during June.
Most of the 1929 crop in
Cagayan province has
been bought up at prices
averaging higher than
obtain in the Manila
market for old crops.
Exports show a considerable increase over May
figures, due exclusively
to shipments to the regies
of Spain, France and
Korea. Comparative figures are as follows:


Rawleaf Stripped Tobacco and Seraps
Kilos
1,442
Australia............... . . . . . . . .
7I7,6l
France.......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33,291
Hongkong................. . . . . .
2,226
Java...........................
105,336
Korea.................... . . . . .
15,341
North Africa.............. . . . . .
58,856
North Atlantic (Europe).....
1,461,708
Spain............. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,798
Straits Settlements....... . . .....
74,758
United States..................
9,614
Uruguay.............. .. . . . . . . .


2,541,531
344,094
May, 1929.......... . . . . . . .
2,021,131
June, 1928............ . . ...


Cigars:—The business with the United States
continues on its downward trend. Comparative
figures for shipments to the United States are as
follows:


June, 1929......... abuut 11,300,000
11,702,817
May, 1929.................
June, 1928.... . . . .......... 17,908,208


THE
RELIADLE LAIVIA


ELMAC INC.
P. O. Box 625 MANILA 627 Rizal Ave.


For


Comfort


IOR office and street wear this
model is a favorite with most
men. Roomy, neat, well designed
and made of fine materials throughout. See them at any HIKE
store. Wear a pair for comfort.
HIKE SHOE FACTORY
STYLE CREATORS
286 SAN MARCELINO
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


21


From One Friend To Another
By ANNE MILTIMORE PENDLETON
One of the Order of Friends discourses upon the transitory existence of Americanos in the Philippines and the prudence (or imprudence, according to the reader’s
own inference) of acquiring a little spot of God’s earth here and building a house
upon it which by the kindness of time and the sufferance of conjugal union may
become that Victorian institution known as home.


Now hath the season returned when the
Heavens be disposed to empty themselves of
their contents, not in conscious, righteous gentle
showers from Heaven as the great Shakespeare
might say, but in heathenish howls of rage,
with much beating of tom toms, and flashings
of fire, and most unholy liquidaceous downpourings of exceeding great force, the which do
last but an hour or so at a time, but do in that
time cause me to fear the while for the sudden
cessation of the Universe, but as yet, nothing
of the sort hath happened, else would I not be
calmly writing to thee this beautiful morning.
As a result of these deluging cloudbursts,
the earth hath taken unto itself a new appearance; vines of many kinds which but a day before
seemed leafless dead roots, now lovingly embrace
all the trees, clothing them with a leafy verdure
of most amazing luxuriance that cannot but
cause one to suck in one’s breath and marvel
that Nature can be such a profligate.
As for the grass it groweth not in seemly
fashion, but fairly leapeth from the earth overnight, so that I befear me it shall soon overwhelm, overtop, and completely enshroud us
till we shall be as the Liliputians beneath the feet
of Gulliver.
But of weather, enough. There be other
things of which I fain would speak with thee.
But first of all, I would thank thee for thy kind
letter of most interesting purport and content,
the like of which do comfort me greatly and
causeth me to know that a true friend is "like
unto the salt of the earth.” Truly, are my friends
unto me like as all his wealth of jewels is unto a
king. I entreat thee that thou wilt not depart
from the way of thy friendship with me. Often
and often do I thank the Heavenly Father of us
all for that He hath delivered thee and mine
other friends into mine heart. And for thee and
them and my loves doth my heart sing songs of
thanksgiving day and night. Yea, though the
Lord hath dealt me much suffering and sorrow,
yet, verily, hath He tempered them with love
and friendship, and for this will I praise Him unto
the end of my days.
And now would I tell thee of the doings of the
Man of My House. We twain have taken unto
ourselves a house, the which we have great hopes
that it may not long remain a house, a mere
thing of nails and bare boards, but a real home,
and to this end hath the Man of My House done
many things with his own hands forthe embellishment and utility of this, our home, to the vast
astonishment of some of our neighbors who do
not so because the time of their stay in this land
of beauty is short.


INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBERETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: "YPIL,” Cebu.


These neighbors openly give unasked comment,
and such words as these are their sayings.
“Of what value to do all this? Thou mayst
not long dwell in this wretched land.” Or,
Thou canst not catch this fellow wasting time
and money on the house wherein we dwell. By
contract, only another year must we stay, and
then back to the States away! Such a short
time, and what profiteth it to fix things up?'
So they say, but they know not, and can have
no understandings of our love forrthe Oriental


What state in the United
States has a female governor?
The state of matrimony!
It’s a "laugh from the shows”
as interpreted by Machailler in
Judge.
The wisecrackers have been
enjoying some
GORDoN ony
—it makes you feel that way!
Cheer Leaders
We just met the dumbest
girl in the world. On reading
the “Cheer Leaders” she turned
and said, "It says here, Harvard
'31. Does that means that Yale
didn’'t score again?"
—from Judge.
“Then,” says Judge’s same
department, "there is the dumb
nurse who thinks a coma is a
punctuation mark.”
Whatever it is, you never
have it if you stick to—
RODERIDOiN
—for highballs
Kuenzle and Streiff
Importers


and the Oriental’s country, and for that I do
pity them much.
But I have strayed far from my course. I
did think to tell thee how the Man of My House
do be painting our Home.
As thou knowest full well, paint maketh the
clothing of the painter untidy and uncleanly,
and for this reason did I insist that he clothe
himself in his oldest garments, the which he did,
so that he did resemble a ragamuffin, nay, more,
a scarecrow in the fields; this he did, for that
he be a righteous and amenable marriage partner
with such virtues as Saint Paul doth enjoin upon
all those entering into matrimony. (Albeit
the Apostle putteth such a special stress upon
the woman, which I like not, for that it seemeth
to me uncalled for, and verily do I resent it.
But enough of that, lest I fall into a rage, and
behave myself in an unseemly fashion.)
The Man of My House, then, did mount the
ladder, and did paint away right cheerily and
efficaciously, when two dames, thinking him to
be but a hired worker, did pass under his ladder,
and by, (for that way did provide a short cut)
discoursing in damely fashion.
Saith the first dame, “This be the nicest home
on the Hill,” and then did she relate in no mean
words the merits and goodnesses of this, our
Home, so that the heart of the painter did glow
within him, for that the dame did call the place
wherein we dwell, a home and not a house.
“The first real home on the Hill,” saith the
second dame.
And so they passed under the ladder, little
knowing what joy they had brought into the
hearts of us twain.
And now, I fear me I have wearied thee for
long with this dull recital of nothings. Fear
not, thou shalt not suffer longer, for now do
I extend to thee a loving farewell, and I do
rejoice in thee, and that thou hast chosen to call
mE
—Thy friend.


VERSES BY "A. R. E.”


Temperament
You bring me peonies—
It is violets I wish,
Laid in a bed of mosses,
Not standing in a dish.
You send me chocolates—
Why can you not recall
My preference? It’s bonbons—
When I eat sweets at all.
How many times must I
Remind you that my taste
In gems is fickle? Today,
These rubies are a waste.
You are well meaning, but
You never can, I fear,
Quite know me. What—vou’re leaving?
Ah—stay, stay, my dear!


JACOB LEVY
PHILIPPINE HATS
Buntals
Bamboos
Calasiaos
Balibuntals


Correspondence Solicited
227 Calle David
Manila, P. I.
Cable Address: “TEXTILES”


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


22


  


July, 1929


Haphazard Studies in the English Language
The University Dictionary which is sold by the MANILA DAILYr BULLETIN at two
pesos the copy, contains an essay on Common Errors in English by Dr. Farquson
Johnson that will be run in installments in this department, commencing with this
issue. For it is at once interesting and instructive; indeed, the editor of the JOURNAL,
benefited by it greatly in his own diction, has seen nothing comparable to it any
where. For this essay alone, he would not part with his own copy of this convenient
English vocabulary at any price—unless he might, for the pittance at which it sells,
obtain another. Dr. Johnson’s pages fairly glow with linguistic erudition, as the
student will observe. But the original was proof-read carelessly, and the errors
which therefore appear in it have here been corrected. Where there are references
to the main vocabulary, etc., any standard English dictionary may be consulted.—Ed.
Too few of us are given to calling the attention of others to errors in speech or in writing
when we hear or see them. Indeed too few of
us correct our own errors, even when we are
aware of them. We easily fall into the habit
of talking carelessly—and the way of human
nature seems to be not to break itself of a habit,
either good or bad.
The logical place to begin in the correction
of errors of speech is at home, and at the age of
HYDROGEN
infancy. From the time the child begins to

Compressed
talk, it never again is too young to be taught
  AO
Hydrogen
correctly. It is then that the bad habits of
99.8% pure
TEDA
careless talking are formed, and unfortunately
the parents seldom realize the necessity of
correcting them and discouraging the habit.
ACEIYLENE
To the contrary—mispronunciation and errors
Dissolved
of grammar more often are encouraged in childAcetylene for
ren by their thoughtless elders. Callers are
expected to witness such exhibits by the proud
all purposes
parents as “Where are the kittens, darling?”
“They has went,” answers baby. "Ain’t that
cute?” will say the adoring mother—not realizWELDING
ing the difficulties some teacher will have in
Fully Equipafter years, trying to break the youngster of the
E
ped Oxy-Ace“has went" habit.
tylene Weld“Wich” for "which,” "brung” for "brought,"
ing Shops
A
" Adose,
“taint” for "it is not," and “dese,"
Va
and "dem” for “these,” “those,” and “them,"
are only a few of the very many errors carelessly
 BATTERIES
picked up in childhood. Quite often these errors

become habitual because they are not corrected
Prest-O-Lite
M.
at home, where they are used more than in any
Electric StorMArtjhi age Battencs
other place. In some instances the parents have

been known to acquire the same careless style
of speaking, which, of course, further encourages
the child in the habit, and the reign of everyday
errors in our language goes merrily on.
Phiiopine Acetyiene Go.


How to Correct Your Own Errors
Among our associates, in the home or at business, we should make it a practice to call attention to errors of speech. By no other method
could we so readily learn to speak correctly.
It soon would become a matter of pride as to
who would make the fewest errors. Not only
those who practised it, but the children also
would benefit largely by such a custom.
The purpose of this section of the dictionary
is to call attention to some of the more common
errors in writing and speaking, and to point out
the proper way to correct them. This is an
unusual feature for a volume of this nature, and
should be welcomed by all of those who experience difficulties with our language.
As has already been said, errors in spelling,
pronunciation, and in the choice of words are
due to ignorance or carelessness. There is no
valid excuse for either. With all of the educational advantages at hand, nobody truthfully
can offer lack of opportunity as a reason for ignorance; and with all of the free schools—both
night and day—lack of funds is no longer a
reasonable excuse for not learning to read, write,
and speak correctly, at least.
To those who wish to avoid common errors—
to those who would gain more knowledge—to
those who desire to improve their style of speech
—an opportunity is here presented. When
carefully reading this section one should at all
times refer to the main body of this valuable
dictionary for the comparison of different words
and their variants, as the preceding vocabulary
is replete with all of the defined words that will
be required for use in almost any walk of life.
The aim of the compiler of the following section, however, has been to make it complete


OX Y GEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure


281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.


The
Phiippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS SURETYSHIPS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
Eoans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest
Call or write for particulars
Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
Box 128
P. o.
Manila, P. I.


also. Yet he has been limited to the selection
of only those words that are more likely to be
misspelled, mispronounced, or misundertood
by those who are careless, or who have not taken
advantage of their educational opportunities.
No attempt has been made to follow the words,
the forms, or the rules carried out by the vocabulary editor of this dictionary, as this section
is to be considered entirely apart from the main
vocabulary—and each is designed to serve its
purpose independently.
An Easy Method for Readers
The compiler of this section has endeavored
to refrain from giving a choice of pronunciations,
or meanings—so far as possible, to those words
regarding which there is a difference of opinion
by authorities. It is the writer’s belief that
there should be, and that there is, only one correct way to pronounce any word, and that disputed points of this character should be decided
by a federal commission, duly appointed or
elected to serve such a purpose. Unfortunately
sufficient interest is lacking in educational subjects, and doubtless the bickerings of self appointed authorities will go on to the end of time.
As will be seen by the close observer, this is
not a technical section. It was not compiled
for the use of those who quibble with the so
called niceties of the English language; but as
the title implies, it is designed to cover the everyday errors of our language which one too often
hears at home and in the workshop, and which
one receives in one’s mail. It will prove helpful
to those who are so sorely in need of it.
a. When we consider that there are twenty-five
or more ways of writing the various sounds
of this letter, we will realize how careful we
must be in pronouncing the words that contain it. Note the different sounds in make,
man, car, dance, etc.
As an article this letter is used when the
word following it begins with a consonant, or
one taking that sound.
Often the entire sense is changed by this
one little letter, as a black and white cat is
one animal; a black and a white cat must be
two. The article should always be repeated
before an adjective that qualifies a distinct
thing. In the sentence “He has a little
money " the meaning is positive; but on omitting the article, “He has little money,” the
meaning becomes negative.
a, an. An should not be used before any aspirated h, such as a heroic a historical, etc.,
not an heroic, an historical. Use an only
before a vowel or silent h.
abbreviate. Words may be abbreviated but
not speeches, which are abridged.
abortive. Improperly used to express failure,
as in “an abortive trip.” It is properly used
only of that which has not been born in full
time or is immature.
above. Expressions such as “the above statement,” “according to the above," though
common in use, are not sanctioned by the
The foregoing, or preceding
best authority.
statement" is preferred. “The above-mentioned” is permissible.
Above should not be used for "more than."
“Above a mile” is not correct.
abridge. See definition of this word and "abbreviate” in the regular vocabulary of this
dictionary.
accept of. We may accept presents, not
“accept of” them, “of” being superfluous.
accident. Often misused for wound. “Accident" implies something that takes place
independently of our intentions. A wound
may or may not be an accident.
ac'curate. Not ak’ret. The three syllables
should be distinctly pronounced.
acknowledgment. No e is required after the
g, which is a common error.
acme. To be distinguished from climax, an
ascending gradation, while acme is the last,
highest, or best of a series. Thus the two
words are not synonyms, though often so used.
acoustics. Acoustics is, not are. The pronunciation is a-koos'tiks, according to almost
universal usage, although authorities differ.
ad. A common trade abbreviation of advertisement, to be avoided in careful writing or speak

IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  
IERCE JOURNAL


23


ing. “Ad” has achieved considerable commercial vogue, however, and is almost exclusively used in what may be termed the inside
of the advertising profession and in business
pertaining to it.
address. Both the noun and the verb should
be accented on the last syllable.
adjective and adverb. Adjectives like previous, subsequent, and independent are often
improperly used in place of adverbs, as in
“previous to your coming,” where “previousshould be used.
“He looks bad," though at first sight inelegant if not incorrect, is proper, as are “to
drink deep,” “to stand erect,” etc.
Adjectives also have a proper adverbial
use in such phrases as "pale green,” “red hot,”
etc., where the first adjective qualifies the
second.
admit of. The meanings of "admit" and
"admit of” are different, as seen in the sentence, “that the door admits to the house does
not admit of argument."
adobe. This Spanish word should be pronounc--
ed in three syllables, the second syllable
slightly accented: a-do be, short a; long o and e.
adult. Pronounce a-dult’, not ad’ult.
advantage. Sometimes erroneously used for
benefit. Compare these two words in the
vocabulary section of this dictionary.
advent. Should not be used for a simple arrival
To speak of “the advent of the coal man"
robs the term of its stateliness and dignifies
a common domestic event unnecessarily. An
important, stately, or sacred arrival may be
properly termed an advent.
advertisement. Should not be accented on
the third, but on the second syllable; pronounced ad-ver’tis-ment.
a few. This phrase, though objected to by
some writers, is supported by good authority,
the adjective becoming a noun and standing
for “part of the whole.” “Quite a few-¬
should be avoided.
affect. See effect.
again, against. Pronounced agen’, agenst',
with the sound of short e. The usual sound
of ai is that of long a, but again, against, said,
saith, etc., are exceptions.
aggravate. Should not be used for irritate,
anger, vex, or provoke, having an entirely
different meaning. To aggravate is to make
worse or more burdensome. Thus, "his guilt
was aggravated by the cirsumstances of the
crime. It is not correct to say that persons
are aggravated.
aggregate. Often used in the sense of "amount
to," as in “The prizes aggregate $100.” Aggregate means primarily to bring together,
to collect into a mass, which is distinct from
“amount to”; the use of the word in the latter
sense is objected to by some authorities.


ailment. Pronounce the last syllable ment,
not munt. Be careful with all such terminals,
ment, sent, ence, ant, ent, ness, etc., and avoid
pronouncing them munt, sunt, unce, unt, etc.
ain't. Not a proper contraction of am not or
are not. Neither ain’t nor 'tain’t should ever
be used. The phrases “he ain’t,” or "tain’t”
are meaningless.
allege. Should not be used where the word
"say” answers the purpose. What is alleged
tends to criminate or exculpate. The synonyms of allege are adduce, assign, andadvance.
all of. Such phrases as “all of them, both of
them" are commonly used, but the best speakers and writers regard “of” as superfluous.
Instead of “I have all of them,” say “I have
them all.” “Take all of it” should be “Take
it all."
allow. Often misused for think, say, or admit,
as “He allows you are old,” “she allowed she
was mistaken.” Such usage is incorrect.
all right. The tendency of common usage
is to contract this expression into the one
word alright, but it always should be two
words.
allude. Should never be used in the sense of
“speak of", which is not its true signification.
To allude to a person is to hint delicately at
him without direct mention. It is less direct


also. Pronounce as spelled, not alt’so, as is so
often heard. Be careful not to use this word
too often in writing and speaking.
aluminum, aluminium. Both forms are
still in use, manufacturers favoring the former
and chemists the latter. Sir Humphrey
Davy, who proposed the word, made it origin
ally alumium and later aluminum.
always. Pronounced awl’wayz, not awl’wuz.
To be preferred to “ever” in prose diction in
the sense of “for all time."
amateur. Mispronounced am’a-choor; should
be am’a-tur, with a slight stress (due to its
French origin) on the last syllable, with the
long sound of u.
among one another. It is not correct to say
“they exchanged confidences among one
another.” “With one another" or "among
themselves” are correct.
anchovy. Sometimes mispronounced anko’by;
should be an-cho’by.
and. “Come and see me” should be “come
to see me.” The wrong use of "and” in such
cases is very common. It is permissible only
when two distinct acts are involved by the
verbs, and should never be used as a substitute
for the infinitive.
And is sometimes used improperly for “or”.
as, "a language like the Greek and Latin."


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - - WALTER E. ANTRIM


than “refer,” which may involve naming the
person or thing.
almost. Should not be confused with "nearly,”
the two adverbs being distinct in meaning;
We say correctly “almost sick with hunger,
The idea
but “nearly fell off the bridge."
expressed by “almost” is nearness to an end;
“nearly” expresses nearness to an unforeseen
event.
alone. Often improperly used for only. To be
alone is to be unaccompanied; “only” conveys
the idea of there being no other. When there
is one man only on the street, he is the sole
male individual present, but there might be
many men alone.


Are You Fit?
or do you lack pep and gy
and listless, and find it d


ara vou dull
22


The Fault Maay be Writ. Your Diet
I se
Discan thes beavy n ngasible meals and
(1) Eat sparhg y of meatge ables and rig fivit form the bulk of your diet
(2) Lesfrest
(3) And, af w ali dmah plenty ef rich nourishing


BEAR



BRAND
NATURAL MILK


for the Tropics—being the sterilized product
Ainest cows fed on the verdant pastures of
lley, Switzerland!


YWHERE IN LARGE AND SMALL CANS


There being no such single language, the
phrase should be “the Greek or the Latin.”
And is sometimes misused to introduce a
relative clause where no conjunction is needed;
thus, "He has a spirit, proud as Lucifer, and
which no test can break.” Omit and.
A common error of speech is the omission
of the sound of d in and. Proper pronunciation of the d is imperative.
another from. Incorrectly used for “another
than."
anticipate. Should not be used for expect
“My atand foresee. It is correct to say,
tempt was anticipated by another” (who made
the attempt first), but not “His death was
anticipated."
antipodes. Properly pronounced in four syllables, an-tip’o-deez, though the singular is
in three, an’ti-pode.
anxious. Misused when “desirous” would
better express the meaning. We may be
"anxious" about our health, but not "anxious”
to dine or to sleep. Friends are properly
"anxious” for news of travelers in a railroad
wreck, but are not "anxious" about keeping
appointments. Remember that “anxious"
means full of anxiety, suffering from suspense,
which will tend to prevent misuse of the word.
(Continued in August)


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By L. ARCADIO
Acting Traffic Manager, Manila
Railroad Company.


The following commodities were received in
Manila May 26, 1929 to June 25, 1929, both
inclusive, via Manila Railroad:


Rice, cavans.......
Sugar, piculs.......
Tobacco, bales.....
Copra, piculs......
Coconuts..........
Lumber, B. F......
Desiccated coconuts,


136,687
150,250
139,328 178,192
35,040
13,140
168,200
130,800
2,533,300 1,886,500
453,600 733,050
12,095
14,432


IN RESPONDIN





TENIS TLEASE MENION TRE AMENIGAN CRAMBER OP COMENGE JURNAL


24


  


July, 1929


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, The Robert Dollar Company


During the month of
June cargo offerings in
all directions held up
to the fullest expectation of owners. The
Philippine U. K. and
Continent movement
Owners
was brisk.
anticipate, however, a
slight falling off in July.
To the U.S. Atlanticand
gulf districts there was
an unusual movement
of sugar and hemp,
much more than was
anticipated at the time our last report went to
press. Here, too, is expected a falling off in
July, in fact, much more than is looked for on the
European berth. Trans-pacific and to Asiatic
ports the movement remained about the same
as our last report.
On June 27 Manila stevedoring firms concluded
an agreement with the stevedore labor organizations, granting an increase of approximately
10% to labor in exchange for an agreement
running five years. Two years ago labor demanded heavy increases and after a short but
brisk strike situation a compromise resulting
in about a 15% increase was reached. At that
time the labor organizations signed an agreement
for two years. It is believed that the agreement
presently concluded will result in a satisfactorv
situation for a five vear period. It is anticipated,
to offset the demands of labor and the subsequent
increase, there will be an adjustment in rates
of freight. Just what this will mean has not
been determined, or at least no indications as


to the percentage of freight rate adjustments
have been passed around.
From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines there was exported from the
Philippines during the month of March, 1929;
to China and Japan ports 12,795 tons, with a
total of 44 sailings, of which 4782 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 10 sailings;
To Pacific coast for local delivery 30,009 tons
with a total of 14 sailings, of which 22,316 tons
were carried in American bottoms with 10 sailings; To Pacific coast thence Overland 474 tons
with a total of 9 sailings, of which 426 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 6 sailings:
To Pacific coast thence Atlantic via intercoastal
steamer, 2,386 tons with a total of 10 sailings,
of which 1694 tons were carried in American
bottoms with 5 sailings; To Atlantic coast
159,661 tons with a total of 37 sailings, of which
78,688 tons were carried in American Bottoms
with 14 sailings; To European ports 21,351
tons with a total of 28 sailings, of which 273
tons were carried in American bottoms with 3
sailings; To Australian ports 1064 tons with a
total of 5 sailings, of which American bottoms
carried none; a grand total of 227,740 tons with
a total of 91 sailings, of which American bottoms
carried 108,179 tons with 22 sailings.
This, we believe, is the heaviest month’s
business ever handled from the Philippine
Islands, the total of 227,740 tons comparing
with an average monthly tonnage for the year
1928 of 127,212 tons. The heavy movement is
largely due to a very active movement of sugar
to Atlantic Coast ports, amounting to 121,355
tons.
From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines, there were exported from the
Philippines during the month of April, 1929;
To China and Japan Ports 18,814 tons with a
total of 49 sailings, of which 5,332 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 12 sailings;
To Pacific coast for local delivery 32,193
tons with a total of 15 sailings, of which


30,145 tons were carried in American bottoms
with 11 sailings; To Pacific coast thence Overland 1,375 tons with a total of 9 sailings, of
which 216 tons were carried in American bottoms
with 5 sailings; To Pacific coast thence Atlantic
via Intercoastal steamer 3,397 tons with a
total of 12 sailings, of which, 2,663 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 9 sailings;
To Atlantic coast 82,803 tons with a total of
19 sailings, of which 29,117 tons were carried
in American bottoms with 6 sailings; To European ports 17,526 tons with a total of 19 sailings,
of which 398 tons were carried in American
bottoms with 4 sailings; To Australian ports
938 tons with a total of 7 sailings, of which
American bottoms carried none; a grand total
of 157,045 tons with a total of 77 sailings, of
which American bottoms carried 67,841 tons
with 19 sailings.
From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines, there were exported from the
Philippines during the month of May, 1929,
To China and Japan ports 27,753 tons with a
total of 56 sailings, of which 6,062 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 15 sailings;
To Pacific coast for local delivery 19,609 tons
with a total of 15 sailings, of which 11,548 tons
were carried in American bottoms with 11 sailings; To Pacific coast, thence Overland 333 tons,
with a total of 9 sailings, of which 307 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 6 sailings;
To Pacific coast for inter-coastal 3568 tons, with
a total of 11 sailings, of which 3,473 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 10 sailings;
To Atlantic coast 76,984 tons with a total of 19
sailings, of which 38,607 tons were carried in
American bottoms with 7 sailings; To European
ports, 19,156 tons with a total of 18 sailings, of
which 156 tons were carried in American bottoms with 3 sailings; To Australian ports 610
tons with a total of 3 sailings, of which American
bottoms carried none; a grand total of 148,031
tons, with a total of 83 sailings, of which American
bottoms carried 60,153 tons with 19 sailings.
Passenger traffic during the month of June
(first figure represents first class, second figure
steerage)—to China and Japan 111-126; to
Honolulu,0-605: to Pacific coast 65-635; to
Singapore “and Straits Settlements 6-1; to Me

diterranean ports 22-1.
Much euthusiasm registered during the month


among impenteis cens


the Philippine


public ir nere ere

racts awarded


by the Ia Sagamshn


r the construc

tion of sis nabile e


ger and cargo


liners, to en Mevit


he Round-the

World o. aaaa


" e
These liners


will be bulit n de


ntic Seaboard.


Their pa. cplas ang n


l, 81 ft molded


beam, 5z *n diegn. 


displacement,


17,000 nan mui


650,000 cubic


feet gencal curgo 


".., cubic feet re

frigeratcr spac:.... I..


mer and a speed


of 21 kres. En


ers will have ac

commod ino, ten ..?


passengers, 140


toprist lass a. .72


steerage. The


c'ew wil. sc.... A."


ely 300. They



nave be.


n avery respect the


requirercamee of tho trenin


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig G von Knobelsdorff
Agents


90 Rosario, Manila


Phone 22324


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OF COMMIE


OURNAL


July, 1929


  


25


Another important construction program is
that recently announced by the Matson Navigation Co., contracts, it is understood, having
been placed for three combination passenger
and cargo liners for the Trans-Pacific service.
These vessels will be constructed at the Bethlehem Fore River Plant, Quinsey, Mass. They
are approximately 600 feet in length, with a
speed of. 18 knots. Each will be fitted with the
highest type of passenger accommodations and
will carry both general and refrigerator cargo.
Additional particulars on these vessels have not
yet reached us.


O. G. Steen, General Manager, The Robert
Dollar Co., with headquarters at Shanghai, was
a visitor to Manila during the month of May,
having arrived aboard the s.s. President Taft
May 9 and returned to Shanghai by the same
liner. Mr. Steen, accompanied by his family,
left Shanghai June 7 aboard the s.s. President
Grant for the United States on a combined
pleasure and business trip.
Geo. P. Bradford, accompanied by his family.
arrived Manila from San Francisco June 20
aboard the s.s. President Madison. Mr. Bradford was until recently General Agent for the
Columbia Pacific Shipping Co., in charge of their
Philippine operations, with headquarters at
Manila. Mr. Bradford has resigned that position to join the firm of L. Everett, Inc., Far
Eastern Agents of the remaining Shipping
Board lines operating from the Atlantic coast
and gulf to the Orient.
G. M. Violet, who has been connected with
The Robert Dollar Co., Manila Branch, the
past year in the capacity of Freight Solicitor,
was promoted to the Position of Freight Agent
on May 20.
W. K. Garrett, who formerly occupied the
desk of Freight Agent, The Robert Dollar Co.,
Manila Branch, has been transferred to the post
of Acting Agent, Iloilo Branch and took over
his new duties on May 27.
L. C. Admiraal, General Passenger Agent,
Java-China-Japan Line, with headquarters at
Batavia, was a visitor in Manila for ten days the
first half of Mav. Mr Admiraal was in the


course of completing a trip around the world and
while here announced the inauguration of a
fortnightly passenger and freight service between
Manila and Java ports with new express Liners.
James Wells, Agent for The Robert Dollar Co.
at Iloilo, arrived in Manila May 30 enroute to
his home in Scotland for a vacation. Mr. Wells
departed from Manila as a passenger aboard
the s.s. President Polk June 5 and, after circumnavigating the world, is expected to return to
Manila some time in November.
J. W. Huck, Cebu Agent for the Columbia
Pacific Shipping Co., arrived in Manila from
Cebu May 20. Mr. Huck was up on business
and returned to his post at the end of one week.
Ole May, formerly attached to the Passenger
Department of the Los Angeles Office of the
Dollar Steamship Line, has taken up similar
duties with the Manila Branch of The Robert
Dollar Co. Mr. May arrived in Manila aboard
the s.s. President Van Buren May 7.
J. O. Foyle, formerly attached to the Freight
Department of the Dollar Steamship Line, San
Francisco, arrived in Manila aboard the s.s.
President Hayes May 21, to take up duties as
Freight Solicitor, Manila Branch, of The Robert
Dollar Co.


Last month we entered Samar with the Franciscans, so the situation has been introduced
to the reader and nothing remains but to extract
from Father Huerta’s notes as progress is made
from town to town. Catbalogan, the capital,
was also described briefly in the paper on the
province as a whole. The reader will not forget
that the Jesuits christianized Samar, and the
Franciscans only went there in 1768, when the
Jesuits were banished from the Philippines
(not to return for a century) in accordance with
the roval decree banishing them from all the
Spanish empire.
Bangajon.—Taken over from the Jesuits with
a population of 2.316, including 530 tributos


John Martin, Far Eastern Representative of
the American Bureau of Shipping, arrived in
Manila aboard the s.s. President Grant May 27.
Mr. Martin was on a business trip over his
territory and returned to Japan aboard the
s.s. President Grant May 31.
B. R. Bates, General Agent, Dollar Steamship Line, Singapore, passed thru Manila June
18 aboard the s.s. President Adams, returning
to his post after a five months’ vacation in the
United States. While in the United States
Mr. Bates joined the ranks of the Benedicts
and brought his bride back with him.
G. A. Harrell, District Passenger Agent, The
Robert Dollar Co., Manila, accompanied by Mrs.
Harrell and young daughter, departed for the.
United States June 14 aboard the s.s. President
Cleveland. Mr. Harrell is enjoying a five months’
holiday and expects to return to Manila at the
expiration of same.
Ethel L. Hawthorne, Secretarv, The Robert
Dollar Co., Manila, left Manila June 28 aboard
the s. s. President Pierce for Hongkong, where she
will meet her husband, S. R. Hawthorne, who
is returning, after a business trip to the United
States. Mr. and Mrs. Hawthorne will return
to Manila aboard the s.s. President Taft July 8.


or taxpaying families, Fr. Juan Salguero being
the first Franciscan parish priest. The Jesuits
had already built a stone church, and a convento
of the same material. Patron, St. Michael,
the archangel.
“The bounds of this town are not limited on
the north and east, where the mountainous
terrain abounds in valuable woods, palms,
rattans, good pasturage, wax and honey, wild
game and many edible roots. There are many
streams, branches of the two rivers which bathe
the town. Of these, the one flowing from the
north first takes a course from northwest to
southeast, abruptly turns westward and, when
past the town. turns toward the south. The


Franciscan Missions in Samar: Forward on
the Mission Trail


AMERICAN MAIL LRNNE
BOLLARSTEASA ERE
COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
SAILING
The "President” Liners Offer
ONCE A
ONCE A
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
WEEK
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
WEEK
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


TO SAN FRANCISC


ROUND THE WORLD


VICTORIA


AND
LOS ANGELES


President Johnson
President Monroe


July 17
July 31


AND
SEATTLE
via


Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokchama, and Honolulu


President Wilson
President Van Buren


Aug. 14
Aug. 28


Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama


SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE FRIDAYS


President Hayes -
President Polk
Sailings every fortnight


Sept. 11
Sept. 25


SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS


24 Calle David


MANILA


Telephone No. 2-24-41


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


26


  


July, 1929


other rises in the region of Paranas, flows from
south to north, turns westward along the southern border of the town, then shifts to the north—
and the two currents meet head on, flowing
thence toward the west.
““The merging of these two currents causes
the great floods which so often occur here. The
current from the north is so much more powerful
than that from the south that it turns the latter
back, causing a great lake to be formed in a
valley called Sapinit, southeast of the town,
the waters sometimes rising to the depth of 50
feet. Many of the trees and plants in the valley
are poisonous, especially those called carisao
and cunumay; for which reason, the waters
sometimes remaining over the valley for 30 days,
they are so corrupted that the odor is unpleasant
at great distances, and in the town it is insupportable. But this is not the worser calamity from
the floods: most of the water from the inundated
region having to be carried off in the stream from
the north together with the pestiferous odor it
gives off, both the fish which abound in the river
and those in the sea, to a considerable distance
from shore, are killed.
“It is a disaster to this town for the rivers to
get out of bank, for the floods usually continue
for two months."
Little circumstances of this kind, which tend
to explain the sparseness of population in various
provinces of the Philippines, Samar included.
Huerta says that in his time the people of Bangajon grew rice, Manila hemp, palauan and
yams; farming, hunting and nishing were the
industries; the women wove native cloths, and
these, with what rice could be sold, were disposed of in Catbalogan. That was in 1865,
and probably conditions are about the same now
as then.
Capul.—Here the Franciscans found a population of 884, with 300 tributos. Jesuits had built
a stone church dedicated to St. Ignatius Loyola—
which Fr. Mariano Valero repaired in 1781, "who
at the same time built the most beautiful and
substantial torre existing in the province."
These torres were fortified watchtowers erected,
usually, under the leadership of the friars serving
as parish priests, at points where Moro pirates
were to be feared. The sturdiest of them are
still standing, landmarks on the coasts of the
Philippines from northern Luzon far to the south.
Guard was maintained from their turrets night
and day; voluntary military discipline prevailed
among the friars' parishioners, and the alarm
from the torre was a signal for all to rally at the
church and defend the community from impending attack. At such crises the friars took
military command of their flocks, and wielded
the sword and fired the matchlock.
In this manner many of the new Christian
communities were saved from annihilation at the
hands of Mindanao and Sulu pirates.
Catarman.—When taken over from the Jesuits
by the Franciscans in 1768, the population was
1,305 and tributos numbered 430. Father Huerta
mentions forest products from the mountains
to the south and excellent fishing along the coast;
in his day the crops were those still grown, rice,
coconuts, abaca, camotes and palauan, this last
being a palm with a large edible root. Native
cloths are woven on hand looms by the women,
and the men farm, fish and hunt.
The church at Catarman in Huerta’s day,
1865, was of timber; no doubt no better one
exists today. The patron is Our Lady. The
friars built everywhere in the Philippines with
the best materials locally obtainable, as transportation of heavy materials any great distance
was out of the question—neither ships nor roads
were available. Thus in the region extending
from Lingayen to well southward of Manila,
where volcanic tufa was available, they built
of that; it is the material out of which the buildings in the walled city were constructed, and so
much of it was obtained from quarries at Guadalupe that it came to have that name, guadalupe,
Where no stone was to be had, but clay was good,
kilns were erected and bricks made for the construction of churches. There was always some
friar who was a craftsman, at least an amateur
one, or there were Chinese craftsmen about.
Brick churches went up throughout the Cagayan
valley; brick and stone were used together in
Manila; brick and timber were often utilized


together. At Catarman, evidently, no good
brick clay was to be had, while the hardwoods
were abundant and accessible.
But aside from the churches, perhaps the other
things built by the friars, the brick and stone
bridges and culverts especially, which are still
in use, have the value of millions of pesos. Of
course, in the provinces evangelized by the
Jesuits the credit should go to them which elsewhere goes to the friars. As they adorned Manila with her most beautiful church, that of
St. Ignatius, so they devoted themselves to the
welfare of the provincial missions.
Catubig.—Fr. Antonio de Valdeolivas took
over this town from the Jesuits for the Franciscans in 1768, when it had a population of 1,515,


Here’s how to
gel Manitas.


Genuine
Manila


Hand Made
Long Filler
Cigars are


in your city


or nearby!


List of
Distributors
furnished
upon


H
AT


request
to—





C. A. BOND


Philippine Tobacco
Agent:
15 Williams St.
New York City
or
Collector of Internal Revenue





Manila, P. I.


Manilas
satisfy your


will
taste!


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


and 510 tributos. The name has been changed,
formerly it was Cagninipa; the old site, too, is
now occupied by the town of Navas. “It was
moved as a consequence of an invasion of Moros
during which the town was burned, multitudes
of people perishing and the Moros taking more
than 500 captives. This removal must have
occurred about 1770 to 1775, because, having
taken over the town with 510 tributos in 1768,
in 1775 there were but 300, a diminution due to
the invasion.” In 1777 Catubig was joined to
Palapat, and 1784 to Lauang (both names are
names of forest trees), until in 1790 Fr. Juan
de la Plasencia was assigned to Catubig as its
t parish priest.
firs
“The climate is damp and unhealthful, winds
are light and during mornings the sky is overcast sometimes until full midday. The commonest diseases are rheumatism, drosy and
fevers. Good water is had from the river.
There is river communication with Lauang and
Navas, and during floods by a precipitous path.
Mails come from the capital at irregular intervals. The church, under the advocacy of St.
Joseph, was built of stone on the old site, where
some ruins still remain. A timber church (on
the new site) was built by Fr. Juan de Plasencia
about 1790, and one of timber and masonry (the
common type of construction adopted in Manila)
was built by Fr. Jose Mata in 1805. A timber
church was built by Fr. Agaton Martinez in
1838. *
The river flowing by the town
has a depth of 70 feet and is navigable to a point
above the town of Navas, a matter of three days
with the oars. Navigation in small bancas
(dugouts, need we say?) on this riveris dangerous
because of the voracious crocodiles which infest
its waters. The cultivated lands produce much
rice, abaca, yams and palauan. The people
are engaged in farming, gathering abaca and
coconuts, hunting and the gathering of forest
gums and wax; and the women in weaving gui¬
naras, which, with what agricultural and forest
products they have to sell, are taken to the
capital, or to Albay or Manila."
This picture of life in Catubig in 1865 would
apply today to many remote towns of the Philippines. One may indeed not go far from Manila
in order to observe similar conditions of life,
save for the public schools, the doctor with his
own drug store, the Chinese shops on every hand,
and the new roads. Life is simple in such towns,
the people happy.
Palapat.—This town was taken from the
Jesuits for the Franciscans in 1768 by Fr. Antonio Sellez. When Huerta wrote in 1865 the
stone church built by the Jesuits was still standing and in good condition. Patron, Our Lady
of the Ascension. “The only fixed boundary
is that on the west. On the east lie valleys and
many mountains abounding in game, hardwoods,
palms, rattans, pastures, gums and wax. The
beautiful neat little port is well protected and
ships of the deepest draft may harbor there.
Game fish are plentiful.
“In this port the galleon Filipino was detained in 1762, for fear that the British cruisers
might seize the silver she was bringing from
America to Manila. From here it was transported by order of Senior Anda (the officer of the
Manila government who went to the provinces
and held out against the British) to Polangui,
then a town of Camarines, in which enterprise
the aid of the Franciscans was very material.
From Polangui the silver was taken to Iriga,
and from there by the Cabusao river and the
coast of Camarines Norte to Mauban, under the
direction of our Fr. Francisco Rosado de Brozas,
who by order of Anda supplied the necessary
bancas."
Tubig.—Fr. Joaquin Polo went to Tubig for
the Franciscans when the Jesuits were expelled
from the islands in 1768 (not to return for a
century). A new roof was put on the church the
Jesuits built, in 1846, by Fr. Manuel Lozano,
“who at the same time built a new choir, two
chapels and a very beautiful sacristy. The
parochial house is also of stone and very
spacious, *"
The river flowing past the
town rises at a site called Magtaon in the jurisdiction of Calviga, whence, first losing itself
among rocks and precipices, it appears again
twelve leagues away, and flows eastward to
the sea, having received on its left bank the


July, 1929


  


27


Danao river which rises in the vicinity of Parie
and forms, not far from its origin, a magnificent
cascade.”
Underground streams such as Huerta here
describes are found elsewhere in the Philippines,
which have all the natural phenomena ascribable
to an archipelago comprising more than 3,000
islands, some isles of coral, others mountain
peaks and ranges once comprising, perhaps,
southeastern Asia, and yet others elevated above
the sea’s level by violent earthquakes and
eruptions.
We shall continue through Samar with the
Franciscans next month.


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


Ana ang g ManNy amaa g aag MaaA IE
Manila real estate, the total as shown is most
satisfactory. With the exception of June, 1923
and 1927, no other June sales since 1920
have equalled the above figures. The 1923 and
1927 totals were only slightly larger. The
following are the sales for the first 6 months of
the years 1920 to 1929 inclusive:
1920, P8,726,503; 1921, 4,347, 704; 1922,
4,688,420; 1923, 5,638,910; 1924, 6,206,247;
1925,6,760,664; 1926, 6,208,202; 1927, 5,862,967;
1928, 8,120,737; 1929, 10,760,037.


May


June


Sales City of Manila


92


(929


Sta. Cruz........... .


₱ 117,387


175,680


Binondo.............


341,500


San Nicolas..........


47,078


105,400


Tondo............. . .


36,133


155,547


Sampaloc............


450,029


66,269


San Miguel..........


45,100


Quiapo..............


13,251


89,712


Intramuros...........


40,500


44,650


Ermita............ . .


70,000


20,000


Malate.......... . . . .


65,648


23551


Paco............. . . .


113,506


45,801


Sta. Ana........ . . . . .


16,301


35,225


Pandacan............


2,870


115,417


Sta. Mesa............


21,823


25,300


₱1,381,126


₱ 902,579


ANE MONA MADIEV
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


N VOng MLaN
—The market under
review opened with the
previous month’s closing
quotation of 1-3/4 cents
c. and f. for Cubas,
equivalent to 3.52 cents I.
t. for P. I. centrifugals.
Notwithstanding the satisfactory distribution
in the United States
of refined sugar at unchanged prices, the mark
et for raws’ declined,
TA  IN
and before the end of
the first week, holders of
Cubas were asking 1-23/32 cents c. and f. for
prompt shipment sugar but buyers would not
quote above 1-11,/16 cents c. and f. (3.46 cents
I. t. for P. I. 969).
In the second week, prices sagged further,
apparently due to Cuba’s production of 5,135,000
tons (up to May 31) coupled with the large visible
supplies in Cuban and Atlantic Coast ports.
During the last two days of the second week
however, an improvement developed which was
ascribed to an expectation of better demand for
refined during the coming heavy-consumption
months. In the third week, the U. K. bought
50,000 tons of raws at a price equivalent to
3.54 cents l. t., which was considered significant,
and on the 18th very heavy transactions were
consummated in New York—210,000 tons on the
Exchange and 70,000 tons actuals.
As was to be expected a sharp reaction set
in after the sudden buying wave was over.
On the 20th, the market was steady at the
decline with small sales prompt shipment Cubas


at 1-344 cents c. and f. (3.52 cents 1. t.). The
fourth week opened with an evident improvement during which the U. K. bought 40,000 tons
August-September shipment at a price equivalent
to 1.69 cents f.o.b. (3.60 cents I. t. for P. I. 969)
This improvement was not long maintained,
since the weakness of the refined marked was
communicated to the centrifugal market, the
latter closing with sellers but no buyers on the
basis of 1-25732 cents c. and f. for Cubas (3.55
cents l. t. for full-duty sugars).
On the 27th, however, a firmer tone developed
owing to the reports of President Machado’s
speech favoring a controlled Cuban crop for
next year. On the 28th, 200 tons AugustSeptember shipment P. I. sugar were sold at
3.73 cents I. t., while small sales present shipment Cubas were sold to operators, Atlantic
Coast and Gulf ports, at 1-748 cents c. and f.
(3-64 cents I. t.).
The visible stocks in the U. K., U. S. Cuba
and European statistical countries are 5,258,000
tons as compared with 4,725,000 tons at the


same time last year and 4,411,000 tons in 1927.
Futures. Quotations on the New York Exchange during June fluctuated as follows:


High


Low


Latest


1929—


July.........


.. 1.81 1.59


1.80


September....


...1.91


1.68


1.91


December....


... 2.02


1.76


2.02


1930—


January......


... 2.05


1.78


2.05


March.......


.. 2.10


1.84


2.10


May......... 2.16


1.92


2.16


Philippine Sales. During the month of June,
sales of Philippine centrifugals in the Atlantic
Coast—afloats, near arrivals and for future
deliveries—amounted to 33,850 tons at prices
ranging from 3.49 cents to 3.67 cents I. t. as
compared with sales amounting to 32,000 tons
during the same period last year at prices ranging
from 4.21 cents to 4.52 cents landed terms.
EuropE:—F. O. Licht, in his monthly report
for May, released his second estimate of the
European beet acreage for 1929-1930 as compared


Me
ENA


OF you take the short TransC Pacific route to Seattle—or
ifyouenterat San Francisco—book
passage on the Oriental Limited
for eastern America. Luxuriously
appointed and smartly serviced,
yet charging no extra fare, thisfast
train reaches Chicago in 68 hours
from Seattle or Portland. It traverses 1200 clean, cinderless, scenic
miles behind giant electricand oilburning locomotives, including 60


miles along Glacier National Park.
Enroute, see the illuminated New
Cascade Tunnel, longest in the
Western Hemisphere—8 miles
through the Cascade Mountains
—shortening the distance across
America on the Great Northern
Railway. At Chicago make connections for Detroit, Cleveland,
Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, New
York, Boston, Washington, D. C.,
and other American cities.


CLEAN. CINDERLESS, LUXURIOUS, SCENIC ROUTE.


Apply to Tourist Agencies orTrans-Pacific
Steamship Lines or write
J. Wesley Young, Gen’l Agent, Pass’r Dept., 1205 4th Ave., Seattle, Wash.
A. H. Hebb Adent, 16 Government St., Victoria, B. C.
Edw. A. Dye, Gen'l Agent, 607 Hastings St., Vancouver, B. C.
C. A. Gerken, Gen’l Agent, 1009 Hearst Bldg., San Francisco, Cal.
M. J. Costello, West. Traf. Mgr., Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hillrail


A Dependable Railway


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


28


  


July, 1929


with the 1928-1929 sowings, amounting to
2,625,000 and 2,639,124 hectares, respectively.
It was reported by him that the sowing of beet
seed had been terminated in all of the European
countries, but that in the course of the coming
months his figures might have to undergo a few
alterations. Weather conditions in Europe have
been favorable to the present good stand of
beets and the delay in the sowings for this year,
according to him, may be partially recouped.
LOCAL MARKET:—Pricesforcentrifugals during
the fist weeck ranged irom Ps00 to Tgy peg
picul. In the second week the market ruled
firmer, with exporters paying P8.00 to P8.125
per picul, while the local refinery paid as high
as P8.30 per picul. In the last two weeks, a still
better tone developed, ouotations ranging from
₱8.25 to P8.375, but large transactions were
made at a price of P8.50 per picul. The muscovado market was weak from the beginning
to the end of the month, with unchanged quotations of P6.00 to P6.30 for No. I.
Crop Prospects. Experience has shown the
futility of attempting to estimate the volume
of the crop before September or October. This
vear to date, following a severe drought during
March, April and May, the weather has been


extremely favorable in June both on Luzon and
on Negros. The appearance of the cane on
Luzon is equal to that a year ago at this time.
On Negros the cane in most districts is farther
advanced than it was at this time last year.
However, this favorable condition can be entirely
nullified by two or three months of excessive and
continuous rains in July, August and September.
Already the planters in the southern districts
of Negros are complaining about too much rain.
Even in September and October, estimates can
be seriously affected by subsequent unfavorable
weather conditions, so any estimate at this date
is too speculative to be given serious consideration.
Milling is completed in all the Centrals on
Luzon and Negros, with the exception of Manapla, Victorias and Lopez Centrals in the north
coast of Negros.
Locusts have been reported present in the
provinces of Central Luzon, particularly in
Murcia, Tarlac. Efforts and precautions are
now being made to check the spread of the winged
pest which has been a scourge to sugar cane
planters in the Philippines for years.
Philippine Exporis. Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for the 1928-1929 crop from


November 1, 1928, to June 30 1929, amounted
to 545,781 tons, segregated as follows:
Metric tons


Centrifugals........ 519,471
Muscovados........ 19,618
Refined....... 6,692


Total.......... 545,781


JAVA MARKET:—The Java market was described as uncertain during the first week on the
following basis:
Spot—Superiors Gs. 14-1/4—P7.63 per P. I.
picul f.o.b.
June shipment—Superiors Gs. 13—P6.99 per
P. I. picul f.o.b.
July-August shipment—Superiors Gs. 12-344—
₱6.86 per P. I. picul f.o.b.
During the second week, large sales by the
Javan Trust were reported—160,000 tons Superiors July-August-September shipment at a
reserved price and 30,000 tons July-August
shipment at Gs. 12. Prices had a downward
tendency from the opening of the month, and
in the fourth week, quotations were as follows:
Spot—Superiors Gs. 12-1/4—P6.64 per P. I.
picul f.o.b.
July-August-September shipment—Superiors Gs.
12-148—₱6.57 per P. I. picul f.o.b.
October-March shipment—Superiors Gs. 12-1/4
—P6.64 per P. I. picul f.o.b.


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
BY RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


TNO MaNag AANE
June was exceedingly
dull. There was a
dearth of export bills
and very little T. T.
was offering, as a result
of which certain banks
were forced to seek
cover for their sales by
buying heavily from the
insular treasurer. Selling rates for USs T.T.
were firmly maintained
!at 1-1,8% premium
while all banks were
good buyers at 34% premium for T.T., Mo
premium for O/D Credit, and 7789% discount
for 60 d/s D/P bills. The tendency of the
market appeared firm at the close.
The following purchases of telegraphic transfers have been made from the insular treasurer
since last report:
Week ending—
nil
May 25.......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 1.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8900,000
June 8..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $350,000
were current
The sterling quotations which
at the end of May, 1. e., sellers of T.T. at 2/-7416
and buyers at 2/-9716, showed practically no
variation during June.
At the close on May 31 the New York-London
cross-rate was quoted at 484 29432 and during
June fluctuated slightly between a high of 484
15716 and a low of 484 25732, closing at 484
15,46.
London bar silver was quoted at 24 916
ready and 24 548 forward on May 31, was low
for June at 24 ready and 24 1,16 forward from
the 4th to the 7th of the month inclusive,
touched a high of 24 le ready and 24 9/16 for!
ward and closed at 24 1/8 ready and 24 3,16
forward.
On May 31 the quotation for New York bar
silver was 52 748. The low point for June was
51 548 on the 4th of the month, the high point
was 53 on the 14th and 18th of June and the
closing rate was 52 16.
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on June 29th:
Paris, 12.40; Madrid, 14514; Singapore, 114;
Japan, 894; Shanghai, 8414; Hongkong, 98;
India, 136; Java, 122)4.


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


ORED
IDE
SIRELESS
RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


9 PLAZA MORAGA


Phones:


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


29


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the Manila hemp market for
the month of June with statistics up to and including June 30th, 1929.
U. S. GRADES:—The selling market in New
York was fairly steady at the beginning of the
month with shippers offering at: D, 14-172 cents;
E, 13 cents; F 12 cents; G, 8-172 cents; I,
11-344 cents; JI, 10 cents; Si, 11-578 cents;
$2, 10-1/2 cents; S3, 8-548 cents. The first
week was quiet with very little business. Occasionally a shipper would dispose of a small
lot of hemp but always by making a reduction in
price. By the middle of the month buyers were
having things pretty much their own way and
general prices had declined to: D, 14 cents; E,
13 cents; F, 12 cents; G, 8-348 cents; I, 11-1/2
cents; J1, 9-5/8 cents;'81, 11-3/4 cents; S2,
10-548 cents; S3, 9 cents. This condition prevailed throughout the last half of the month and
at the close shippers were offering freely at:
D, 13-344 cents; E, 12-344 cents F 11-172
cents; G, 8-1/4 cents; I, 11-348 cents; J1, 9-344
cents; Si, 11-348 cents; $2, 11 cents;'$3, 8-172
cents; and would undoubtedly accept lower
prices. The decline for the month ranged from
1/8 cents to 3/4 cents on the various grades and
the average was about 1/4 cents. The higher
grades suffered the most.
In Manila the market at the first of the month
was firm enough with most of the exporters
willing to buy at: D, P30.50; E, P29.00-
Per."o, P1l.7o 1, P25, d1. F2l; S1, f26;
$2, P24; $3, ₱i6.50. During the first week it
was apparent that the larger exporters were
getting plenty of hemp in the provinces and
almost all of the arrivals were bought by speculators and small shippers. By the middle of
the month values were practically unchanged
although there were differences in some of the
grades, sales being made on the basis of D,
P30.50,E, P20,F, P26.50; 6, ₱17.75;1, ₱44.50;
JI, P21.50; 81, P25.50 82, P23.50, 83, ₱18.25.
The market remained quiet throughout the
balance of the month and sales continued to be
made but a fair amount of hemp went into store.
The last prices paid were: D. P29.50; E, P27.50;
F ₱2530 G. PI7.75; 1, P2425- 01, ₱21.25,
si, P24.50; 82, P23; 83, 18. This shows a
decline of from ₱1.00 to P1.50 on the better
grades and from P0.25 to P0.50 on the lower
U. S. grade.
U. K. GRADES:—The London market on the
first of the month was firm with shippers selling
on the basis of: J2, E38.10; K, E34; Ll, 234;
L2, 232; MI, 232; M2, E27; DL, E26.15; DM,
#23.10- Dealers and spinners, both in the
U. K. and on the Continent, showed very little
interest and prices gradually declined and the
middle of the month found shippers offering at:
92, 238; K, 233; Ll, 233; Lz, E3010; Mi.
230.10; M2, 226.10; DL, 226.10; DM, 223.
During the last half of the month there was a
fair amount of buying but business was not
sustained and shippers were apparently overeager to sell. As a result, the market was rather
dull the end of the month with downward prices
at: 32, 237.5; K, 232.15; L1, 232.15; L2,
230; MI, E30; M2, 226; DL, E26.5; DM,
E22.10. This shows a decline for the month
ranging from 10,- to E2 a ton for the various
grades.
In Manila the market was fairly steady for
the U. K. qualities on the first of the month with
shippers paying: J2, ₱17.75; K, ₱15; Ll, ₱15;
La PIdas 3il, P13so ME, Pi13o, DE.
₱11.25; DM, Pi0. Thenext two weeksbrought
very little change and prices at the middle
of the month were: J2, ₱17.50 K. ₱15; Ll,
₱15.25; L2, P13.25; MI, F13.25; M2, ₱11.25;
DL, Pll; DM, P3.50." The last half of the
month the market here was decidedly quiet
as it became apparent that receipts would be
rather full and the consuming markets were
anticipating a decline. The market closed with
a few buyers willing to pav: J2, P17.50; K,
Pilso; El Pl4so; 12, ₱1s; Ml, P13; M2,
Pil; DL, fll, DAl, 9.25.
JAPAN:—This market continued to take a


reasonable amount of hemp but business was
below normal. The exchange was rather against
the Japanese buyers and this probably restricted
business somewhat. The continued heavy production assures this market of rather a full
supply of the grades they require so they can
afford to buy only actual requirements. Should
receipts show a falling off in the production of
Leyte, it would probably stimulate buying in this
market.
MagueY:—The production of Cebu Maguey
continues full and prices declined in sympathy
with Manila hemp.” At the end of the month
buyers were paying P13 for No. 2 and P11.25
for No. 3. This is a decline of from P0.25 to
₱0.50 per picul during the month. There is
still some Manila Maguey being produced in
the Ilocos country but very little is being shipped
out. The season is just about over.
PRODUCTION:—Productionstill continues heavy
and so far the small receipts predicted by the
experts since the first of the year have failed to
materialize. The Fiber Standardization Board’s
figures show that 871,177 bales of hemp were
pressed during the first six months of the year.
This is at the rate of 1,742,254 bales per Vear.
The total production last vear was 1,386,897
bales and the highest production in recent times
was in 1924 when l,4l,7a47 bales of fiber were
produced. It is hardly possible that total
receipts for the next six months will be anything
near like as heavy as for the first six months.


The first six months averaged more than 33,000
bales per week. It would take an average of
less than 20,000 bales a week for the next six
months to give a total equal to last year. It is
quite safe to say that receipts this year will
probably break all records and it is easy to figure
how the total can reach 1,500,000 bales and
even 1,600,000 bales. Notwithstanding the
heavy production, stocks on hand in Manila
have averaged only about 50,000 bales more than
last year and considering the number of exporters
now engaged in the business, a stock of 200,000
or even 250,000 bales is not too much.
Freldur RATEs:—There is no change in rates
on hemp since last report.
STATISTICS:—The figures below are for the
period ending June 30th, 1929.


1929


1928


Manila Hemp


Bales


Bales


On hand January 1......


158,452


139,624


Receipts to date.......


S71,177


678,613


1039,620


818,257


Shipment to—


United Kingdom.....


182,377


185,077


Continent...........


87,545


100,629


United States.......


290,545


177,866


Japan............. . . .


212,994


168,207


All Others...........


18,574


56,653


Totals..........


NUOAOO


688432


A
“North
Coast
"
Limited”
O
KSICUIS
"Finest"
“the finest train in the world and I have
traveled on all that are worth talking
about"'—Samuel Hopkins Adams,
Auburn, N. Y.

“Best
“equipment the very best, service splendid—a wonderful train"—N. A. Peterson, San Francisco.
TOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between
N the North Pacific Coast and Chicago! Leaves
Ay
Seattle at 11:00 A. M. for all the principal cities of
the United States. Two days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel is its
diner service. New-style Observation-Club car with deep, restful
lounge—cushioned chairs—library—writing corner—club rooms—
showers—and maid and valet service.
The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos.
Cook Sl Son, Shanghai Commercial Ga Savings Bank, or any transPacific steamship company will gladly furnish additional information.


Oswald Crawford, G. A.
01 Granville Street
Vancouver, B. C.


R. J. Tozer, A. G. P. A
200 L. C. Smith Blda.
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.


E. Blackwood, G. 4
$12 Government Stroot
Victoria, B. CG.


NorthernPacificRailway


(352)


"First of the Northern Transcontinentals”


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


30


  


July, 1929


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of McCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.
MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


Luzon Stevedoring
CO., Ino.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Port Area
Phone 2-16-61


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Gorporaton


There has been little of interest to note in the
local copra market during the month of June.
Prices remained practically unchanged over May
levels notwithstanding the fact that many Tayabas producers are withholding their coconuts from
the Tapahan. Before the end of the month increased buying pressure on the part of local
mills advanced provincial prices P.20 per picul,
although during the same period at Manila,
buyer’s ideas remained unchanged. At this
writing, pressure at provincial concentration
points has been somewhat relieved and the
market is slightly easier. Total arrivals at
Manila during the month of June were 288,808
bags. The U. S. market for copra was featureless during the month fluctuating between narrow
limits. The London market while dull during
the early part of June is reported somewhat
steadier today. Latest cables advices follow:
Manila, Buen Corriente P8.50 to P8.625;
Arrival Resecada, P9.50 to P9.75; San Francisco, $.039 to $.04; London, f.m.m., in bags
22015J0.
Coconut Oil.—The U. S. market for coconut
oil continued dull and depressed thruout the
entire month of June, with buyers interested
solely at their own figures. Selling pressure
from all sources continued heavy during the
first half of the month and new low trading levels
were recorded. Large offerings of Palm Kernel
Oil were noted at further price concessions.
Toward the end of the month demand for coconut oil improved somewhat and as a result
sellers, ideas have been advanced. Latest
cables follow:
San Francisco, $.06-1e to 8.06- 548 f. o. b
tank cars; New York, $.06-3a to 3.06-748 c. i. f.;
London. No quotations.


THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija.
Director, Rice Producers' Association


Prices for both palay and rice rose slightly at
the beginning of the month, but at present writing,
while appreciably higher than at the same date
in June last year, they have taken a small slump,
due to lowered prices for Saigon importations.
This will no doubt be rectified shortly, due to
conditions affecting crops, and the volume of
exportable surplus in nearby centers overseas.
Present crop conditions in the rice region of
Luzon are very unfavorable, due to the lack of
timely rains. Lacking these, the irrigation systems obviously cannot supply moisture even
for seedlings. If no rain is forthcoming before
Julv 10, we can confidently expect the loss of
half the seedlings in the Luzon plain, and lack
of time in which to replant will affect the coming
crop seriously. Other pests, such as locusts
and rinderpest, will have little effect just now.
There is a certain amount of apprehension
among rice producers as to the effect of the ricewarehousing law, passed hastily at the last
session of the legislature, to go into effect January 1, 1930. While this appears an excellent
law to protect the depositor in warehouses, by
a bond to be approved by the commerce and
communications secretary, from all accounts,
any gain to the grower will be offset by other
losses. So far, the storers are noncommittal
as to the law itself, which they believe is an
honesty-forcing one to their detriment, as the
industry has always moved smoothly and efficiently under the general rules followed by
commerce. To deposit a bond amounting to
two pesos and fifty cents per cavan of palay,
and six pesos for each cavan of rice, and support
an army of official interventors, seems too hard
a burden for the business to stand, or at least
the warehouse interests reason so.
Consequently, as this law is muddling an


otherwise clear situation, there is to be a severe
restriction of credit allowed the producer himself, some millions less of sacks to be imported
to be distributed gratuitously; and the further
conclusion consequent upon the law is, that of
accepting no deposits under the law’s conditiona.
This would of course force the grower to sell
during the post-harvest glut, at an economic
loss, besides straining the milling, transportation and distribution functions. No matter
how good a law is passed, it remains to see if
business will stomach its conditions—orlet George
do it. A possible effect will be to restrict a
much-needed credit (extended the producers
without interest) amounting to some millions
of pesos, and very possibly the refusal of deposits, as being too hard a condition for a business whose profits are narrow already.
It should not be forgotten that the depositing
of palay as a function has been built up by the
buyers and storers to stabilize supply and distribution, entirely for the benefit of the depositor. Formerly all palay was purchased
outright, and milled and distributed by the
storers. Storing by producers, together with
credits extended them, has been a growth of some
decades, and all to their benefit. There is also
another thing not realized by the ordinary individual. That is, branch of the rice business is
highly competitive. In this lies the small
spread between the raw and manufactured
product and the consequent gain to the producer himself.
Like many of our bright-idea laws, this one,
no matter how highly it can becommendedin
theory, may not work at all, as it takes two
parties to subscribe to an agreement. It could
have been done by the extension of the insurance carried by every milling plant of magnitude, the extra premium to be paid by the
depositor himself. In this event, perhaps, the
business would not have received a set-back.
As for any other entity entering into the competitive storing, milling and distributive function,
we believe that it is a thing of the far-distant
future, when more will be known about what
the ethics of business are, and should be.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


July, 1929


  


31


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


April, 1929


April, 1928


Monthly average for 12 months
ending April, 1929


Quantity


Value


25


Quantity


Value


25


Quantity


Value


5


SaA


99,410,153
-


₱15,111,888


43.


88,150,478


₱15,198,7:


52.5


48,478,91


TANAANO


30.5


Hemp....

........* *




1,895
19,
*........4


5,889,


6.7


13,653,475


4,136,797


14


15,311,936


4,547,66


17.0


Coconut Oll...


19,209,56
.. *


6,217


17


5,598,449


1,911,97,


13,894,644


4,544,00


Copra.
..............................


8,831,358
.. 


54
1,616,05


4.5


15,597,0


3,105


10.;


19,809,78


3,972,824


4.


Cigars (Number).....


12,187,651
..........


27,055


14,414,953


2.3


17,910,979


789
sio


Embroidery........


*........


790,77


2.3


142,40


2.0


5,594


Maguoy.


1,343,559
* *........


287,47


1,917,743


37a
1


4


1,399,262


89,55


Leaf Tobacco....
* ...............


,984,26
........4


12,29





211,43


1,600,352


550,432


Desiccated and Shredded Coconut.......................


1,754,115
.......


79,386


1,477,660


50,35


1,789,014


56,18


Hats (Number).
............


,404
* *.......


279,460


0.8


9,83


256,7


0.9


6,32


676,27


Lumber (Cubic Meter).............. . . .. ..


5,253
*.......


529,110


2,40


443,041


1.5


13,893


s7,6


(Copra Meal....


7,296,727
........ .


502,405


4,206,82


,593


vo:
S,10


594,30:


Cordago.


841,313
* .........


431,96-


25,488


302,99:


1.0


347,200


2,9-


Knotted Abaca..


70,551



214,42


0.6


.73


10,66


43,041


143,407


Pearl Buttons (Gross)...
*..


9
47,37
..........


3,442


.1


64,403


0,52-


0.2


3,254


5,7


0.2
02


Canton (low grade cordage fiber)...............


746,103
...*.


49,59


581,277


117,90


574,763


02,671


All Other Products......
*......................


.......


955,704


2.7


688,405


2.4


861,464


2.4


Total Domestic Products..............................





TOLSONIE


99.5


₱28,553,366


99.6


₱27,198,518


95.4


nited States Products................................


* .......


104,623


0.3


04,42


29,284


.5


Foreign Products......................................


...


76,453


o.2


3,069


0.1


38,991


0.1


Grrand Ota 





P35,027,948


100. 0


P28,690,864


100.0


P27,366,292!


00.0


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


April, 1929
Articles
April, 1928


Monthly average for
2 months ending
April, 1929.


Value


5


VN


77


Value


7


Cotton Cloths..........


₱ 4,935,456


17


₱ 3,164,592


15.7


₱ 3,509,243


16.5


Other Cotton Goods.....


1,313,246


998,233


4.9


1,166,016


4.8


Iron and Steel, Except
Machinery...........


1,820,842


6.3


1,775,615


1,892,871


8.4


Rice...................


9,051


,94


Wheat Flour..........


465,30


788,,


.8


,2:


Machinery and Parts of..


087,807


887,2


1.3


0,482


Dairy Products........
Gasoline...............


58,166


770:


2


589,678


1,815,210


6.1


400,532


.9


8,543


Silk Goods.............


1,142,859


3


628,89-


3


78,944


Automobiles............


'6
501,67


2.6


egetable Fiber Goods...


470,024


0


Meat Products........


488,005





192,4


Illuminating Oil.....


704,768
574,744


438,4


)2,406


ish and Fish Products.


a


O7


1.8


Crude Oil..............


144,844


0.8



Coal.....


717,308


2.5


167,159


8.8


399,184


1.9


Chemicals, Dyes, Drugs
tC.....


526,691


331,4


1.6


393,574


1.9


Fertilizers..............


20,200


10,52


.0


346,04


Yegetable......


490,903


1.8


309,655


1.5


375,742


1.8


Paper Goods, Except
Books...


506,185


1.8


308,675


1.5


411,251


2.0


Tobacco and Manufacbures of..............


227,882


22


316,146


1..


551,088


2.7


Electrical Machinery...


662,180


265,417


1.3


376,115


1.8


Books and Other Printed
Matters............


493,568


1.8


373,148


1.8


220,282


1.0


Cars and Carriages, Ext Auto



.57,706


0.8


232,992


1.


199,909


0.9


Automobile Tirc
8.......


472
265,689


159,712


O.7


276,5


.3


Fruits and Nuts........


161,456


O.8


284,3:


1.4


Woolen Goods..........


91,74


H


155,304


110,72


O


Leather Goods.....


3
24,499


1.


212,806


1.0


236,723


1.1


Shoes and Other Footware


176,775
217,308


158,147


O.7


128,364


O.


loffee ........ . . . .


3.s


97,604


0.4


152,742


O.7


Breadstuff, Except
Wheat Flour.........


381,694


148,270


.7


179,550


0.8


Eggs..
*  .


362,022


1.3


191,735


0.9


195,171


O.9


Perfumery and Other
Toilet Goods.........


192,441


.8


125,977


0.6


138,004


0.6


Lubricating Oil.......


271,302


1.0


124,419


0.6


179,299


0.8


Cacao Manufactures, Exept Candy..........


237,522


177,7


141,848


O.?


Glass and Glassware....


188,066


82


120,785


833


170,162


0.8


Paints, Pigments, Varnish, Etc....


210,14


173,896


148,482


o.7


Oils not separately listed


149,889


62


126,222


68


145,819


O.7


Earthern Stones and
Chinaware.


148,540


79,1


125,598


O.


Automobile Ac


317,884


22


81,912


0.4


144,218


0.7


Diamond and Other Precious Stones Unset....


107,938


0.5


80,703


0.5


120,899


0.5


Wood, Bamboo, Reed,
Rattan..
*


145,356


102,755


0.5


115,902


0.5


India Rubber Goods...


157,245


0,066


O.


112,735


0.5


Soap.......


182,990


178,"


4
185,20
2,28


0.9


Matches...............


44,502


66,9:


O.


Cattle................


46,048


40


0,649


.1


Explosives.............


26,062


O.


33,76


O.)


Cement...
 


115,734





66,43


57,02


4


Sugar and
es.....


59,578


55,938





26,748


O.I


Motion Picture Films....


41,815


31,28


).1


3
2,456


0.1


All Other Imports......


2,102,124


7.1


1,698,323


8.4


2,897,120


9.2


Total..........


TAMONN


100.0


FININONON


OG


P22,552,652


100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Ports


Manila......
..

gamb, inga....
30le.....
Taveo......
agan


Monthly average for
April, 1929 April, 1928 12 months ending
April, 1929.


Value


25


Value


75


Value


5


₱46,707,927


7.5


P28,578,908


59.6 P33,138,140


66.3


,226,67


14.


10,736,289


22.5


6,840,098


13.7


5,175,165


,127,68a
7


14.9


6,564,478


13.1


95,7


o.


442,667


598,7a


2.0


127,476


54,168


0.3


97,897


1,358,593


il


706,058


1.5


1,338,202


278,449


0.4


135,781


0.3


1,039.479


2.0


P63,170,035


100. 0


₱47,881,559 100.0


₱49,919,025


100. 0


CARRYING TRADE


IMPORTS


Monthly average for
April, 1928 12 months ending
Nationality of Vessels
April, 1929
April, 1929.


Value 0
Value 0
Value 0


47.9
American.............. ₱12,003,113 41.0 ₱ 8,192,978 41.5 ₱ 9,773,312
 36
7,449,43
25.6
7,365,20
,045,69"
35.8
British.................
59,138
1,943,184
7.5 1,270,5:
Japanese...............
714,48:
52,197
545,328
3.4
Dutch..............
1,584,762
7.0
1,378,402
German........
2,093,21
894,00
4..

9.0
2,708,
63,158
Norwegian.............
21,3
0.5
9,818 0.3
0.6
41,0
Philippine..............
0.7
161,247
275,191
56,715
Spanisl................
.9
0.3
63,91
22,199
88,176
.4
Chinese..........
,680
31,094 0.4
Swedish................
21,384
o.7
136,102 0.5
148,27
annish...
1,340
sechoslovak...........
16,074
56,277 0.2
French................


By Freight............. P27,424,702 97.6 ₱18,663,239 97.0 P21,929,319 96.2
By Mail...............
623,331 3.1
713,385 2.4
527,456 3.0


Total..... ₱28,142,087 100.0 ₱19,190,695 100.0 P22,552,650 100.0


EXPORTS


Monthly average for
12 months ending
Nationality of Vessels April, 1929
April, 1928
April, 1929.


Value
75
Value % Value
2


48.9 ₱12,853,170 41.3
American.............. ₱15,220,499 43.6 ₱13,784,54.
9.8
24.7
7,491,045
8,110,573 28.6
3,629,542
2.
British................
2,822,559 11.1
1s
6,368,9
.4
154,460
apanese...............
962,
1,650
645,176 2.0
2.7
German..............
278,o17 3.0
2,100,407 6.0
1,756,683 6.0
Norwegian.............
102,896
. 4
Spanish................
2.1
571,104
247,324 0.6
751,003
Dutch.................
169,123 0.6
44,835
Philippine..............
3090
'12
8,041
Chinese................
350,159 1.4
167,244 0.4
1,344,998 4.6
Swedish................
sa
French...............
667,272 2.6
Dannish..


95.6
By Freight............. P34,335,149 98.1 P28,088,592 98.1 P26,257,21
4.4
692,799
1,109,080
By Mail...............
602,272 1.


TotAl. 135,027,948 100 0 P28,690,864 100 0 P27,366,292 100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Countries


April, 1929


Monthly average for
April, 1928 12
months ending
April, 1929


Value


70


Value


7


VON


75


United States.........


₱45,083,190


1.6


₱34,557,157


75.1


P34,845,185


69.


United Kingdom......


2,366,646


2,321,19


2,093,75


Japan.......


4,238,640


3,332,86


3
3,325,14


China......



488,3.


1,693,


3.6


718,086


3..


French East Indies....


586,694


,80


0.3


622,95


Germany.............


1,512,156


2.4


942.7


O


1,249,141


Spaln.............


806,478


1.3


634,9"


1.3


1,0-
el.


Australia...............


511,29:


O.8


1.


British East Indies....


1,042,633


.5


1.0


685,13


Dutch East Indies.....


573,641


0.9


519,00


1.1


541,818


France.................


623,747


400,5


0.8


81,6


Netherlands....


449,31


O.7


7,672


0.6


Italy.


569,65


0.9


0.3


Hongkong.............


402,062


6
0


1.0


ARA


Belgium..............


00,058


0.8


110,8


0.8


164,5


3


Switzerland...........


393,269


294,


0.6


304,269


apanese-China...


382.34


9-


0.1


109,909


0.2


Siaml...


1o5,932


0.2


4


0,550


weden...............


106,371


0.2


50,0


).I1


102,28:


O


Canada...........


129,836


0.2


1,630


102,4


O.


Norway...............


21,637


2,910


O.1


89,175


O.?


Austria....


8,743


3,064


14,101


Denmark..



36,66
6


0.1


28,022


34,11


O.)


Other Countries.......


230,687


0.4


175,310


0.4


302,000


0.6


Total.


₱63.170,035


100.0


₱47,881,559


100 O


₱49,919,025 100.0


32


  


July, 1929


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
PR
“SILVER FLEE'IExpress Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigerated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


5 *EIP
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
Tel. 2-24-18
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND'


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10



IO


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
₱26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE


110 P. Faura


Tel. 5-69-44


Telephone 22070
P. O. Box 1394
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Collections
Investments
Income Tax
121 Real, Intramuros Manila, P. I.


“LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
P. O. Box 1423
Manila, P. I


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: “SALEFIBER”


Derham Building
Mmg


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


REMEMBER
The JOURNAL is a mighty good
publication to send to someone in
the United States whom you wish
to keep informed regarding the
Philippines!
₱4 Yearly Does It
Send name and address to
The
American Chamber of Commerce
Journal: P. O. Box 1638,
Manila, P. I.


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works


Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISENENIS TEEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN CRANEER OF COMMENCE JOURNAL


RIU HERMANOS —623-ESCOLTA-623


Manila Wine Merchants
Limited
174 Juan Luna Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to bel) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


Recommended By Leading Doctors


Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake


TEL. 5.73.06


Nature's Best Mineral Water


Available Facilities for the Benefit of the Public
C. O. D. Service. (Collect on Delivery). This service enables anybody to order or send goods without
leaving his home town or place of business. Payment is made when goods are received at destination.
Express Truck Service. A fleet of motor trucks is operated for this service to make home deliveries
of baggage and express shipments to any part of the City and designated places in San Juan del Monte and Pasay.
All you need to do is to order the billing clerk at station of origin to include the home delivery charge on the shipment and give the addiess, or patrons may call up Express Office, telephone 4-98-61, or 4-97-75 and give necessary
instructions.
DOWN-TOWN OFFICE, right in the Business Center at 519 Dasmarinas. Established for the convenience
of the Public. Sells tickets for all trains, accepts billing of express shipments and C. O. D. orders, and furnished
information on matters pertaining to service of the railroad.
Boat Connection for Bicol Region. Two boats are placed on the Aloneros-Pasacao run, furnishing the
public daily service, except Sundays, and enabling passengers to and from the Legaspi Division to reach destination in less than 24 hours.
Combined Train and Steamer Service between Hondagua Terminal and Ports on the East Coast of Luzon
in new big motorship designated and ordered especially to respond to the ever-increasing demand for travel facilities.
MANILA RAILROAD C
NY


T EIEE TO EENENANN N TENIE MEN    L MENO IOA


Gaining daily in popularity
MOriOlos So


EEE them everywhere you go—the new
 Chevrolet Six passenger cars and
trucks—on the boulevards, in crowded
traffic, and out on provincial roads. Seldom,
if ever, has a new model been so instantly
popular.
The reason is not far to seek. The
Chevrolet Six is an outstanding value. Your
money invested in a new Chevrolet buys the


maximum of dependable, comfortable, economical transportation.
Exceedingly smart in appearance, snappy
in pick-up, swift and safe, its price is most
attractive and the Chevrolet tradition of economy holds in the Six as it did in the four.
Investigate the Chevrolet Six. Passenger
cars and trucks are available for immediate
delivery.


a Six in the price range of the four!


PASSENGER CAR
PRICES
Touring Car  ₱1830
Roadster
 1830
2190
Coupe
Sedan
2315
Convertible Cabriolet 2400
Convertible Landau - 2475
F. O. B. Manila
Discount for Cash


Chevrolet’s
Greatest Truck
The 1le ton
“Utility” Truck
Chassis -- ₱1750
The Light Delivery Truck
Chassis - - 1375
F. O. B. Manila
Discount for Cash


Pacific
Iloilo


Commercial Company


MANILA


Cebu


T EERE O IEENEENEIE IEN TENE E MEREN UNENG UNNNO NUNE


Commemorating Occupation Day!
Leroy’s Account of the American Occupation of Manila, August 13, 1898.—Where
and How the American Flag Was Officially
Raised over Fort Santiago.—Pictures of
the Oldtime Walls and Gates of Manila.-
Another Poem by Gilbert S. Perez.—Babe
and the Moon (concluded), by Henry Philip
Broad.—The Black Butterfly, by Percy A.
Hill.—Editorials: Free Trade—Conditionally;
Resocialization of Cured Lepers; and Wrightly
Speaking.—Present Situation of the Philippine National Bank.—Revelations of the
Most Recent Land Law, supblemented by a
handy table of areas and population by
provinces.—Other Features and the Usual
Reviews of Commerce and Industry.
For Students of English:
Second Installment of Farquson Johnson’s
“Common Errors in English Corrected."


RULY AMAGAZINE PREEMINENTIN. THE PHILIPPINES


THE EXPERIENCED
1 Smoker of Manila cigars
knows the quality of
PAABACLLA
Made from the finest selected
Isabela leaf tobacco, properly
aged and cured to bring out
the best characteristics.


Try one of our CORONAS


WHY QUALITY?
LONADING


We do Sanitary installation per
specifications or per wishes of
the owner.
Only first class plumbing goods
and materials are used and
first class workmanship labor
employed.
No matter how difficult the work
or how complicated the planing of your plumbing, don't
worry; just give us a callHENRY MUSSER—Tel. 2-10-44
We do our best to satisfy the customer, and we correct errors of
any plumbing installation of
every plumbing system, however difficult it may be.
We do also any kind of Sheet
Metal work, kitchen appliances,
ice boxes, etc.
HENRY MUSSER
Plumbing and Sheet Metal Works
662 Rizal Ave.
Tel. 2-10-44


When you think of purchasing a new range
you are confronted with a problem that
requires some considerable thought. The
buyer of a LAnG RANGE does not make
his or her choice haphazardly, but investigates the merits of the range along the following lines:
First, QUALITY, which is exemplified
in every detail of the LANG. From the raw
material to the finish range, nothing is sacrificed to produce the very best range that can
possibly be made.
Second, APPEARANCE. The LANG, on
sanitary legs, with smooth top in durable
nickel trim, enamel trimmed or all enamel
construction if wanted, in blue, gray, or
white, will please the most exacting requirements.
Third, ECONOMY and EFFICIENCY
must be considered and a range that is proven
fuel saver (accomplished only in a LANG
with its exclusive hot blast features and direct
application of heat) will, over a short time,
repay the purchaser many times over a cheap
and wasteful range not to mention the guaranteed cooking and baking satisfaction.
The LANG is particularly adapted for the
fuel conditions where gas could not be obtained. Wood and soft coal are burned
more satisfactorily in this Western Patented
fircbox.


The First Choice of Every
Ho me
The Lang Ranges
Enjoy the Range Comfor:


Specify


Lang


Range


Sold by
HENRY MUSSER
se?
es Ave. Manila, P..


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AM!!


MEEN ERA


August, 1929


  


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM


can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Isiands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


EA
SUDDO


Interior Street-Car Advertising
Small in Cost—Large in Results


For Rates and Particulars—Call Up
Telephone 2-19-11
Manila Electric Company
A. B. TIGH
Advertising Manager
134 San Marcelino
Manila, P. I.


INTERNATIONAL
E ED
O-SPECIAL


ARHIS NEW Truck has created a sensation
 among transportation men because of its
extraordinary power which enables it to
pull its full load out of or over the most
difficult places. Its TWO-SPEED AXLE
furnishes this tremendous reserve power.
This truck forms a part of the INTERNATIONAL Truck line which we have for you.
Come in and look it over if you are in the
transportation business, or need a truck that
will operate dependably under the most adverse
conditions and at lower cost than you have
been pay ng.


A Truck that Will
Out-Pull—Out-Climb—Out-Perform
any other truck of the same rated
capacity under FULL LOAD
MACLEOD AND COMPANY
154 M. DE COMILLAS
MANILA, P. I.
Branches in
DAVAO
CEBU
VIGAN
ILOILO





PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
The American Chamber of Commerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)


Governor Davis’s Manila Introduction
This paper inaugurates a feature in the JOUrNAl which will continue
until other plans are made; maybe one issue, maybe scores. That is to
say, as long as it seems practicable, about the middle of the month prior
to publication the editor will summarize events in the experiences of Governor General Dwight F. Davis in the islands. The purpose, aside from the
major one in all our work, that of informative entertainment for the reader,
will be to promote the interests of the administration by throwing occasional sidelights on significant events.—Ed.


ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.
Local Subscription: ₱4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per ycar
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
P. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, Vice President
John L. Headington, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
I. C. Rockwell
Kenneth B. Day
An Wehaven


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Frank W. Butler
Wm. H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
R. Ba Cavena.
H. E. Hicath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Carl Hess
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
ai Walhavan"
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wilson


COMMITTEES
FINANCE
Chairman
Wn. R. Renndids
F. W. Butler


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
. L. Spellman
M. M. Salccby


PUBLICATIONS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Bemice
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, ChairW I shaV


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, ChairnOn
F. W. Butler
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
-. Chairman
N N VIN
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
Bradford!
G..P
L. E. Nantz
INVESTMENTS
A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender


The President Taft brought Governor General Dwight F. Davis and
his party to Manila on schedule time Monday, July 8, when the auspices
weren’t a bit good and a typhoon, aided by one of the highest tides ever
known in the Pasig, flooded Manila’s downtown district and put the city’s
hospitality to a test which it nobly surmounted. For the crowd that welcomed Governor Davis at Pier 7 seemed quite as large, and generous in its
cheering propensities, as sunshine could have brought out. But the openair ceremonies were out of the question, and resort was had to historic
Marble Hall in the Ayuntamiento, where the inaugural address from which
we quoted last month was read into the microphone and a screen of ferns
along the rostrum.
That night, when the capital’s reception to Governor Davis and Miss
Alice was given in Marble Hall and so many of the elect were there, the
Constabulary orchestra was behind the ferns—it and only it. The recep-¬
tion was populous, but dry; upstairs and downstairs, search for something
inspiring and adequate to the inner man was vain. Someone of about


explained that it was because Ben Wright wouldn’t charge the function',
expense to the exchequer, and that those who would have to foot the bill
were economizing; but it seems that Governor Davis is a dry, denizen of
St. Louis though he be. The thought is far from comforting, but it is
about the only disquieting thing one may think respecting Davis, and perhaps the inhibition will not prove insurmountable.
Manilans are really resourceful in wetting their whistles. They don’t
seem to fear old Don Arterio Sclerosis a bit. But something mitigating
the vulgar repute which regions east of Suez have for placating thirst,
may be tolerable for a while in Manila—or even more than tolerable.
Anyway, we have it.
It was a real treat to observe His Excellency in the reception line,
As he caught each new name (and he never claimed out-of-bounds on one),
a smile as pleasant as a sunburst wreathed his countenance; as if he had
particular gratification in meeting this particular person who was filing
by with the rest. Then momentarily the smile was erased, to be followed
by another of equal spontaneity for the person next in line. The sheer


EGOR MAHROTALCORSTRES.
AND SEE for yourself the long faithful service
AA they give.
Then you will know, as many other motorists
know, that the Royal Cord exclusive processes build
tires that give long wear and save you money.
We Stand Behind Every Tire Sold
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY CO.
MANILA
BACOLOD
CEBU
ILOILO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


4


  


August, 1929


ability to smile, and propensity to do so, along with other attributes yet to
be discovered in Davis by Manilans, attributes which some would say are
more fundamental in public men, may make His Excellency the cynosure
of all eyes in a big spring parade down Pennsylvania avenue in Washington
some day; for our governor general hails from a pivotal state and is potential
timber for the presidency.
One or two events incident to Davis’s arrival
seemed almost to have been arranged to break
him in quickly. Both occurred at the ship. The
arrangement that the commanding officers of
the Army and the Navy accompany the official
delegation went by the board, perhaps by someone’s oversight or blunder, and the civil officials
were last to meet Governor Davis, the military
first. The last shall be first saith the Scripture.
In the welcoming of governors general, this is
said to be a detail unique to the welcoming of
Davis alone; and the welcoming of Stimson is not
excepted, though he too is an ex-secretary of war,
only of an earlier vintage than Davis.
However, after the guns boomed out, Davis
did get to the gangplank, where he was casually
handed a morning paper featuring the address
he was, hours later, to deliver. It seems there
was another slip-up by someone, and the enterprising publishers had their special edition on the
streets about three hours in advance of the
release time. Explanations have been made.
Davis had sent the text of his address to Manila
by radio, at the request of the news services that
wished to get it over to the United States for
timely publication.
With our new governor is his daughter, Miss
Alice, and a niece, Miss Alita Davis. Miss Alice
Davis is now mistress of Malacanang, with everyone there singing her praises and avowing she is
the pleasantest and fairest hostess the place has
ever known. Miss Alita Davis, too, shares the
Davis amiability, but was unwarily interviewed
by one of the papers—or allegedly interviewed,


Sketch by Fernandez, La Salle College
HON. DWIGHT F. DAVIS


More press incidents. One morning Governor Davis learned from his
newspaper that he had written a letter to Mayor Earnshaw regarding
public improvements—which he hadn’t done. That afternoon he learned
from another paper that he was deep in the problem of two reported overdrafts in the posts bureau—and he wasn’t at all. The overdrafts papers
may have reached his office when the item was
printed, and the letter to the mayor was from
Gilmore and about a month old.
“You ought to do better than that,” Governor Davis said, with the smile all Manila has
come to like, when he talked to the reporters
representing the delinquent papers; and the
reporters concurred in his opinion.
There has indeed been a series of stories and
interviews—information from fuentes fidedignas—
and then corrections, explanations and apologies.
Which indicates that Governor Davis, as frank
and cordial as man may be, is yet able to keep
his own counsel and keep others rather wildly
guessing. Maybe it’s a tennis trait, which brings
us to the games with the Aragon brothers, Davis
Cup contenders for the Philippines, in which
Davis and his partner took the honors and of
which there were countless pictures in the papers.
Cameramen have been no less constantly on the
Malacanang job than reporters, but on his first
Sunday in Manila Davis found temporary surcease in church from the demands of both. He
attended the services at the Cathedral of St. Mary
and St. John—under the spreading acacias on
quaint old calle Isaac Peral.
The persistence of the newspapers is entirely
pardonable. Governor Davis is good news, pictorial and editorial. The pestering he has underAATA
gone from cameramen and reporters might have
31
exasperated a man with less grasp of himself,
but Davis has managed to seem to enjoy it. He
is a man of gracious parts; his popularity among
newsmen in Washington can well be understood
by all who have observed him in Manila. The


n a E na maan
Ioarned, from Governor Davis, that he, not members of his family, is
Malacanang’s official spokesman.
The assiduity of Manila newspapers in gathering news (or what have
you!) had proved to be up to the most daring standards. But Governor
Davis kept his temper well; he was nothing more than crisply emphatic
about certain courtesies being mutually observed between himself and the
reporters covering his office. He was a little more emphatic the next day,
or maybe the next after, when directly quoted in an interview—all news to
him!—to the effect that he prefers the parliamentary plan of government.
Conjecture is that this is a point about which the governor is trying
to be careful; he touches it gingerly, so far, and isn’t interviewed about it.
He has only said, in his message to the Legislature, reported elsewhere in
this issue in full, I shall continue to use the Council of State .. as an
instrumentality for friendly advisory contact between the executive and legislative branches, without in any way affecting the independence and the freedom
of action of either.
Salt this to taste, and it still remains quite conditional and commits
the governor general practically to nothing. As this is written, one meeting
of the state council has been held.


Davises, we think, are going to be liked by all.
As the governor general had indicated, his message to the legislature
is couched in general terms. As it is brief, it appears elsewhere in this
issue in full. Later communications are to supplement it. Rumblings
are renewed which threaten conversion of the Philippine National into an
agricultural bank, whatever that is. However, this is for the future.
During the leisurely course of the second session of the Eighth Philippine
Legislature the Davis policy will gradually unfold. Meantime, more
tennis. But there’s been precious little of that as yet, and will be little
more until the budget (threadbare news when this is printed) is off the
gubernatorial desk. In making ready the budget Governor Davis has
demonstrated his capacity for hard work; commencing at eight in the
morning, his day ends late at night. But that he is a man who values
leisure and knows what to do with it, is a fair assumption.
Last because it’s worst—the vigorous public laundering of the tatters
of discord between two of the islands’ best known men. Coincident with
Governor Davis’s first fortnight in Manila, this must have been more edifying than agreeable to him—as it was to the public generally, let us hope,
without regard to nationality. Aguinaldo’s record is made. It is what
it is; and the same dictum applies to the other belligerent.


Retail


Wholesale


Importers


yine American Dr,,
JOO
 Ca.
BOTICA BOI


Agents


MANILA


Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers


We


have been selling drugs for 98 years


VEENO NO ANNNNNE EN NEN OE EN CNO O ONE


August, 1929


AN
AR
  


5


The Official Raising of the American Flag
Over ManilaAugust 13, 1898


The American occupation of Manila, Saturday, August 13, 1898, was effected from the
south. Details of the negotiations between the
American and Spanish commanders were still
pending during the American advance, and
Major General Wesley Merritt maintained his
headquarters on the ss. Zafiro, where two companies of the Second Oregon were on duty, until
about 4 o’clock in the afternoon, the Zafiro
lying off Paranaque beach. Other companies
of the Second Oregon were on the transport
Kwong Hoi. Company A, commanded by
Captain H. L. Heath, was among them. When
Merritt, commanding the American forces,
decided to come ashore, the Zafiro and the
Kwong Hoi moved northward and entered the
river and the Second Oregon disembarked on
the south bank of the river, formed, and proceeded to the Ayuntamiento and the Plaza de
Armas (now Plaza de McKinley), entering the
city through Puerto Postigo.
To the Ayuntamiento the Spaniards were
coming, to surrender; Americans were taking
their places in the trenches round about the
city. Anxiety and confusion prevailed throughout the day among the Spaniards, by no means
all of whom, even of the officers; were informed
in full as to the arrangements for the occasion;
officers hardly knew what their own conduct
should be, much less what commands to give
their men, until quite late in the action.
After landing and establishing headquarters
in the Ayuntamiento Merritt got word that
confusion was such at Fort Santiago that trouble
might arise there in the official raising of the
American colors and taking possession of the
citadel. Flag Lieutenant Bromby, from the
Olympic, had come ashore with the flag to hoist
it over Fort Santiago, and he applied for troops
to assist him. Merritt had Captain Heath and
his company detailed to this duty; they accordingly proceeded to the fort about 4:30
o'clock, lowered the Red and Gold from where
they were still flying at full mast over a redoubt,
and, when Bromby appeared, raised aloft, in the
place of the Spanish colors, the Stars and Stripes.
Bromby took the Spanish flag away with him.
Captain Heath detailed a lieutenant and a
squad of men as color guard, and returned to the
Avuntamiento with the rest of the companv.
The flag remained at full mast all night. At
that time, of course, Captain Heath had no
idea who Bromby was; he was merely complying
with his duty to assist in the raising of the flag.
About the same time, the Stars and Stripes and
Merritt’s blue headquarters flag were raised
over the western balcony of the Ayuntamiento.
Our data are directly from Captain Heath
and from Millet’s The Expedition to the Philippines, Captain Heath corroborating Millet’s
account. Captain Heath’s subsequent career
has been in the Philippines, where everyone
knows him in business and as a director of the
Chamber of Commerce who helped in its organization and was for several years its president.


He is now a director and a vice-president. On
Sunday, August 14, 1898, he returned to Fort
Santiago and took quarters with his company
in the ordnance department, to look after
Spanish war materials there. On Monday he
went on a tour of investigation into the fort
proper, and found a Spanish soldier still on
guard at the Carlos gate.
Guardia, no mas, the man explained, letting
the American pass.
Captain Heath’s duties and quarters were
soon changed, and, until Thursday, July 25,
only a few days ago, when he courteously went
with the editor of the Journal to point out the
precise spot where the American tolors were
officially raised over the Philippines, he had not
been back to the place once—duty had not called
him there. He has since been back again,


Occupied by Dewey after the Battle of Manila Bay,
May 1, 1898.—Commandant’s residence.


however, with a delegation from the Philippine Chapter of the Daughters of the American
Revolution, who will, with the consent of the
proper officials, mark with a bronze tablet the
spot where the flag was raised.
The resistance the color guard encountered
when it lowered the Red and Gold and raised
in their stead the Stars and Stripes, was the
resentment of an artillery colonel’s daughter
—young, red-haired and beautiful. She would
have flung the men from the wall, or have immolated herself to redeem the situation; but at
last her family, especially her old father, was
able to quiet her and get her into the house,
which is still standing as it stood then.
Back at the Ayuntamiento where the Spaniards were coming in, Captain Heath saw another
sight that remains vivid in his memory. A


major of engineers rode in at the head of his men.
His manner was correct, eyes front, head high,
shoulders straight and soldierly; but tears which
he could not check streamed down his trenchburnt cheeks. Relief was the general attitude
of the weary men, some 11,000 all told, including
two or three regiments of Macabebe troops.
many of whom were afterward sent to Spain, at
their own request, along with the repatriated
Spaniards.
In the building of the ordnance department
where Captain Heath was on provost duty, at
the beginning were some 200 halberds—equipment of the Spanish guards that used to be on
duty at the fort, at Plaza Militar, at Malacanang and the Ayuntamiento. Officers among
the Americans wanted these, but had to procure
official permits to get them—which, one by one,
they did until the souvenirs were all gone. America paid for the Spanish military property.
The staff on which the flag was raised over
Fort Santiago stood at the northeast angle of
the coping on the southernmost redoubt on the
western wall of the fort, a location almost directly
opposite the main entrance of the office building
of the ordnance department. Outside the
redoubt, toward the bay shore, over which it
frowned in close proximity during Spanish
times, is a bastion surrounding a powder house,
or polverin, still utilized as such.
Batteries of bronze muzzle-loading 15-centimeter cannon are still in place over both redoubt
and bastion.
Fort Santiago has fared well in the hands of
the American army, and Major General Douglas
MacArthur, now commanding general of the
Philippine department, is interesting himself
in the history of the old place. He will no
doubt contribute to its preservation. Nevertheless, carelessness crops up; as, on the day the
redoubt was visited, for the better accommodation of some new tennis courts on the wall nearby
an old guadalupe coping some two feet in height
was being removed, and the symmetry of this
section of the wall thus destroyed. Would that
the coping, immaterial as it is, might stand as it
was under Spain; it is quite a part of the city’s
priceless historical treasure.
The courtesy of Colonel Odus C. Horney,
ordnance officer, and of Major Glenn P. Wilhelm, of the department intelligence staff, must
be acknowledged. Colonel Horney furnished
the JoUrNAL several memoranda, valuable source
material for future articles; Major Wilhelm
showed the way to the redoubt and rendered
much other assistance.
Let us make the rounds of the guns, spiked
but otherwise ready for firing. Their carriages
are a product of old Seville; with wooden blocks
under the breeches, their crews could set them
at various angles, for longer or shorter range,
and the approaches to the fort on this side, from
every direction, land or sea, could be defended
by their concentrated fire.
Beginning where the flag was raised, we shall
circle from right to left round the redoubt, then
in the same manner round the parapet of the
outer bastion.
On the redoubt, the first of the cannon is the
Then
Marciano, No. 1793, Seville, 1788.
come Teodosio and D. Diego de Sangran. Next


The result of over
half a century of
refining experience


V

S


MOTOR OILS AND MOTOR GASOLINE


Remember that SOCONY is Standard


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


6


  


August, 1929


is Pedro 39 de Aragon, No. 8791, Seville, 1857,
and next Alfonso el Catolico. Then San Aquino,
March 8, 1793, Seville; San Anacleto, April 6.
1793, Seville; Asteropeo, Almirante Lezo, El
Miserable and San Boromeo. The El Miserable
was cast in Manila, at the fundicion from which
calle Fundicion takes name, October 4, 1803.
Search did not discover El Horroroso, which
Captain Heath recalled as being somewhere on
the walls of the fort when the Americans occupied the place. Maybe it is among the historical relics the Spaniards had sent back to
Spain. Its proportions were gigantic.
Regularity in numbering the pieces cast at
Manila does not seem to have been followed,
but perhaps they were quite numerous.
On the outer bastion, the first gun is El Miserable, duplicating the name of one on the redoubt;
it too is a Manila product, dating October 12,
1803, two days prior to its fellow of the inner
defenses. The next is the Carlos Boromeo,
Fundicion de Manila, 21 de Dic., 1788, No. 1;
so here, perhaps, is something dating the Manila
foundry. The next is the San Catalino de Zena,
Manila, April 30, 1796, No. 100. Then come,
right to left as we make the round, El Acogido,
Seville, September 5, 1783; San Lazaro, Manila,
December 16 1803; Agrabiado, Seville, December 5, 1783, No. 1274; Alexandro, Seville, December 19, 1783, No. 2163 (disclosing how busy the
Seville foundry then was); Agraciado, Seville,
October 3, 1783, No. 1254; and finally the Natvidad de N. S., or Birth of Our Lady, Manila,
September 8, 1798.
It is raining, preparing to deluge the city as
it did thirty-one years ago while Dewey’s fleet
covered the American advance up the beach.
Well, enough data for an article. Let’s gol


Colors on the Wall opposite Cuartel de Espana, Walled City, Manila, in the early years of the American period,
before the walls were cleaned and the moat parked. The site is not the identical one, but is similar to the
one where the Flag was officially raised. Captain Heath formerly had a picture of the raising of the colors
over Fort Santiago, but has lost it. Others should be extant, but none was procurable for this article.


Scurrying through the passage under the wall,
we leave the guns to the weather. They are
bronze, pure stuff that was the pride of Seville’s
best craftsmen; and they will be as they are
today, as new as when they were shipped from
Cadiz round Good Hope, when many more
centuries shall have passed. Where they stand
changeless, there was the American flag raised up.


Philippine Raw Products For America’s
Factories


G. C. HOWARD
U. S. Trade Commissioner, Manila


If the raw material users of the United States
were to meet in convention to outline specifications for an ideal source of present and future
imported supplies of tropical raw materials, the
result of their most optimistic imaginings would
probably read about as follows:
(1) A place from which there would be no
import duty.
(2) A place whose productiveness is unquestionably proven.
(3) A place where the possibilities for future
expansion are many times greater than present
production.
Here their ideas might diverge according to
the business requirements of the individual. The
tire manufacturer would want a land where rubber would thrive. The perfume manufacturer
would require a source for the supply of essentials
oils. The confectioners and foodstuffs people
would want sugar, tinned fruits, vegetable oils,
shredded coconut, coffee, cacao; the rope makers,
hemp; cigar makers, tobacco and wrapper leaf.
The manufacturing chemists would require a
variety of crude drugs such as camphor, quinine,
dozens of other products of tropical forestry.
Cabinet makers would want hardwoods, tanneries would require tanning extracts, hat makers
their fibre, the paint maker, lumbang oil. The
oil mills would require copra and peanuts.
It is probable that there would be considerable
astonishment expressed if one of the delegates
to this imaginary convention made the statement
that a source exists which answers all of these specifications, and still adds to the list. They would
possibly be still more astonished were they to
learn that they need not leave American territory to fulfill all their requirements for this
ideal source of supply for tropical products,
only having to turn to the Philippine Islands
for a part of their present requirements in these
items and for a far greater part of these requirements in the future.
A glance at what the Philippines has supplied
to the United States in the past, what she is supplying at present, and at the future possibilities
of these fertile and productive Islands should be
a great interest to American industrialists who


need tropical products in their manufacturing
processes.
A scant twenty-five vears ago, the Philippines
were selling to the United States, annually,
goods to the value of a little over $13,000,000
During the year 1927, her exports to the United
States topped the $116,000,000 mark. America’s purchase from the Islands during 1927
included sugar to the value of $48,000,000, coconut products worth $43,000,000, hemp valued
at $12,000,000, tobacco and tobacco products
having the value of $4,000,000, and miscellaneous items worth $9,000,000, which included such
diversified items as reptile skins, hats, embroidery, coral, canned fruit, glue, pearl buttons,
sponges and lumber.


In spite of this remarkable growth of demand
for the products of the Islands which has occurred in the United States, the ability of the
Philippine Islands to supply America’s requirements is still awaiting a test. Only 20 per cent
of the available agricultural land of the Philippines is under cultivation, and only 41 per cent
of her available labor is thus engaged. Much
of her land which now lies idle during eight
months of the year could be utilized between
eight and twelve months. Her available water
power is unharnessed. Her mineral deposits
are practically untouched. Much of her territory is as yet unexplored. Great areas of her
timberlands are virgin, and even the development of her agriculture is as vet mainly on a
basis of 21% acre farms employing, with few
exceptions, only hand labor.
The Philippine Islands are, however, gradually feeling their way toward modern economic
development. Recent indications show that the
realization is coming that large, well-organized
and efficiently operated business, agricultural
and manufacturing entities are far more productive, and far more remunerative to all concerned that the individual acre, the small home
industry and the wayside “tienda.” With this
realization are coming the beginnings of adjustment of the commercial outlook, and the transition from a mediaeval to a modern economic
and industrial society.


We Have


The Largest and Most Complete Stock
of Drygoods in the Philippines
If you need silks, linens, cottons, or
notions you can serve yourself be !
by choosing from our large stocks
We also carry haberdashery, and
make men’s suits and shirts
Manuel Pellicer y Co., Inc.


44 Escolta, Manila


Phone 2-11-06


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


taugust, 1343


THE AMERICAN UHAMIBER OF COMMEKCE JOURNAL


One of the vitally essential matters now
receiving increasing and intelligent attention
from producers of Philippine products is that of
standardization of grades, lack of which has in
the past had an unfortunate effect on the reputation of certain Philippine products in export
markets.
Several of the more important of the products
of the Islands such as coconuts, abaca and tobacco, which have in the past been produced by
innumerable small growers and passed through
several hands before reaching the exporter,
are now receiving the intelligent attention of
large growers and large-scale producers who are
improving, standardizing and eliminating waste
in both production and handling.
What the Philippines produces today is but a
fraction of what can be produced in her territory
and her $156,000,000 of annual exports to all
countries today is but a fraction of her possibilities as a supplier of products which the United
States needs, and for some of which the United
States is now dependent on foreign countries.
At present there are combinations controlled
abroad in nine raw materials needed and imported by American industries, and other virtual
monopolies influenced through benevolent policies of interested governments. There are
also some thirty additional commodities imported by the United States which are susceptible to such foreign control.
The more important, complete and partial
controls include rubber, quinine, camphor, and
coffee. All of these can be produced in the
Philippine Islands, and, when they are produced,
there is a ready market waiting, for the United
States can consume all the Islands can produce
for many decades.
Weather You Like It or Not!
You swelter, perspire and shiver with heat,
You’re weary and bleary and feeling dead beat;
You’ve got not the tiniest bit of ambition,
You say, “My, this heat puts one in condition!”
You snivel and sneeze and cough into your
hanky,
Your nose is the proof that you’re not Vilma
Banky;
You dodge the typhoons and you wear an umbrella,,
Yousay, “Gosh, this weatherain’thardon a fella!”
You start in the morning dolled up in a sweater,
You find out by noon a chemise would feel
better;
You get all steamed up, then go out in a breeze,
And first thing you know you have started, to
sneeze.
You see the thermometer says ninety-nine,
Yet you write to the folks that the climate is
fine;
And so you are fated to steam and perspire
In brimstone forever—because you’re a liar.
—A. R. E.


South Gate to Manila, through which American troops entered the city August 13, 1898. This gate was
rebuilt too low and narrow for state uses after the British siege guns destroyed the original one in 1762.
The street lost its name of calle Real, therefore, which went to the one still bearing it, down which the
progress of many a royal governor and archbishop has moved in solemn pomp. Early in the American
period, this gate was removed in order to widen what then was calle Nozaleda and is now calle General
Luna; for mercy’s sake not Gral Luna, for Gral, is the abbreviation of the Spanish word General, their G
having the sound of our H, their vowels being broad, e as in whey, a as in ah, and the accent on the
third syllable.


The Prodigal
So they sent him back
On a freighter
To the old New England
Town.
Where years before
He had heard the
Heathen’s call;
Where twenty years
Before,
The First Church
Congregation
Had listened to a
Farewell sermon
On "Sacrifice”.
He saw
The scarlet sunset
Of the southern seas
And again
He heard the call

& Co.


LARK


NEIIAEO
CA MANILA.
S0 94 ESC0LTA
PA
MASONIC TEMPLE


LFTICIEINOl
PODAY efficiency is the password to
I success, and efficiency and poor vision
are incompatible.
Whatever your vocation may be, you
cannot possibly be doing your best work
if your eyes are not functioning normally.
Defective vision impairs the quality
of work you produce; it does not allow you
to work to your full capacity; and it pulls
you down in physical fitness.
Have your eyes examined.
Always the best in quality
but never higher in price


Of the Heathen
And the langorous
Song of the East.
But the Orient call
Was the loudest
And it stilled
A
The heathen’s cry;
So he lingered
Under the palm trees
As he sipped the lotus
Brew,
While the Book
In the chest of
Camphor wood
Was covered with mold
And dust.
Back to the cold
New England
Hils,
To geranium fringed
Windows and to shelves
And shelves
Of faded green
Books of Cotton Mather
And Fox’s Book of
Martyrs.
'Tis harder to die
In an alcoved bed
Than under sunlit
Skies.
“Speak, Brother,
Before you join
The Master’s throng—
Speak, Brother!
We want to hear
Of thy years
Of holy's. fce.”
The silent Mourners
Waited
And the black-frocked
Elder prayed
While two eyes
That were sightless
But seeing
Beckoned a
Fond "Maria!”
And lips that
Were parched
With fever
Shouted a farewell
"Damn!”


—GILBERT S. Perez.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  OF COMMERCL JOURNAL


August, 134-


Americans Occupy Manila: August 13, 1898


FroM “Leroy"
Commemorating the American Occupation of Manila, August 13, 1898,


we published Leroy’s authoritative account of the event. The reader
will find other material in this issue on the same subject.
It will all serve to refresh the memory of oldtimers
and to inform the younger reader—for auld
lang syne.—Ed.


The American troops had been organized by
an order of General Merritt on August 1 into
the Second Division of the Eighth Army Corps,
under command of General Anderson, composed
of two brigades under command respectively of
generals MacArthur and Greene. The navy
was all ready for the attack on August 9; but,
besides the pending negotiations with the Spanish
authorities, delay seems to have been caused by
General Merritt’s request that the attack be made
on Saturday, August 13, when the tide in the
estuaries between the American forces and the
Spanish trenches and Fort Antonio de Abad
would be most favorable for fording. Meanwhile, the ground was thoroughly reconnoitered
by various daring American officers and privates.
On August 12, General Anderson prepared the
formal plan of attack for the 8500 troops who
were in position in the two brigades south of
Manila.
Merritt himself did not come on shore, but
kept his headquarters on the navy transport
Zafro, from which he could watch the operations
and move promptly into the city when the time
should come. His instructions to his forces on
shore were sent over on the night before the
attack, in the form of a memorandum for general
officers in camp regarding the possible action
of Saturday, August 13, and the next morning
his adjutant landed with precise instructions
as to the posting of troops in the various parts of
the city after it was entered.
The morning of August 13 was misty and
cloudy, hampering signal communication between
the vessels and the shore. At nine o’clock the
Olympia led most of the fleet into position off
the fort below Malate. The Monterey, however,
steamed in as close as the shallow water would
permit in front of the walled city, and trained
her guns on the Luneta battery; while the Concord took position off the mouth of the Pasig,
ready to open on the battery there or to meet any
movement to escape on the part of the vessels
in the river. The Olympia opened fire on Fort
Antonio at half past nine, followed by the Raleigh
and Petrel and the little captured gunboat Callao.
The navy fire, which continued more or less
spasmodically during an hour, did no great
damage to the Spanish fort or other works, and
probably was not meant to do so. The guns
of the Utah artillery, firing from a thousand
vards on land, raked the paranet of the crumbling old fort, and finally a shell from one of the
vessels exploded its magazine; but this was all
wasted ammunition, for the fort never fired in
return, and was abandoned almost at the first
shot, in accordance with the plans which General
Tejeiro had secretly promulgated for a retreat.
Various circumstances combined to
interfere with this programme of outward show:
among them, the withdrawal of the Spanish
right more rapidly than had been expected,
under the Utah artillery fire and the advance
of. the Colorado infantry; the raising of the red
(sic) flag on the fort somewhat earlier, therefore,
than the troops farther inland were expecting it,
while they had become occupied also quite
vigorously with MacArthur’s brigade in front
of Singalong and with the insurgents at Santa
Ana; the fact also that the Spanish plans of
retreat had been confided to but a few of the
general officers, and one or two of them were
incensed and quite ready to take some comfort
out of shortlived resistance to the Americans.
Acting under his modified instructions, General
Greene had started the Colorado volunteers
forward upon the Spanish position about three
quarters of an hour after the bombardment
began, and the navy was then signaled to cease
firing.
The Colorado troops went gayly to the attack,
rapidly fording the estuary, rushing into the old


fort from behind, raising the American flag
over it, and then starting to follow up the Spaniards who were withdrawing into Malate. Opposition, however, had developed from the
Spanish trenches on the right and bullets also
came from the Spaniards who had retreated into
Malate; one man was killed while raising a flag
over a house, and several were wounded. But
the Eighteenth Infantry and Third Artillery
had been ordered forward against thertrenches


on the right near the beach, and their occupants
were speedily in full retreat. At the same time,
General MacArthur’s brigade farther eastward
had begun its advance, the Astor and one of the
Utah batteries dragging their guns along by
hand, after they had driven the Spaniards out of
the blockhauses on that part of the line. The
resistance to Greene’s brigade, such as there
was, was all over. The troops held in reserve
came along up the beach; the Nebraskans
marched in toward the walled city on the sand,
the gunboat Callao guarding them; the California and Colorado troops were reformed in the
streets of Malate and, fogether with the Eighteenth Infantry, proceeded slowly through that
suburb and Ermita, toward the open space
between the latter and the walled town; while
along the two parallel streets of the suburbs the
Third Artillery battery and the Tenth Pennsylvania followed them. A battalion of the Eighteenth Regulars elicited some spirited firing for a
few moments from the Spanish troops; there


Main
alle Trece Martires


Atlalatie oun ant ratinie Co.


OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERIISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


11


was also some stray shooting from the houses,
and Mauser bullets were heard at intervals
coming from the right, where the insurgents were
pressing into the city, around the right of MacArthur’s troops; these circumstances made
the advance through the suburbs somewhat
slow. General Greene himself had ridden forward and came out into the open space in front
of the Luneta at one o’clock, to see the white
flag flying conspicuously on the southwest angle
of the city walls, where it had been displayed
since eleven o’clock,—the hour at which the
American soldiershad entered the fort at Malate,
—and perhaps longer. Admiral Dewey had at
that hour signaled the city, Do you surrender?
and the reply in the international code had been
a request for conference. The personal representatives of the American chiefs in command, Flag-Lieutenant Brumby and Colonel
Whittier, had at once gone ashore, and were in
conference with the Spanish authorities inside
the walls when Greene’s troops arrived outside
these old fortifications and faced the Spanish
soldiers who lined their top and other Spanish
troops who were retreating confusedly from the
southeastward, each side uncertain as to what
should be its attitude toward the other.
When the Spanish troops in the suburb of
Santa Ana initiated their rather premature
retreat, they were pressed closely by the insurgents and one or two small detachments
with officers were captured. This force of
insurgents was now pushing on toward the walled
city, and up the Pako road toward the walls
there came also a large force of Filipinos who had
moved with no resistance around MacArthur’s
right. Shots between them and the troops on
the walls and those retreating to the gates were
being exchanged, and, as the American regiments came out into the open space stretching
back from the bay, they also joined in. Several
men of the California regiment, which, under
General Smith, was endeavoring to block the
Pako road to the insurgents were hit. Most of
all, there was danger of a promiscuous engagement, in the then bewildered state of mind of
the various troops and their commanders.
The Spanish officers were as eager to prevent
this indiscriminate firing as were the Americans,
and communicated to General Greene from the
walls that negotiations for the capitulation were
going on at headquarters. He thereupon went
inside, improving the opportunity to communicate with General Merritt through Colonel
Whittier, the condition of the forces on land.
The Spaniards offered no great objections to the
general conditions of the capitulation as proposed by the Americans, although the specific
terms were not agreed upon until the following


day. Meanwhile, their consent to surrender
caused the Oregon troops, who were awaiting on
small transports at Cavite, to be sent for, that
they might enter and police the walled city.
It was General Greene’s prescribed duty to march
his troops across the river and distribute them as
guards in the business and residence sections
north of the Pasig.
General MacArthur’s troops had been assigned to occupy all suburbs of the city south
of the Pasig. But, as has been seen they had
met some resistance, through the failure of the
plans for a united withdrawal of the Spanish
outer line, and perhaps also through a desire of
the Spanish officers facing them to have the satisfaction of a fight. The terrain in which this


Sta. Lucia Gate, Manila


brigade had to operate was much more difficult
than that nearer the bay, while the unwillingness
of Merritt to ask for more insurgent trenches or
to extend the line farther inland had made it
impossible to prepare as well as might have been
done for an attack. The firing of insurgents on
their right, where they had massed in numbers for
several days, brought MacArthur’s men under


the Spanish fire early in the morning
held their places, however, until the sking
had compelled the abandonment of the Srhe
blockhouses in front and the American Flag
gone up on Fort San Antonio. In the thicki.
near Singalong, they met vigorous resistance to
their advance from intrenched troops who were
under cover. General Anderson authorized
them to move around to the left and follow
Greene’s men into the city but they were too
heavily engaged. An advance party of Minnesota volunteers and of Astor Battery men,
with no arms but revolvers, charged the Spanish
position against considerable odds; the main
body of the Twenty-third Infantry and Minnesota volunteers supported them, and the
resistance was soon over. The brigade moved
on cautiously, however, through the uncertain
territory, and it was 1:30 before it was discovered
that all the Spaniards had withdrawn from the
front—some time before, in fact. These forces
then pushed on to occupy the districts assigned
to them, and thus made contact with the troops
which Greene had sent to keep the insurgents
out on the southeast. The latter had, however,
fully established themselves in some of the
southern districts of the city and were helping
themselves to the Spanish military barracks.
The Oregon troops were policing the walled
city and had begun to receive the surrender of
arms from the Spanish soldiers who had retreated
thither, and also to occupy their military quarters, before the bases of the capitulation were
finally agreed upon, late in the afternoon, upon
the arrival of General Merritt at the new headquarters. It was only after the announcement
of its terms that the Spanish flag was hauled
down from over Fort Santiago, in the corner of
the walled town, and the American flag went up
in its place, at 5:30 p. m. Even then, the capitulation was not put into formal shape until the
following day. The Spaniards were conceded a
surrender with the honors of war (which was in
agreement with their previous stipulation and
with the hypothesis that this was a surrender
rather than a capture); but there were some
difficulties about minor points, particularly as
to the return of the arms of the troops, to which
the Americans finally consented, in case either
party should afterward evacuate the city. The
most important difficulty lay in their desire to
interpose a preamble much in the form of the
preliminaries to a formal treaty, prescribing
especially conditions as to the public and private
property of the city. The Americans insisted
that all public property and public funds should
be surrendered to them, pending peace negotiations, and closed the articles of the capitulation as adopted with this declaration (on the
lines of those governing General Scott’s occupancy of Mexico City): This city, its inhabitants, its churches and religious worship, its
educational establishments, and its private property
of all descriptions are placed under the special
safeguard of the faith and honor the American
army."
All the Spanish troops defending the city did
not surrender until the afternoon of Sunday,
August 14.
That morning word was sent out to the commanders of the outer Spanish line running from
the river near Santa Mesa northwest to the
bay
to come in and lay down their
arms, and the American line was pushed out to
cover practically the ground whichithey had held.
The Spaniards stated that they wou d surrender
over 13,000 troops, and they dideventually turn
over about that many Mauser and Remington
rifles; but most of their native os had been
lost by desertion, and there were fewer than
9,000 soldiers under arms in the city, including
two practically complete regiments of native
troops. Nearly $900,000 (value in Mexican
silver) were captured, P750,000 being in the public
treasury and the rest in the custom-house and
other dependencies of the administration. The
Americans had taken possession, on the afternoon of the 13th, of the captain-of-the-port’s
office, this over the protest of the Spanish officerin charge, who, in spite of the overwhelming
military force surrounding him, declared that he
dared not surrender the office unless given a
written statement that he had yielded only to
(Please turn to page 25 col. 3)


THE TOKOHAMA SIECIE BANN


:LTD.


(ESTABLISHED 1880)


HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN


Capital (Paid Up) -
Reserve Fund
Undivided Profits


Yen
100,000,000.00
105,500,000.00
9,346,622.43


MANILA BRANCH
600 DASMARINAS, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager


PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER


2-37-58—Export, Current Account, Cashier
PHONE
12-37-55—Import, Accountant


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


PHE AMERICAN JHAMBER OFTCON EKUE JOURNAL


FREETRADE—CONDITIONALLY
The program for the Philippines under the leadership of State Secretary Stimson, who was governor here for a while last year and still keeps
a hand upon insular affairs, seems to be this: Sugar until it rouses the
cupidity of homeland sugar interests, then no more sugar; copra until it
runs counter to homeland cotton interests, then no more copra; Manila
hemp until frowned upon by sisal growers and their New York bankers,
then no more hemp; tobacco and cigars only on the most modest scale, not
to antagonize Havana, Tampa and Key West; but camphor, rubber and
coffee as makeshifts, since we can grow them and no competing homeland
interests are to take into account.
But there are surely powerful American financial interests behind
Brazilian coffee, now bursting bodegas in San Paulo, by the way; maybe
we could not go far in coffee either without giving offense. The primary
purpose of having a little rubber here is to stabilize the market with it;
and the islands might well grow a good deal of rubber, but even to grow a
large portion of all the world requires would not effect the islands' economic
salvation. Similarly, we surmise that camphor in redemption of the catngins in Mindanao—those burnt-over areas now devoured by cogon and
scrub timber—would not furnish homesteads to the millions of young peasants who need them, nor provide the augmented revenues the government
wants for schools, hospitals, roads, bridges and ports.
Ours is the problem of tilling ten acres where we now till one, which
means we must grow everything for which there is demand, and as much of
everything as we can grow.
Stimson led in defeating for the time being the move to levy duties
upon Philippine products entering the United States. His work to this
end is appreciated widely in the islands. But we cannot permanently
prosper upon palliations and postponements.
For instance, there could be no surer way of getting ourselves deprived
of free trade with the homeland than to restrict opportunities in any field
the privilege opens; to create, as this would do, a monopoly, as in the sugar
industry were restriction practiced, or monopolies in which a few people
in the islands, and by no means all, should benefit directly from the privilege. There could be no surer way of forfeiting the privilege, that is to say,
than to abuse it on the one hand and to act as if we really are not entitled
to it on the other. A principle underlies free trade within all the territory
over which the flag is sovereign. Folly alone would compromise that principle in the homeland by making deals, agreements and concessions effecting its limited application—in lieu of its natural and unrestricted encouragement to all alike. Free trade with America portends that we shall have in
the Philippines that share of the national commerce and industry invited
by natural advantages, if such exist—no more, no less. The alternative is
not restriction of production, a blushing way of saying we profit from a
privilege to which we are not entitled, that really we are filching from America’s pocket; the alternative to free trade is one, one only—political separation of the islands from America.
We have heretofore remarked the fact that advantage in free trade
with the Philippines lies with America, that it is vital to her merchant
marine on the Pacific, that it enables her to exchange goods fully manufactured for raw and semi-raw products affording her additional profits
and employment of labor in their elaboration. It is for us to remain frank
and unmoved in our position, and for America to decide. The consequences of deceiving her would be disastrous.
RESOCIALIZATION OF CURED LEPERS
For the laudable purpose of ascertaining where some two thousand
cured lepers discharged during the past three or four years from Culion
are living and how they are faring, the anti-leprosy society is trying to
raise P20,000 in contributions from the public. This preliminary step
toward resocialization of cured lepers may well be undertaken by the society, and aided by the public; it has received commendation in our pages.
But actual resocialization of the cured leper is a problem obviously
to be undertaken by the government. Two paramount obstacles exclude
from this work all other entities; no other entity has the resources, no other
entity could find its way safely through the mazes of the law. Inducing a


changed viewpoint on the part of the public respecting cured lepers is an
educational process dependent to a vital degree upon additional scientific
information concerning the persons affected. Many doors are rightly
closed to anyone who has ever had leprosy even in the mildest form, since
it is not known with scientific accuracy that the malady will not reappean
in any individual once its victim. Until more reliable data on this point
are available, reluctance to associate with cured lepers or to employ them
either as domestics or in industries and the professions is not prejudice
only, it is rather due precaution. But whatever it is, it ts and will not be
readily overcome.
The debility from which cured lepers suffer is still another bar to their
direct resocialization immediately upon discharge from observation, and
the desirability of maintaining immunity from relapse by periodical recourse to the specific is another.
The place to begin the resocialization of cured lepers is upon government reservations which ought to be established at advantageous points.
No stigma would attach to them; they would, on the contrary, attract the
world’s favorable attention. Leaving Culion, the cured leper should bear
credentials to the Constabulary, who should thenceforth keep in touch
with him. If he makes out well, then well and good. But if—as will be
the general experience—he finds no welcome nor anything to do, his establishment upon a reservation should be facilitated. There he might wish
to live out his days, and there could be no objection. This phase of leper
work should be diligently taken up by the government, in the hope, if not
the fully justified expectation, that leprosy may be eradicated from the
Philippines within two or three generations; or that it may at least be
greatly minimized and controlled, and the cured may be resocialized and
made reasonably happy without any material drain upon the treasury.
Toward defraying the staff expense of the reservations, the charitable could
contribute. But soon, with the products of field and industry, the reservations would perhaps all be self-sustaining communities. As communities,
indeed, they should be organized and encouraged to carry on in their own
behalf.
WRIGHTLY SPEAKING
Ben F. Wright, insular auditor, is vacating the office November 1 and
turning it over to Creed Hammond of Oregon, whom Hoover appointed
(the Senate not having to confirm the nomination) soon after Wright,
on July 6, submitted his resignation for the purpose of having it accepted
or obtaining a direct expression of presidential support. A bizarre procedure? Perhaps, but there had been departure from the policy to which
Wright adhered—the Wood policy—and it had been a perpetual open
season for getting the auditor’s goat ever since this fact penetrated the consciousness of officials who either have cause to wish for more lenient scrutiny of their accounts or who have other reasons for wanting a new man
with whom to deal.
Hammond has been heading a bureau of the war department from
which the rule of quadrennial rotation retired him. He has enjoyed banking experience in Oregon. Governor Davis recalls him as one who did his
Washington work well.
Manila generally regrets Wright’s resignation, without much blaming
him for submitting it. Editorial comment indicates the appreciation of
his qualities that is felt even among men who seldom stood with him in the
controversies to which many of his actions led. El Debate, among others,
came out with a commendable expression along this line. All seem ready
to admit that, whatever fancied or real faults they found in the man, he
has been a capital auditor of the accounts of the Philippine government and
an unceasing influence for rectitude in office. It is he of course who drove
the government to undertake the probes that may result in good; during six
years rascals have had cause to dread his inquiries.
The public has enjoyed the spectacular in his administration, and the
reflection which this notoriety has provoked in the minds of thousands of
readers may have had sound moral influence. Is the public works bureau
right, or Wright? Is the posts director right, or Wright? People ponder
these questions seriously, and seem to hold with Wright. It was his effort
to compel the public works bureau to obtain certificates from the auditor
as to the availability of funds in the treasury before essaying to enter into
contracts (the code so providing in plain language), that told most on his
energies and culminated in his resignation at a time he seeks a hearing in
the Federal supreme court at Washington. He doesn’t abandon positions
readily; he almost never does abandon them. Holding this particular one,
he opposed the governor general, the secretary of war (now the governor
general), the commerce department, the public works bureau and the decision of the Philippine supreme court. The decision got confused in one
quarter with the court itself, and Wright endured a fine of P500, summary
arrest and threat of imprisonment.
Corking news, all of this, making the people talk and some of them
think. It followed closely, too, that dramatic midnight at the piers, when


August, 1929


E
THE AMERICA CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


11


Wright personally aided the Manila police to take into custody the posts nard Wood, who effected amendments to the islands’ finance and banking
director, who was departing for London as a postal envoy of the islands to laws, reorganization of the Philippine National Bank, restoration of the
a world postal conference—not having complied with what Wright thinks currency to par and resumption of the free sale of exchange at the treasury
sum of taxes. Is the posts director right, or Wright? Not Americans confirm the impression that it is one preeminently of constructive tone,
alone, but Filipinos, ponder the situation seriously. That many of the as it will show his unflagging inclination to economize taxes and give the
latter hold with Wright is clear enough from their proffers of assistance, the
the man is held as an insular official.
The better part is the constructive part, the financial counsel to Leoappreciate it.
Understanding Our Age
By PRESIDENT RAFAEL PALMA
University of the Philippines


is the law and obtained the auditor’s clearance the law purports to require, at nominal rates. Wright was relied upon in all of this. No doubt the
The bar to the clearance is an alleged shortage of about P350,000, quite a temperate view which time will make possible of his period as auditor will
officials even, of one province, reporting their willingness to cover his fine, people the most possible for their money. This latter evokes their present
But the better part of Wright’s work as insular auditor is more subgratitude, but the former is perhaps destined to win their truer appreciastantial than the incidents related, more explanatory of the esteem in which tion. In the large and in meticulous detail, Wright always stood for the


people and their welfare.


The thousands of diplomas issued by our
colleges each year are a positive proof of the
eagerness of our young people to attain higher
education, and thus satisfy their longing for
individual advancement. The pertinent question now is: Have our colleges measured up to
their responsibilities? Have they imbued Philippine youth with the spirit of the age, and the
principles which animate it? For without such
knowledge our voung men and women would
not be in a position to understand the questions
of the day nor to help in the solution of our
national problem which, in the last analvsis,
are but the offshoots of the problems of all
mankind.
It has often been said that one of the manysided functions of college education is to train
the reasoning power so as to enable it to analyze
and investigate the whys and the wherefores of
things, to develop a mind open to all kinds of
truths and doctrines, ready to consider all questions from a universal vantage point, regardless
of local prejudices, racial, sectarian or otherwise,
and rationally tolerant of the opinion, advice
and counsel of others. The college man should
be imbued with a clear notion of the trend of
world thought and of the stage of development
of ideas and human institutions in other lands.
Education would fall short of its mission if it
did not impart other information than that necessary to the exercise of a calling or profession,
if it did not open the vision of the student to
what lies beyond the horizons of his country,
and if it did not stimulate him to think of what
he himself can do toward enrichment of the
stock of human knowledge and the promotion
of human welfare on earth.
The world, as it is found today, is an aggregate of interdependent and related units. The
centuries of seclusion and isolation are gone.
Day by day, there is a growing feeling that
peoples are bound to each other as a result of the
multiplication of means of communication and
trade. For such reason there is a closer observation and assertive intimacy among the races,
in an attempt to evolve a common mentality
and bring about those spiritual connections
essential to the elimination of conflicts and misunderstandings.
It goes without saying that only through education can this ideal be attained. Education,
of all the social forces at work in the world, is
the least self-complacent. It never ceases to invent, to throw aside what it has invented with
the view of building a new structure on the
ruins of its own creation. Education partakes
of the unconquerable restlessness, of the eternal
dissatisfaction that inspires the production of a
masterpiece. It is never contented with what
it has produced. It is because of this that eduCaRa
cation is a source of lif
Education has always son
as abraced new theories, and aand nan nabo s
illuminate the human co rein ngaor
awaken in it a longing for  paver mere cen
fortable life.
It seems to me that one  tin nm ator
our present mental scope sia propem
thresh out our problemsin alighi of lecal oatroable of emag
conditions without taking
daving ha an.
a glance at the world witho
good fortune to go around ha world mea a
once and having observec anh atten ne


evidences of progress, as a result of changing institutions, I feel I can say with some authority
that the advancement and prosperity of most
peoples have been made possible in proportion
as they have felt less regard for traditionand
have accepted the new; less adherence to the
prejudices and habits of the past, and more
desire to forge ahead through repeated ventures
and trials in the darkness to discover new light.
Consequently, in considering our pedagogical
problems, we should bear in mind that we are
dealing with an age entirely different from that
which we knew in our infancy.
I wonder if what has been the
greatest achievement of our age is
generally understood? To me, it
has been the declaration of the
rights of man. Individual freedom,
as against individual absorption,
is the distinguishing characteristic
of our age. It marks the boundaries of the old and the new world.
The rights of man have been known
since the twilight of antiquity, but
the institutions which regulate
human conduct were long dominated by a spirit antagonistic to
the recognition of these rights.
The family, the church and the
state were dominated by a spirit
of absolutism. The individual was
subjected to the tyranny of eachr
one of these institutions. Man
was not free to think, to speak, to
feel or to act in accordance with
his own nature, but only according
to a pattern of life previously laid
out.
In the family, this absolutism manifested
itself in the absorption of the individuality of
the members by the father and husband. The
father was the center of gravity of the whole
system. The wife, as well as the children, were
mere accessories and owed him blind obedience.
What he said was law. This authority even
extended to the right of repudiating his wife and
of bartering away his sons.
In the church, the communicant was a mere
numeral. He had to accept certain established
dogmas of the faith without the slightest discussion, and to consider as damned those who
did not believe and worship as he did. He was
forbidden to deal with them, and could even
deny them bread and water, because mere
contact with them was contaminating. Every
new idea or doctrine which departed from what
was commonly accepted was tabooed, and those
professing such ideas were subjected to merciless
torgure or martyrdom.
An the state, the head was s
cais
will was supreme. He had to
 V Acitizens under his jurisdiction w-rneg
and vassals. He appointed or emeved .


They know it—they the Filipinos. And they


officials for no other consideration than that they
had pleased or displeased him. He apportioned
territories for them to govern in utter disregard
of the will of the inhabitants and even in the
face of their protest. He could, with impunity,
kill and plunder, and even abuse the honor of
maidens and wives. The law was whatever
pleased the prince.
Naturally, under these conditions, education
prepared the individual to obey and not to
discuss; to bear with resignation the abuses and
crimes of the authorities, because it was then
the belief that they exercised their powers in the
name of God.
But human conscience revolted against this
state of affairs and replaced it with a new system
of ideas and truths which profoundly altered
the conditions of human relationships and completely transformed an old world, based on subjection, into a new world based on freedom.
The individual has recovered his rights and
privileges, and within the family as well as
within the church or the state, he is no longer
considered as an insignificant atom of a unit but
as a distinct unit by himself. He has become
autonomous and free to exercise all his faculties
with no other restraints within than his conscience, and the law without. He has become
Mone responsible for his welfare and misfortune.
No man is superior to, another because of birth
or social position. -Institutions exist for the
benefit of the individual and not the individual
for the benefit of institutions. His cooperation,
while necessary for the existence of a group,
is premised on a voluntary basis.
That is why the family system has changed.
It was believed in the old world that the parents,
being the creators of their children, had all the
right to determine their fate, without regard to
their opinion and happiness. They could sacrifice their children as offerings to Divinity or
for the satisfaction of their own whims and
caprices.
If the parents incurred indebtedness, they
pledged the persons of their children like chattels, to wipe out their obligations. If the children had attained marriageable age, the parents
chose the persons whom they should marry.
The parents likewise dictated the professions
their children should embrace, collected the
income they earned, drove them away from the
parental roof once they incurred their parents’
slightest displeasure, and in the majority of cases,
children were treated without pity or consideration.
Nowadays, the center of gravity has shifted
from parents to children. (The theory of the
family is that it exists not for the benefit of the
parents but for the benefit of the children. The
parents are responsible for the life of their chili
dren, consequently they owe them the care and
assistance necessary for their physical as well
as mental development. The children were
brought into the world not out of their own
choice but out of the desire of their parents to
have children. For this reason, the father and
the mother jointly have duties to perform toward them, and are entitled to rights in so far
as they are founded on these duties.
In the old days likewise, woman was regarded
in the family almost as a thing. Her sex doomedher to an inferior lot. Many parents showed
dissatisfaction upon a daughter’s birth. As a
daughter she was not only subjected to the
hority of the parents but also to the tyranny
ner brother. The latter, to the exclusion of
e sister, could inherit the titles and distinction
cheir father. The young woman could not
out alone on the streets. In many countries


12


  


August, u92y


she had to veil her face in order to protect herself
against the lust of man. AShe was completely
kept out of touch with the world and allowed no
other knowledge than that relating to the home.
She passed from the tutelage of her parents to
the tutelage of her husband when she got married. In conjugal life, she was considered fit only
for motherhood and for the discharge of domestic
duties, and not for anything else. She could
not administer her own separate property, much
less that of the conjugal partnership. The
husband could dissipate the property of his wife
without her having any recourse other than
perhaps a vain protest. Even when married,
she could not leave home alone without exposing her reputation to the talk and gossip of


society. Feminine virtue was considered so
fragile that contact with the world was enough
to defile it. Malice was ever ready to waylay
woman with its vileness. The husband could
stay all day and night out of the home, perhaps
have several paramours, but the wife was forced
to complete fidelity—however insulting and
humiliating her husband’s conduct might be.
Nowadays, the domestic seclusion of woman
is a thing of the past, at least in most countries.
Although she still reigns supreme in the home,
she has been gradually invested with certain
rights which heretofore have been monopolized
by man. Now, woman is free to educate herself
(Please turn to page 24)


Babe and the Moon
By HENRy PHILIPS BROAD
(Concluded)


Then, at last, came dawn and with it exhausted
sleep. Coma, Babe thought. And dread and
terror invaded her soul. She wished she could
stay longer to see it through, to hold his hand
until the last bitter moment . . . but how explain
it to the day-nurse? So she took a long, long
look at him, then knelt down and reverently
kissed the hands she had stroked so often. And
then ran home, death in her heart. She would
never see him again, never.
For the first time in the history of her career
asa nurse Babe could not sleep. Fortunately Sally
was on morning duty so that she had the room
all to herself. It would have been unbearable
torment to have had the chatterbox about.
The houseboy brought her breakfast tray, but
she had him take it back. Then she lay down
on her bed, pulling the mosquito-net about her,
not in protection from blood-sucking pests, but
because she felt somehow more guarded from
possible intruders. If they saw the net down
they would think her asleep and leave her alone.
How was he now? Perhaps already...? She
who had seen and met death so many times and
in so many forms was trembling now at the dire


possibility. She knew he would not pass the
day. Twice she rose, peered through the shutters
at the rambling frame structure that was the
hospital. But there was not the slightest commotion, nothing to indicate that what she felt
with increasing terror was approching had already occurred.
Hour after hour wheeled agonizingly slowly
past. Babe lay tossing on her bed, waiting,
waiting.... Later there was a short quick rap
at the door. Ah! They had come to tell her.
Her heart pounded wildly, anxiety strangled
her; she could not answer the rap. The door
opened and the chief nurse stepped in, daintily
efficient as always with a white cap on her marceled gray hair and the silver bar on her slim
shoulders. She glanced furtively at the bed,
believed the paralyzed Babe to be asleep and
tiptoed out of the room again.
Babe leaped from her bed. The chief
nurse! What did it mean? What? She never
invaded the rooms but for serious cause. Was
it because. .. Had someone seen her? Flames of
shame and despair shot through her. She,
Babe, a nurse on duty! A dying man, to be sure,


who had mistaken her for another woman, but a
man just the same. She hid her head in the
pillows, sobbing her sorrow and her fear and
shame into their crisp cleanliness, hoping that
it would all be over soon; and all the time stood
before her the harrowing certainty that at any
moment one of the chattering girls would come
in and bring her the news of Major Dexter’s
death.


It was Sally, returning from afternoon duty,
who brought her the news, but not the news she
so fearfully expected.
“Say, Babe,” Sally stormed, cap already pulled
off and white uniform flying; “Now do tell me
what you have been doing to that case of yours,
you witch, you.” She sat down on the wicker
lounge. Babe remained on her bed unable to
stir, her heart fairly bursting with anxiety.
“You’ve heard the news, haven’t you, Babe?”
But Sally generally did not require an answer
to her queries; so she went on, prattling gaily
while she removed her shoes. "Well, you know,
it’s almost miraculous the way he’s come out of
it. Not even a temperature since this morning.
Carolyn tells me he asks for chow—says they
are starving him! Old Gardner is just tickled
hibiscus-color. Gives himself all the credit as
usual, of course. Chiefy says she came in to
tell you about it, but you were fast asleep. But
Babe, say, are you still asleep? One would think
you never even heard of Dexter forallthe interest
you take in him."
The prattle was all lost on Babe. All she
knew was that he was alive. Motionless, but
exultant with joy, she lay on her bed. He was
alive! He was to live! Glorious! A thousand
warm springs welled up in her, flooding her with
indescribable happiness; something that had
not before existed was born in her and so rejoiced
her that her heart sang in exultation. He was
to live!


Hurriedly she rose and dressed, in preparation
for another night on duty. In the sitting-room
Sally was entertaining some callers and as Babe
passed through on her way to the hospital, she
if I were
OV
you
hidi
alle


THIS DELICIOUS BEER
Brewed by
SAN MIGUEL BREWERY


Insist on
TANSAN


Ar e rou
Getting the
Most out of
Eife:


Or—are you handicapped by the distracting
pains of indigestion?


Why not give the
world-famous natural
mineral water:


a trial?
Many owe their buoyant
health to their regular practice of
drinking a glass of this sparkling
table water after each meal?


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN CM


COMMERCE JOURNAL


August, 1929


THE AMERICAN"CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


13


I’d make up a bit. This is what they call the
psychological moment, or something like that...
But look at Babe, boys, look! I swear she’s put
on rouge to-night. Smart old Babe! You do
look swell, Babe."
It was not rouge, though. It was when Sally
spoke to her that she realized with sudden sharpness that she would have to face him. After
what had happened! Her immense joy at his
recovery had drowned out all other feelings.
What was she to do? Should she play sick, worn
out—plausible enough after the long strain?
But no, no, she was no malingerer, was Babe.
And upon reflection, she realized that she did
not want to have another nurse take care of him
now. Why, they would all be trving their little
wiles on him, Chiefy not expected.
She would carry on. He had been in delirium
when he kissed her. With returning health
he would have forgotten all about it. So in
great perturbation she went to the hospital.
The chart but substantiated the news of the
miraculous change in the patient’s condition.
Babe went into his room, cheeks burning. She
had looked at herself in the small mirror in the
hall. Sally was right; her flushed cheeks looked
rouged indeed. At the same time Babe realized
how very becoming the color was.
The fifth night had come. Major Dexter
had so much improved already that the chief
nurse hinted at his not needing a special nurse
any longer. “That’s to give herself a chance,”
Sally whispered.
When Babe came in that evening, with cheeks
burning red in her small face, he greeted her
with outstretched hands, a boyish smile on the
still ravaged features. “You do not recognize
me now, do you, Miss Martin?”
‘I am mighty glad I do not,” Babe said,
delighted beyond words at his cordiality.
It was very still in the room and in the world
outside. Slowly above the slumbering flame
trees in the vard the moon rose.
“I must have been a pretty mess of a case,
was I not?” he asked after a while. “I bothered
you a lot, did n't I?”
"Oh no, no; not at all.”


“Really not?”
“You talk too much, Major... You must
sleep now. Sleep will do you good.”
How many countless times in her life as a
nurse had she uttered these words! And what a
new and wonderful significance they had now,
addressed to him! She reiterated them almost
pleadingly: “Sleep, do! It will do you no end
of good.”
Obediently he closed his eyes, but his hand
remained on hers. Only now it came to her
that he had been stroking her hand for quite a
time.
But she could see he was not to remain quiet
for long. There was, she perceived, a new restlessness about him. Twice she caught him
looking at her in an interrogating, inquisitive
sort of way, as though there were something he
could not comprehend, something he wanted to
learn from her. Perhaps she had better leave
him alone? She rose and went out on the screenedin porch. He might sleep now.-
Outside the fairy wand of the moon had transformed a drab world into one of inexpressible
splendor. The flame-trees langorously waved
their crimson blooms in the soft breeze that was
fanned in from the sea. A car or two sped through
the lighted streets beyond, headlights paling into
insignificance in he marvelous silver-and-gold
brightness that enwrapped all things.
Babe sighed. She would soon be leaving the
Islands. In three months. She would miss
these moonlight nights—but not the moonlight
alone.
“Miss Martin!” The call interrupted her
musings.
Babe went back to her patient. "What is it,
Major? You cannot sleep? A sleeping-powder,
then? The Colonel says you must sleep.”
He shook his head and a quick smile flitted
across his face. “Sleeping-powder! When all
I want to do is to talk to you?”
“But it may not be good for you.”
“It will not hurt me. But how can I talk to
you when you sit in your chair so stiffly and so
primly? Come over here,” and he made her sit
down on his cot.


“But, Major. . .if someone should come in!”
Babe stammered. The thought was so strong
that she made as if to rise. Lord! She a nurse
Discipline, dignity! Yet it was unutterably sweet
to sit still and have him stroke her hand.
“Don't worry, little girl. Gardner is over at
Miller’s playing bridge. You know old Gardner
when it comes to bridge. He’ll play bridge in
heaven,—that is, if he ever gets there. . .But tell
me, wasn’t the old medico just a little bit
worried about me, eh?'
“He never said so, to me at least.”
“Now tell me, did I behave well while in
your charge? I asked you that before, but you
did not say.”
“We nurses know what to expect.” Babe
spoke hesitatingly, adding as if in disculpation:
“Yours was a very complicated case."
“So that’s it! That implies a whole lot. So
I was a bad boy?”
He had turned on his side
and looked her full in the face. Under this
scrutiny her cheeks flamed up and in embarrassment she turned her head away.
“Miss Martin! You must tell me!” He tried
to rise from his bed. Immediately the nurse in
her overcame the woman. “Major! If you are
careless you’ll have a fever again tomorrow.
And I do not want you to get a relapse?” She
spoke vehemently and into his eyes came a new
expression.
Why not? Why don’t you want me to get a
relapse?”
“Because. . .because. ..” she, faltered, “because they’ll blame me for it."
There was a silence. Then: “Miss Martin!
You've got to tell me what has happened or I
shall not care whether or not the fever comes
back, though I’d hate to have you blamed for it.
There is something I must know. Absolutely
must! You will tell me, wont you?” He had
imprisoned her hand between his two and in his
eyes looked at her so entreatingly that she could
not, as she wished, flee from the room.
“You will tell me, yes, you will! Miss Martin,
did I... did I... mention names while I was
ill? Tell me, did I?” A tone of anxiety in his voice
crept into her heart. "Was I.. .was I... un

Dunlop experience of tire making commenced forty-one
years ago, when they made pneumatic tires for the old high
bicycles. Since then it has embraced tire performance on every
variety of vehicle running on every kind of surface.
ONLY DUNLOP EXPERIENCE COVERS THE
WHOLE HISTORY OF THE PNEUMATIC TIRE


Filipino Craftsmen
Men Want Comfort
They are willing to
put up with the
knocks and setbacks in business but
they want their feet
to be comfortable.
That is why so many
of them choose
HIKE Shoes.
HIKE SHOE FACTORY
STYLE CREATORS
MANILA, P. I.
286 SAN MARCELINO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


14


NI 
  OF CUKIMERCE JOURNAL


August, 1929


kind to anyone?”
“No, Major. You were not unkind. You
were. .. most kind. .. to... . to everybody.”
“Are you sure of that?”
“Quite sure."
He lay still for a while. Then: “Are you
sure I mentioned no names? Can you assure me
I did not?'
Babe’s face flushed scarlet. Then the trained
nurse in her responded: "When we graduate we
swear never, under any circumstances, to divulge
bedside confidences. You must ask no further
questions, Major Dexter,—no more.” Her voice
shook.
“But it is not that, little girl; it’s not that!
And you divulge no secret, really, if you just
answer me. There is something not quite cleay
to me,” he added. “Tell me, was not... did not
a young woman come to see me one evening?
And she stayed here for a little while?”
Her heart pounded so within her that she
could not speak; and again he queried. Finally,
straining at the words, she said: "No one has
been to see you yet. Orders from the Colonel.”
Passing a thin hand through his dark wavy
hair and looking at her intently, he whispered:
“Yet it seems to me... I could swear to it...
I don’t know. .. but it seems to me that a young
woman came to me one moonlit evening and sat
down by me and. ..” Now his voice sunk to an
almost inaudible breath. “And she kissed me
. .and I kissed her... and she said...”
Babe’s heart stood still.
"And she kissed me,” he went on, as inaudibly
as before, "and she said she loved me... she
said that...”
He sat up straight. “Miss Martin, little girl,
tell me... was that a reality or just a dream?
A reality,—or only a dream?'
Thus he asked, eyes imploringly set on hers,
hand warm on her icy trembling one. “You
were here—you could tell me.”
“It was only a dream,” she whispered at last,
brokenly. "A beautiful dream." And flung
both hands before her flaming face.
Was it the voice that said what the words did
not quite betray? He sat up abruptly and looked


at her in unending surprise. Then with very
gentle persuasion he drew her to him and took
her hands, still wet with tears, and stroked them,
however much she resisted and kissed them.
“My dear girl, my dear little girl ” he repeated.
Then folding her in the crook of his arm: "And
what keeps us, tell me, from making the dream
became a reality?
Apparently nothing kept them from so fascinating a pursuit, for three weeks afterwards
they were married. To the regiment, to the
hospital and even to Manila the news came with
the force of a thunderclap. What? Dexter!
That dashing fellow Dexter! You don’t say?
A nurse... and not even a voung one at that...
She nursed him... hm! You never can tell
in this blamed country. Poor Dexter.
It was Sally, vivacious, unconventional Sally
who probably came nearest solving the puzzle,
but she had lain awake nights thinking of Babe
and her perfectly astounding piece of luck. Babe!
How in the world’s goodness did she manage it?
Why, it sort of made you feel queer to see one
like Babe arrive where you have for years tried
to arrive yourself.
The evening after the wedding—it had taken
place at the chief surgeon’s on General Luna
street—Sally had a few callers to tea and the topic
hinged on the still inexhaustible subject of Babe
Martin. Lieutenant Timothy Ward, pressing
Sally’s lively hand, said, between puffs at cigarettes: “I truly believe he has been smitten
with sudden blindness—poor Dexter.” And
Captain Peter Lyle who was never far from where
Sally found herself added: “She must have
bewitched him, really. We all know he had
been going stronger than strong—and thentofall
for Babe!”
Sally remained pensive for a minute or so,
then she burst out: “You never said a truer
word, Pete. Bewitched him, yes, that’s it.”
Both exclaimed: “Sally! Are you getting superstitious in your old days?”
She shook her head, but could not be induced
to say more. But she thought to herself: “It
was that moonlight... It sort of changes you...
mellows you... Babe Martin—one night she


looked, she looked positively beautiful! Sort of
like a saint, I’d say... and Dexter, he was no
saint himself. .. Attraction of the extremes.
Something like that...
“Sally! 'Why so pensive?” Sally was thinking
of herself and how in spite of her evident ponularity, she was getting nowhere. Twenty-eight
pretty soon, and all those fellows ready for funat
all times, but no more. She must adopt new
tactics, she must.
Suddenly she went out on the porch. “Come
out here, bovs,” she called, and a new alluring
note was in her voice. “Come and look at the
moon! Pete, don’t you think she is beautiful?”


Dalagang Bundok"
Dawn bursts the tropic night,
The barrio wakes—
Mangy dogs and scurrying pigs,
Harsh choruses of fowls;
Querulous voices dominate the Bedlam.
But along the mountain trail
Through the loitering
Sweetness of the night
Comes the market girl—
Basket lightly poised on head,
Unhurried movement,
Sinuous, swift;
No eyes need guide her dewy feet,
Sure as the forest creature’s
In the rugged path.
She nears,
She turns a placid golden face
With eyes of shadowed pools,
And smiles, and passes on:
All vigorous grace,
Lithe hips and sculptured limbs,
Breasts at the bud of maidenhood,
Lips of sensuous roundness
And guileless innocence—
What harmony of color and of motion!
—R. F. WENDOVER.


'Mountain Girl.


Stomach Disorder?


FORMULA:
Alcanfor.......0.03%
ESs. Menta.....0.03%
Ex. fl. Cannabis,
Elixir Paregorico aa ......0.30%
Alcohol .......17.60
Excipiente c.s.. M/.


Why suffer the
pain—take
LICOR
SIOMACAL
of Dr. Luna
—it will relieve you of stomach
ailments such as DYSENTERY,
COLIC, INDIGESTION,
DIARRHEA, and other stomach
complaints.
Keep a bottle or more in
your home—its necessity
is indispensable.
On Sale at All Drug Stores
in three different size bottles or can
be secured direct from us.


Farmacia de San Fernando
Telephone 4-80-85
MANILA
835 San Fernando


Better Health


for you and Baby when he drinks your health
and you drink his, with the world famous

BEAR"
BRAND
NATURAL MILK
This delicious milk is just as efficacious in giving health
and vigor to the adult as it is invaluable in insuring proper
development in the growing infant.


Look
for the
Bear on the
Label


Sold
Everywhere
in Large and
Small Cans!


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


August, 1929


  


15


MESSAGE
The GovernorGeneral
TO THE
EIGHTH PHILIPPINE LEGISLATURE
Delivered by His Excellency in the Hall of the House of
Representatives on July 16, 1929
GENTLEMEN OF THE LEGISLATURE:
Because I have arrived in the Islands so
recently, my message to you today will necessarily be brief and along general lines. I shall
from time to time forward other messages to
the Legislature with specific recommendations
and suggestions for your consideration.
As I said in my inaugural address, I sincerely
desire to do my part in maintaining a close,
cordial, and constructive cooperation with your
honorable body. I agree with the farsighted
view of the distinguished President of the
Senate, Honorable Manuel Quezon, when he said:
“It is the duty of both (branches) mutually to
respect the powers and prerogatives of each and
to seek through a frank and full interchange of
views a common ground for action.” I also
agree with a similar view expressed by the eminent Speaker of the House of Representatives,
Honorable Manuel Roxas: This cooperation,
he said, does "not mean either renunciation or
abdication by each other of fundamental principles or the surrender of powers recognized
by the Organic Law; nor ... absorption by one
of the other, but merely helpful cooperation,
thereby insuring the normal functioning of the
Government for the promotion of the best interests of the country.”
Accordingly, I shall continue to use the Council
of State established by Executive Order No. 130
of my able predecessor, ex-Governor-General
Stimson, as an instrumentality for friendly advisory contact between the executive and legislative branches, without in any way affecting the
independence and the freedom of action of elther
branch. Knowing the ability, sincerity and
publie spirit of the members of the Legislature,
I am certain that you also will do your part in


maintaining this spirit of cooperation. With
such cordial sentiments of good will, our mutual
understanding is assured.
As you well know, there has been a determined
effort recently made in the Congress of the
United States to limit the importation of Philippine sugar. I am strongly opposed to this
proposal. The Philippine Commission in the
United States is doing very effective work in
fighting against its adoption.
Many American friends, both in and out of
Congress, have worked hard to insure the continuation of those trade relations with the
United States to which in my opinion the Philippine Islands are justly entitled. By far the
larger part of the American press ably and generously supported these efforts. The House of


The life of any governor
Is difficult extremely,
He may not be a lover,, or
He's branded as unseemly;
He may not play or frisk about
Or sing a roguish ditty;
He dare not let his waistline out
Or diet, more's the pity;
Nor dare he serve into the net
Nor volley out of bounds;
He may not even swear, and fret
Around official grounds;
He must not seem to have imbibed
(That's if he has ambitions),
His life is tighily circumscribed
By countless inhibitions;
He may not smuggle opium
And risk a fine or prison,
Without the dirty dope o' him
Is yours as well as his’n.
The poor unfortunate is doomed—
What price we pay for glory!—
To spend his wretched term entombed
Within a goldfish dory.
L'envoi
Please keep this under cover. Lor,
I wish I were a governor!
—A. R. E.


Representatives, after full hearings in the committee, at which ex-Governor-General Stimson
gave an effective exposition of the facts, registered
its emphatic disapproval of the disturbance of
the present trade relationsbetween the Philippine
Islands and the United States. I hope that
the Senate will take a similar wise and just course.
This fight has not been without some practical
advantages. It has tended to cement the union,
in the common cause of the welfare of the Philippines, of all elements, Filipino and American
alike, who have that cause at heart. It has also
emphasized the importance of such a sound and
progressive solution of the existing economic
problems of these Islands as may tend to insure
that material prosperity which is so essential
to political, industrial, and social well-being and
as may also tend to give these Islands, in case a
similar tariff question should again arise, that
additional active assistance on the part of the
business interests of the United States which
would be the natural result of increased reciprocal
benefits that are susceptible of establishmenti
under the existing trade relations.
However, we must not fail to heed the danger
signals raised by this agitation. The wise sailor
avoids the typhoon whenever he can possibly
do so. With a world overproduction of certain
agricultural products such as wheat and sugar;
with an under-production of other food products
in the Philippines for current consumption;
with an enormous demand in the United States
and elsewhere for tropical products which could
profitably be raised in the Philippines; it would
seem to be only enlightened self-interest to
devote our energies, capital, and initiative to
the development of profitable products for which
there is a great demand, rather than increasing
the production of products in which there i2
already a large oversupply. In other words,
wise foresight on the part of Philippine business
interests themselves would bring about a diversification of crops and a voluntary limitation of
an unduly increased production of crops of whichthere is already a world overproduction. 74
Diversification of crops is universally recog(Please turn io page 17)


KOlVIBOI TEBU OA.


COLUMBIA VIVA-TONAL PHONOGRAPH


"Like life itself”


MODEL No. 820 (closed)


Cash or Monthly Payments
This Viva-Tonal Columbia offers the music lover a cabinet of
imposing proportions and magnificent design in keeping with the most
luxurious furnishings.
In the equipment are the Viva-Tonal tone arm and new VivaTonal No. 15 reproducer. Massive top lifts with feather-like ease.
Four 12-inch brown cloth record albums.
47 inches high, 33 inches wide, and 27'7, inches deep.
SATISFIED?
You Will Be!
We carry fourteen Columbia Model and five perfect portables—
Phonographs for every purse and purpose.
Easy Monthly Payments
Play while you pay!
Played And Displayed At
OUR COLUMBIA BRANCH
136-138 Escolta, Manila
or
BECK'S: ESCOLTA


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


16


  


August, 1929


WEALTH


Wealth derives from the soil, in the form of
crops cultivated on the surface and minerals
dug from the depths; it constitutes that for
which men will exchange their labor, and in the
modern world takes manifold forms in an infinite variety of manufactures representing the
original product in its crudest state with the
labor of many hands finally added. But it
derives from the soil alone; everything beyond
that is an exchange of labor.
The farmer in the Mississippi valley raises a
crop of wheat. This is new wealth in the world.
A railroad carries it to Galveston, a ship takes
it from Galveston to Liverpool, where British
millers buy it and convert it into flour and bran.
Everyone takes toll of it, grocer and blacksmith,
twine manufacturer and merchant, miller,
gbanker, railroad and ship; and when all are paid
for their labor, the farmer has what is left from
the new wealth he brought into the world—
what is left, if anything, is the farmer’s wages.
The farmer exchanges his labor for the labor of
thousands of persons whom he never sees; if he
still has wheat left (or money which wheat has
fetched him), he is wealthier by that much.
It is of course the same with us in the Philippines; not Manila, but the farms in the provinces, and the mines to a little extent, produce
wealth. Manila trades in wealth, manipulates
wealth, but produces none of it.
“What a lot of wealth the automobile industry
has produced," a man remarked, thereby causing
this article to be written. For the automobile
industry, nor any other not delving wealth from
the soil, has produced no wealth whatever.
Popular industries are provocative of the production of wealth; if a farmer desires to own an
automobile or truck, he may produce enough
alth to trade for one and add another hand to
eroup which tolls his crop. Thus, in the
exploitation of any industry, it is important
to reach the farmer—tempt him to bring more
wealth into the world.
In the simpler ages of the world, all society
subsisted almost directly from the soil. Even
penury had its security, for the customs of families, tribes, clans and counties provided somehow
for all. No such society was innocent of slavery,
yet, according to their dependent penury, even
they had their share of the crops. The industrial
age ensuing, freed men from slavery and serfdom
and invited them into industrial centers to
exchange labor with one another—the smith
trading the candle-maker, the tanner, the baker,


the butcher and green grocer, and they with
him. Cooperation under mercantile management has since refined the processes of exchange;
it has induced the age in which we live, in which
we think of money as wealth when it really is a
token indicating the precise amount of labor
the posessor of it may command.
Were this not the character of money, money
would be without value; money is a token of
wealth, or of the labor which produces it.
Men who have been freed from the soil—who
neither work there as owner or tenant, serf or


slave—are beset inevitably with the evil of fear.
They fear the day when they no longer can
exchange their labor for that of others, the farmer
included, being no longer able to work; or if
they have money in token of labor, they fear
they may lose it; the spectre of want, for them
or their families, haunts them always. They
ward off their fears, however, by many ingenious
devices, and to this end they effect cunning
organizations and pools.
The flower of man’s genius in fighting off


poverty and the fear of poverty is insurance of
his life and limb. It has been found that many
men may pool certain portions of the residue
left them from exchanging their labor with their
neighbors throughout the world, and that new
men will keep coming into the pool as the shares
of the old men are drawn out; and that this
process is popular, because safe and managed
under strict laws of nations and economics
(the science of labor exchange, one might say),
so it acquires greater magnitude every year.
The larger it grows the safer it becomes; life


insurance gives the modern man the security
his ancestors forfeited when they bade goodbye
to the soil and wended their way to town.
Instance: Not long ago a young man beginning his business career in Manila insured his
life for P10,000 one month, and died the next.
The ₱10,000 went to his mother. Another
instance, where an airplane hurried up the
security: When Paul Whiteman was filming
his picture King of Jazz, it was wanted to insure
his life for $500,000 and put cast insurance into
effect for a like amount; if anything happened
to Whiteman and such insurance were not in
force, Universal Pictures Corporation would
suffer a tremendous loss. The agency of Behrendt-Levy in Los Angeles handled the matter.
Whiteman was in San Francisco, it was necessary
to make the physical examinations and complete
the papers, for reinsurance with Lloyds in
London, between Saturday, June 7, and Monday,
June 9. The insurance man was sent from Los
Angeles to San Francisco via the Maddux Air
Lines regular passenger plane, and everything
was completed and the million-dollar insurance
in effect before the close of business June 9.
The Maddux lines operate between Los Angeles,
San Francisco, San Diego, Agua Caliente and
Phoenix. The insurance feat shows how the
airplane facilitates modern business. The agents
and Universal demonstrated enterprise.


Lest We Forget
August 7 was the second anniversary of the
death of Leonard Wood. Each year it were well
to remember at this time how much unselfish
work the man gave to these islands; how earnest
he was about it, how little he regarded the cost
to himself. A fund for memorial windows at
the Cathedral of St. Mary and St. John is being
raised, in a manner that all may have their part
in them. This is appropriately undertaken and
well conceived.


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
Kneedler Building
Manila, P. I.
Telephone 2-36-74


rhe insular nife Assurance Co., Ltd.
MANILA, P. I.





ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
,oansonrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
FOR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


HOME OFFICE


Call or write for particulars to:


4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, ¡Gaches Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 11
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


THE AMIEKICAN UAMBRER OF TCOMMERCE


Message of the Governor General
(Continued from page 15)
nized as sound agricultural policy. The periodic
disastrous consequences of relying solely on one
crop have been repeatedly emphasized in the
experience of countries or sections of countries
which have disregarded the lessons of history.
Before it is too late, the Philippines may wisely
avoid this danger.
Diversification is only good business judgment. The wise merchant tries to diversity
the goods he sells. The careful capitalist diversifies his investments. In the same way,
the successful farmer seeks to diversify his crops.
He may not make quite as much money in the
years when his principal crop is selling at a high
price, but he often saves himself from ruin when
the price falls to a low level.
Even today the Philippine Islands are relying
on three crops for some 82 per cent of their total
exports. These crops and the products thereof
are all vulnerable to competition from similar
and identical products from other markets.
It is unmistakably apparent that if the Philippine Islands are not to continue to rely for their
exports on an extremely limited variety of products, all of which are meeting increasingly
strong competition abroad, the prime necessity
is the development of a more diverse agriculture,
bringing into production on a commercial scale
many of the now neglected crops which can
readily be grown in the Islands and for which
there are waiting markets. To mention but a
few of these products, the United States alone
can consume all the quinine, camphor and coffee
that the Islands can produce for many years.
Diversification is especially desirable in a rich
agricultural country like the Philippines which,
although able easily to raise ample supplies for
its own needs, imported during 1928 foodstuffs
to the value of over P54,000,000.
Not only is there need of diversification but
also of a fuller development of all our resources.
Such an expansion is essential if we are to carry
out the public improvements so earnestly desired.
The Insular revenues are practically stationary,
with urgent needs constantly expanding. That
this vital need of increasing the revenues exists
was forcefully brought out by a former Secretary
of the Interior and Senator, who is now the
head of the University of the Philippines, President Rafael Palma. In a recent speech he said:
“Everybody, even the most skeptical,
accepts the fact that we have mounting
necessities to satisfy, that for lack of resources
hygiene, elementary education, our railroads
and highways, the irrigation system, the
means of maritime transportation, and other
elements vital to modern life, have not received
the impetus that progress demands; that in
the absence of local industries we import
numerous articles which we can very well
produce here in great abundance such as eggs,
rice, canned fruits and fishes, refined sugar,
cotton, paper, silk, etc.; that our barrio lacks
the attractions and incentives to retain the
hands that it needs but which are forced to
emigrate to other lands lured by high wages
and a more decent existence; that conditions
in the towns are sadly antiquated and reveal
how primitive still are the ways of living of
their inhabitants. We do not need to be


told that we are not keeping abreast of the
progress of the world, that as yet we are
considerably behind other nations in industrial
and scientific achievements and that even
our agricultural industry proceeds, under the
most primitive and crude methods. This is
the picture insofar as concerns our public
life. Now with respect to the private life the
picture is still gloomier. Very few of our
people are moneyed people; the great rank
and file of our citizens lead a life of abject
poverty, of penury that inspires pity and
commiseration. They do not have more than
is necessary to supply their daily needs, the
morrow is ever to them a question mark and a
constant worry. To see people under-nourished and poorly clad is a common sight in
our barrios. Whoever would judge and
grade our civilization on the social level of
our peasants and laborers would form an idea
not altogether complimentary to our people."
As long as these conditions exist, so long does
the responsibility of the Legislature to correct
them exist. They can only be corrected by the
expenditure of large sums of money. Increased
governmental revenues are essential to the
future welfare of the Philippines from every
standpoint, social, educational, cultural, and
moral, as well as physical, commercial, and
political. I recommend this whole subject most
strongly to the earnest consideration of the
Legislature.
How the revenues can best be increased is a
complicated problem, involving other related
problems, such as a careful revision of the system
of taxation with a view of realizing fully and
effectively our present sources of revenue, and
also by gradually increasing the sources from
which revenue may be derived in the future

HES EAN OIN G INA ARINS DO ANIENI
not sufficient to provide adequate taxation with
which to care for even the most essential needs
of today. The expansion must come principally
through increasing the wealth of the people.
Industry must be encouraged. Idle lands must
be brought into cultivation. Improved lands
are a valuable asset; idle lands a wasteful liability.
Our enormous potential natural resources must
be developed. Trade and commerce must be
promoted. The Government will then share in
the increased prosperity of the people. Only
in this way can the pressing and ever-expanding
needs of the Government be satisfied. Only
through economic development can the Government become self-sustaining and fulfill its duties


to the peopie.
Yet there are people to whom the words
“economic development" immediately raise the
bogey of "exploitation" If “economic development" meant “exploitation,” I should favor
fighting it to the finish. I shall never favor the
exploitation of the resources or the people of the
Philippine Islands either by capital, labor, or
politics, foreign or domestic.
But the two ideas are not at all synonymous.
To develop our waste lands and create new
wealth for the people and the Government; to
encourage industry and thus afford employment
for labor; to increase the revenues and thus foster
education, sanitation, and public improvements;
to furnish opportunities to the great mass of the
people to improve their material conditions;
these things are not exploitation. They are
enlightened statesmanship.
How the Philippines can achieve economic
development under adequate safeguards against
improper influences is a problem which demand:
the best thought of the Legislature. Leaders
of public opinion seem to realize the need for
additional capital. To quote again the Senate
President: “No country in the world has ever
been able to develop economically without the
aid of outside capital, and the Philippines cannot be the single exception."
The United
States, now one of the most powerful economic
nations in the world, until very recent years
developed its economic resources largely through
the assistance of foreign capital. As the national
wealth increased, the American people w.
gradually able to supply their own capital ne
themselves, until today they are no long
borrowers, but have become lenders to otl
nations. Their use of foreign capital as
SUIUTHCHIU LO (EvE1o bilematlonlanwomioll 3


N M  
side capital did not bring with them any danger
of foreign exploitation of the national resources.
Nor did it mean any attempt at foreign political
domination.
I can find no evidence that outside capit
clamoring to enter the Philippines for the pur
of exploitation. Rather is outside ca
hesitant, reluctant, unwilling. Owners of ca
are usually very cautious in their investm
What they seek and properly demand are a
ances of fair treatment, just laws, sound pa
and a chance to earn reasonable dividends
they fear that they will meet with hostl
uncertainty, or unfairness they will seek d
fertile fields where they will eagerly be 1
welcome.
The fear of foreign capitalistic domina
would seem to be the unfounded night-mar
those who lack a vision of the future.
belittle the Philippine people by intimat
that they have not the intelligence, the abil
and the courage to cooperate with outside cap
without being controlled by it.
The economic problem here is two-fold
bring capital in and to keep labor from ge
out. The solution of the first will materi
aid the solution of the second. Unfortunat
due to changes in the economic life and to
creased needs without the means of satisf
them, our labor is emigrating to other la
With economic development will come an
creasing demand and need for Philippine la
which today is promoting the prosperity
other countries rather than building up the
own. It is vitally important to both the prese
and future prosperity of the Islands that t
energies of our citizens should be profita


For Your Electrical Work
2-32-40
Phone
AMA
MORA ELECTRIC CO., INC.
MANILA, P. I.
7 CALLE SODA


CHARTERED BANK


OF INDIA. AUSTRALI
AND CHINA
Capital and Reserve Fund..................... E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor.................. 3,000,000
MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


THE AMi
applied here and should not, in the present stage
of our economic development, be diverted to
emplovment in building up the industries of
other lands. Measures adapted to bring about
the needed conservation of the Islands’ limited
supply of labor may well receive your careful
consideration. Where only 2 per cent of the
thirty million hectares of public domain have
been taken up, where less than 12 per cent of
the lands are in cultivation, with ten million
lectares of potentially agricultural lands subject
to settlement, where enormous natural resources
are undeveloped, there would seem to be plenty
of opportunities within the Islands, instead of
following the will-of-the-wisp of waiting wealth
in other lands.
Labor is the backbone of industrial development. Capital furnishes the life-blood. Both
are necessary for a healthy growth. A sound
economic life demands that capital earn reasonable dividends which in turn enables labor to be
pprofitably employed. If labor is forced to emigrate from the country, and capital is discouraged
from entering into the country, economic growth
will stop.
Capital and labor, two corner-stones on which
sound economic development rests, depend
largely udon communication and transportationl


SRICAN CHAMIBER


AMEKCE JOURNAL


ust


for their strength. In the Philippines splendid
progress has been made upon a comprehensive
system of land communication by the construction of good roads. The completion of this
system should be carried out as rapidly as funds
permit. But another medium of communication, of vital importance in a country consisting
of thousands of islands, a natural system of highways built by nature itself, the sea, has been
seriously neglected. Other countries, especially
the United States, are spending enormous sums
to develop their waterways. In the Philippines
our laws have in some ways retarded rather than
encouraged the development of interisland shipping.
Transportation is the life of trade. If its
growth is stunted by restrictive laws, the growth
of trade is stunted. If it is encouraged to expand, trade will expand. A sound, adequate,
modern system of transportation by land, sea,
and air is essential to a healthy growth of both
foreign and domestic trade.
The report which was made in 1927 by the
able Advisory Committee appointed to study
this subject is illuminating. It showed that
interisland shipping was utterly inadequate;
that most of the ships were antiquated, unsaUIMIULOIV. TICrilorlt miilddalreorior. Urlal UrlUr


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


IRLLLSS


RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


9 PLAZA MORAGA


Phones:


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


E


were many abuses and discriminations; and that
there were inadequate provisions for the safety
and comfortable convenience of passengers.
Although the recent change in the law, which
relieved interisland shipping from its monopolistic
control and placed it on a competitive basis, is
resulting in substantial improvements, many
of the unsatisfactory conditions above described
still exist. The Committee very strongly recommended important modification in the law
regarding the replacement of tonnage operated
by certain foreign owned corporations. These
modifications, with appropriate safeguards for
Filipino and American interests, would result
in bringing immediately into interisland shipping a considerable number of modern wellequipped vessels.
If, however, the improvements which are
taking place and which, with proper encouragement, will take place in interisland shipping are
to be used to the best advantage, an adequate
system of ports should be developed. An Advisory Board on Ports and Harbor Improvements,
composed of technical and business men, was
appointed last year and made a careful survey
of port facilities of the Archipelago. The report
of this board, as well as the report of the Secretary of Commerce and Communications, should
receive your consideration. The proposal to
place all wharfage fees in a special fund for the
development and maintenance of insular ports
is especially meritorious.
The development of interisland shipping and
of ports is necessary in order that products of
agriculture may reach the domestic and foreign
markets expeditiously and cheaply. Agriculture is, and for many years will be, the basic industry of the Islands. Every possible encouragement should be given to its sound development.
The welfare of the small farmer must be our
constant care. Upon his prosperity depends the
prosperity of the Islands. Merchants, manufacturers, transportation agencies, banks, dealers
in every line of trade, share in his prosperity,
suffer with him in his reverses. Upon the land
and the use that is made of it depends largely
the future prosperity of the Philippine Islands.
The problem of expediting the settlement of
the public domain and the prompt registration
of land titles continues to be a serious one.
Several proposals will be submitted for your
consideration by the Secretary of Agriculture
and Natural Resources. Among the more important are: development of public lands on the
sugar central principle, known as the Alunan
plan; more rapid disposition of agricultural
public lands through the creation of a special revolving fund for the survey, subdivision, and
settlement of vacant lands, to be carried out and
financed either by the Government directly or in
cooperation with private capital.
The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural
Resources will also present bills designed to
protect the forests and to provide a more effective
supervision in the Bureau of Forestry; to encourage the development of the mineral resources of the Islands by liberalizing the law
governing investment in more than one mining
corporation; exempting exported refractory ores
from payment of wharfage taxes; the coordination and specialization of agricultural experimentation; and the promotion of the cattle
raising industry by the imposition of higher
import duties.
In order to encourage agricultural, industrial,
and commercial development steps should be
taken to supply, preferably through private
agencies and capital, the existing need of facilities for granting small loans to worthy individuals of limited means and business enterprises of narrow scope, at fair rates of interest
and under reasonable conditions. There should
also be a thorough revision of the present laws
governing rural credit associations so as to
bring them under adequate supervision and
control and make them function according to
their original purpose. A bank devoted exclusively to agricultural loans and designed to
supplement the work of the rural credit associations is another agency needed to encourage
agricultural development.
An educated public opinion is essential to the
success of a democratic form of government.
With about 65 per cent of our children of school


RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Augus



IEN
EIc.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
TCANN


age unable to obtain even the most elementary
education due to the lack of school revenues, the
development of an informed public opinion is
difficult of attainment. The keen desire of our
Filipino youth for education, always the object
of commendatory comment by trained observers,
should be gratified as rapidly as funds will permit.
Through the generous appropriations of
previous years, an excellent system of public
schools is now in operation. The large ap
propriation made at the last session of the Legislature in further aid of elementary education has
been most beneficial. Gradually school facilities are being extended, and as rapidly as the
income of the Government will warrant, further
extension should be made. The first obligation
of the public school system is to overcome illiteracy and provide the individual a sufficient knowledge to enable him to meet adequately his own
personal needs and discharge properly his social
obligations. In keeping with this principle,
primary and intermediate education should
have first claim on available Government funds.
Secondary and higher education, while important, should not be promoted at the expense of
basic training essential for all children. Above
the elementary grades preference should be
given to vocational, industrial, and agricultural
education. It is gratifying to learn that this
principle found recognition two years ago in a
liberal appropriation for the promotion of vocational education. This has done much to stimulate and develop the excellent vocational work
which the public schools have been doing for
many years. Further encouragement and financial support are needed. We should continue to
adjust the educational program so that those
who are educated at public expense will be economically efficient. Purely academic education
should be supported more and more by those
who seek it.
be recognized: that
Another principle -
lop not merely
the purpose of ed
increased
the mind but the n
endable.
interest in health edu
1 will be
It is hoped that this phase
given generous consideration.
Approximately two thirds of t. financial
support of the public school system comes from
the Insular Government, the rest being provided
by the provinces and municipalities. It is
believed that there should be a gradual increase
in the proportion which is carried by the local
entities. In order to enable the provinces and
municipalities to do so, there have been proposed
from time to time certain bills authorizing additional local taxation, such as an increase in the
land tax, an increase in the cedula tax, and the
creation of a provincial school fund. Serious
consideration of these proposals is desirable.
The importance of wholesome recreation in
education should not be overlooked. Aside
from the physical value, sport has an educational
as well as a moral influence. Some lessons can
be taught better on the playground than in the
school. Fair play, respect for others, selfsacrifice, square dealing, honesty, ability to
work with others, these fundamental qualities
are developed by recreation. Juvenile crime
is lessened by properly supervised playgrounds.
When the more pressing needs are cared for, our
municipalities may well foster the development
of their recreational systems.
The ability of a country to advance in civilization is largely influenced by the health of its
people. Diseases, epidemics, and bad sanitation
directly affect progress and prosperity. The
evil effects of under-nourishment particularly
are often not recognized. Preventive measures
are more important than curative, although
both are necessary.
The achievements in public health and sanitation in the Philippines are well known. There
is no more important field of Government activity. It should continue to receive liberal
support. It is gratifying to know that special
attention is being given to the thorough training
of public-health officers by means of the recently
established School of Public Health and Hygiene.
The Islands are fortunate in that the International
Health Board has taken an interest in this work
and has contributed so generously to its support. On the curative side, very satisfactory
progress has been made in the establishment of a


system of provincial hospitals. This work should
go on. Several vears ago the Legislature inaugurated a plan for an adequate institution for
the care of the insane. The new Psychopathic
Hospital at Mandaloyon is the result.. Several
additional buildings should be supplied before
the institution is complete.
We may take pride in the fact that the Philippines lead the world in the treatment of leprosy.
With the Leonard Wood Memorial Fund for the
Eradication of Leprosy, amounting to more than
P2,000,000, we should be able to realize still
greater achievements. A new leprosy hospital
located near Manila is necessary in order to do
away with the very unsatisfactory conditions,
due to overcrowding and inadequate facilities,
prevailing at San Lazaro and to provide an adequate station for the care and treatment of lepers
in this part of the Archipelago.
Other diseases taking a heavy annual toll of
human life and seriously impairing the vitality
of thousands are tuberculosis, malaria, and
beriberi. The special activities being carried
on with respect to these diseases should be


contiluea anu anequately supported.
The Quarantine Service of the Philippines is
one of the most effective in the Far East and
deserves credit for having protected the Islands
from an invasion of any of the highly communicable diseases which afflict this part of the world,
There is great need of an adequate detention
station at Mariveles in order that the service
may be prepared to handle any emergency.
A balanced budget is the keystone of good
government. If expenditures habitually exceed revenues, that keystone will fall, and with
it a good government will fall. The Philipipine
Government today is on a sound financial basis.
We must be willing to make any sacrifices necessary to keep it on a sound basis.
The Government finances are in good condition and the budget is made under a strictly cash
basis. The integrity of our credit must be
retained, regardless of what desirable improvements must be eliminated from the budget
I cannot agree to any material increase in the
total amount fixed in the Budget.
There is nothing at present to indicate that


THE POPULAR AND RECOGNIZED
MATONN COORAO SIOVEs
REGISTERED AND PATENTED BY
CIRIACO TUASON


The "Mayon" cooking
stoves are generally used
in all parts of the Philippines, because they are
economical and can take
easily the place of any
other stove. For sale
exclusively in our factory at 1174-1188 Agno,
Manila.
We are obliged to secure
a patent for the manufacture of the "Mayon"
cooking stoves in order
that the public may not
be defrauded by the
various imitations which
are modeled after our
noted and exclusive invention.
This is the patent of
the “Mayon" cooking
stoves which is conceded
by the Patent Commissioner of the United
States to Ciriaco Tuason
and Sons.


ELA
BE
 G A LO MAERCHAMAGRIAREE GEMAGRA
ereds GINIAGO TUASOS,


Ehiliprios Isianas


ia a a antia ana   de



aaaang aaaan saa gaaaunan pangutan y yain
Datestimonnphe
entonfke

MTOR

 



r
nge &, Gilakyo


We manufacture also different kinds of mosaics tiles,
cement pipes and gutters, roof tile, granite imitation,
balausters, flower-pots and other articles made of cement
for ornamental and miscellaneous purposes.
C. Tuason & Sons, Inc.
(Founded in MDMXXI)
Phone off. 5-71-29
Office and Factory:
Res. 5-44-20
1174-1188 Agno, Malate


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


 R

JERICAN
CI
BAMBER OF COMMERCE JQURNAL
IV


August


the revenue collections will increase next year.
The average annual revenue for the last ten
years, including receipts from the currency
reserve fund which by its nature are special
and not expected to recur, is P76,834,000; the
annual average for the last five years is P78,-
863,000; and the annual average for the last three
years is P80,366,000. Therefore, in the absence
f any sure indication of probable increase in
ollections, it is believed that the estimated
income of P80,100,000 for 1930 is the safe limit
for the budget. Of this amount the sum of
P2,500,000 is proposed to be set aside exclusively
for port works, and the balance of P77,600,000
for general expenditures.
The budget general fund revenues for 1928
were P85,214.000, an increased of P7,486,000
over 1927. This increase is mainly due to the
first payment of P2,853,000 made by the
Philipine National Bank on account of the
Government’s fixed deposits with said bank
which were cancelled in accordance with the
provisions of the Philippine National Bank Rehabilitation Act No. 3174 to the greater collection


in import duties due to the heavier importation
of rice and textiles, in income tax and in excise
tax where kerosene and distilled spirits figured
prominently. The budget general fund expenditures for 1928 were ₱79,626,000 as compared
with P74,346,000 for 1927, or an increase of
₱5,280,000. This increase is chiefly explained
by the purchase of Manila Railroad Company
stock in the sum of P1,000,000 under Act No.
3116, and by the larger amounts expended for
public works, postal service, and aid to local
governments.
The prevailing low prices of our principal
products, coupled with the devastations of hemp
and coconut plantations caused by the typhoons
in the month of November of last year and in the
month of May of this year will undoubtedly
diminish the purchasing power of the country
and this will be reflected in the Government
revenues. It is, therefore, reasonable to expect
that there will be a general decline in the import
duties, income tax, and sales tax. Moreover,
the Philippine National Bank will not be able
to pay to the Government, on account of the


MBOLAR LONADLR COIRANI
Owners and Operators of
Sawmills—Planing Mills—Dry Kilns—Box Factory
At Fabrica, Occidental Negros, P. I.
Production—52 Million Board Feet
Annually
Manufacturers, Exporters, and Dealers


Bandsawn Lumber
Tanguile
Red and White Lauan
Almon
Apitong
Complete Stock of All Sizes Always on Hand, Including
Flooring —Ceiling — Siding — Interior Trim —Box Shooks
Kiln-dried or Air-dried


Manila Office:
P. V. O. Building
Calle Pureza
Cable Address:
“ILCO," Manila


Mill Office:
Fabrica
Occidental Negros
P. I.


U. S. A. Office:
Atlantic Building
Philadelphia, Pa.
Cable Address:
ILCO,” Philadelphia


fixed deposits cancelled, as much this year as it
paid last year. Consequently, after a thorough
consideration of the various items of the budget
general funds revenues, the same were estimated
at P80,362,000 for 1929 or P4,852,000 less than
the revenues collected in 1928. The total
appropriations authorized for 1929 amount to
₱30,207,000, an increase of P581,000 over the
expenditures in 1928 and P155,000 less than the
estimated revenues for 1929
The cash surplus at the close of 1928 was
₱13,179,000. Following sound finance principles,
it is recommended that this surplus be reserved
for the following purposes: (a) To redeem during
1930 the 514 per cent Manila port works bonds
amounting to P12,000,000. These bonds were
issued in 1920 and are payable in thirty years but
redeemable after ten vears. As the rate of
interest earned by these bonds is the highest paid
by the Philippine Government (usual interest
is 41% per cent), it is only sound business policy
that the same be redeemed promptly. This will
also reduce the annual interest charges and will
permit the amount saved to be devoted to public
improvements hereafter. (b) To provide for
the revolving fund authorized to the amount of
₱5,000,000 for the construction of permanent
bridges under Act No. 3500. In accordance
with the provisions of this Act, tolls must be
charged on these bridges until the cost and interests thereon are fully covered. The tolls
collected are to be paid into the revolving fund
and may be expended for the construction of
other permanent bridges. By the provisions
of said Act 3500 the appropriation of ₱5,000,000
may be made available in whole or in part at the
discretion of the Governor-General and consequently the entire sum may be gradually completed as future surpluses may permit.
With regard to public works, the Budget
contemplates appremately P7,500,000 for
2,500,000 for port
general public
roximately Fi0,-
works. Th
nat of last year andis
000,000:
-. In considering the
believec
for public works it is well
amount
Sress which has been made during
to note t
years. In 1924 the total expendithe past
tures of an kinds for the construction of public
works was approximately ₱12,000,000. In
1928 it was P26,000,000. This represents an
increase of more than 100 per cent. Considering
the slight increase which has been realized in
general Government revenues, it would seem
that public works have received a very generous
share of ourincome. The total of all expenditures
for public works during the past five years
reaches the enormous sum of approximately
₱94,000,000. To this should be added the cost
of maintenance and repairs of public works
which during the same period amounts to over
₱48,000,000. We must realize that with the
construction of new public works the annual
maintenance charge will necessarily increase and
will become a fixed liability against the operation
account.
Important changes in the banking laws were
enacted at the last session. At that time it was
recognized that a revision of the various provisions
of the law relating to banks and trust companies
should be made. This revision has been prepared and will be submitted for your consideration by the Secretary of Finance. Many of the
suggested changes are of minor character and are
submitted for the purpose of clarifying the
existing law. Others, however, are important
changes and merit careful consideration. This
revision will afford additional protection to the
public, to the depositors, and to the stockholders, while liberalizing in some respects the
powers of these institutions under adequate
safeguards.
Frequent complaint is heard concerning the
character of the tax laws and the method of collecting taxes. The main complaint has been
against the sales tax. This matter has received
much consideration in recent years, and valuable
reports prepared by the Secretary of Finance
and the Collector of Internal Revenue are
available. Thevariouscommercial organizations
as well as representatives of the important commercial houses have submitted extensive memoranda. It is believed that this subject is so
important to the industrial and business interests


RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


TA


n 2
GR  NICN CHAMBER DF COMMERCE JOURNAL


21


O
S.na
Se r..
A iag
lie er
the Prge
men ot
Co. ol
the she


the Legislature sh
-
tion very early in t”
aes were made in the naj
at elist session of the I.
ed by a Joint Con e
iations, was also ni on
P
 petion with the an
An!
..aws but due to la
¡..r serious consideration. I.
Pl... .n. the uniform Corporation Law
mi ca and is designed to facilitate

sonsolidation of corporations.
rog ure for accomplishing this is
 md duficult to follow.
h.. raa, and independent judiciary
nae. If justice is not equal to
2 . .. a.. Lo the rich, to the most humn na he most powerful, then justice
neckery. Judicial officers, from
w the peace to the Chief Justice of
a onrt, are protectors of the rights
ne people.
i
mngl to improve the administration
navapanr presented iniprevious years.
vill be submitted by the
r.

e for your consideration.
.
iportant proposals are: re Sagn Court in the handling of
Mitili:
appeal cases by the appointaddi.
udges or the creation of a
nsferring the functions of
"PEs
provincial governor to a
h Tues


of Fone.
your
ing the y.
sential p le
of the loy ads, aicent of the co a to eaprovemoats.
lation. I have no mecino ingid
will cheerfully gr


specan offiver ant inted by the Secretary of
Just ne an reconmng dation of the proper Judge
anaranta; aaendments to the marriage
laws ... horiting ile transfer of Bilibid Prison,
the e. sition af San Ramon Penal Farm, and
the e.mhhrauns of o her penal farms.
The prolden af an efficient control of immigra m and ii, administration of the laws
goveri ny tieseme s a serious and complicated
e Sonrecaty of Finance will present for
a lulls designed to secure
more ef!  mrnistrarion of the immigration
laws. he is an imnerative need for an adequate d nmen matien for immigrants.
Gratil me pmanes hos been made in beautifyatarla end in providing for eshs. is has been made possible by t 'ya matira ig the issue by the city
of two bo. sag e  ₱1,000,000 for filling
other of P10,000,000
for the enar n of ace public buildings and
bridges and lon suree: mmprovements. Inasmuch as st w impr rements largely benefit the
owners of abacting.  e estale, the Secretary of
the Interior re qiomrnds that the law should be
so amended as n qquire secial assessment


The Black Butterfly
By Percy A. HIll


be superstition, or it may be chance
a ma of the people of the Philippines dread
.... ance of the mariposa negra. To them
...arbinger of misfortune. Though predominanty black, the mariposa negra has white
spots and other small markings. It is harmless except in its character as a foreteller of ill
tidings, appearing as regularly each year as the
first wet monsoon. With the fearlessness of
butterflies in general, it often forsakes garden
foliage and enters houses. It will even perch
upon one’s hand or fly in erratic circles above
the head of a pedestrian. It may be this penchant for famihiar contact, as well as its sinister
color, which has given the natives their superstition about it.—If something does not
happen within twenty-four hours, he who considers himself warned goes about with a gloomy
feeling that he has been somehow cheated.


The troubadour, Jose Garcia, called Pepe,
nad his superstitions, concerning the number of
scales on the legs of his favorite fighting-cock,
or marked cards in juego del monte; but he was
not in the least troubled by black butterflies.
Pepe, whose name might be translated into
English as Joe Smith, so common a Castilian
cognomen is it, dwelt, during the latter part of
the eighteenth century, in the suburb of Santa
Cruz, now quite a downtown district of Manila,
outside the walls of the old city. He was married to a stout mestiza, Maria, who had brought
him no dowry, but had endeavored to compensate
the musician for this neglect by presenting him
with an addition to the family each year. And
for this numerous household rice and vianda,
clothes, money for masses, an occasional ride
in the rickety coaches of the day, all had to be
provided by Pepe from his earnings with his


against such inoperty of nos less than 60 per
I have calle yen attenona many subjects
which in my ojmion it your carnest consideration and whiei, sgnd wise emmm, netive legisprogram
to urge upon st Every esea ave official
a an ay ance you may
desire in carrying cu' , ur important duties.
We are united in seeking but one end, the welfare of all the people.
In conclusion, I can only reiferate my sincere
expressions of good will, my farnest desire to
cooperate with the Legislature. This is not
merely an oratorical gesture. It comes from
the heart. Our problems cannot be solved by
oratory. As President Coolidge once said
“Government is a practical business which
depends largely for its success en sound common sense rather than high-sounding phrases.”
The problems we must meet are essentiall
practical. Upon the practical way in w'.i"
meet them depends the future welfare of . An m
fhe
Words cannot solve them.
of people.
great patriot Rizal said: “Too many wor
little work.” Action, sound, wise, anri sarsighted, is necessary. I have every conf eng
in the ability and the vision of the Legis re
to solve these problems. In their solutio"
offer you again my close, c. dial, constru iv.
cooperation.
DwiGHt F. Davis,
Governor-Ger.
E PEN ANNE LEGISLATURE,
ala, P. I.


Build for
MRKMAVEOMO


Don’t make a mistake. “If
I had it to do over, I’d use
concrete!" How many
times you hear such regrets
from householders. Another
says, "I receive rent enough
for my house, but it is not
concrete and the upkeep
is so much there’s hardly
any profit left!”
Concrete Is Economy
Better appearance, more
satisfaction, greater security, lower insurance, and
the permanence of rock.


Ce


Let Us Help You Plan
bu Portland Cement Co.


bhina Bank Building


Manila, P. I.


SPONDING TO ARVETTI.


EASE MENTION THE AP ZRICAN CBAMBER OF


CVAL


22


  


twelve stringed bandurria.
Rendering serenades under the grilled windows of lovelorn damsels for which he was
rewarded by ardent youths in proportion to
their success and financial standing, brought
him an irregular income. House-parties, fiestas,
and dances paid much better, and in addition
there were quantities of native wine, generous
supplies of the succulent lechon, or roast pig,
not to speak of the native confectionery, such as
lumpia, poto-lanzon and bibinka, indigestible,
it is true, but satisfying. Then there were the
church services and processions in which Pepe
and his fellow musicians filled the air with melody
while behind staggered the pious under the
heavily draped statues of Our Lady of Pilar
and San Nicolas. These latter exertions did
nothing to help fill Pepe’s earthly coffers, but
did, let us hope, lay up for him treasure in heaven.
Pepe was a philosopher of sorts, a jovial and
carefree individual without responsibilities, like
many another of his calling. Reckoning wealth
in time, he was also a millionaire. Neither the
Spaniard nor the Malay place a high value on
time. The Philippines, referred to as the land
of mananas, is not a figure of speech. What is a
day more or less, they argue, when millions
have gone before and millions will follow? The
mountains never hurry. Ocean, sky, stars and
seasons follow cycles, returning so surely that
they never seem to change. There’s something
in it. Pepe employed the word manana quite as
frequently as his fellow-countrymen.
If Pepe’s superstitions were limited to his
gambling games, those of his stout spouse were
not. The mere mention of a mariposa negra
would start Maria trembling as if with ague.
Superstitions die hard. Fear and superstition
are primitive passions of mankind, and though
civilization may replace one fear with another,
superstition is never completely routed, even
in the most highly civilized social structures.
The old Romans said Beware of the Ides of March;
the Chinese dread the evil eye, New Englanders
burned witches; New York society matrons turn
pale if it is discovered that there are thirteen
guests at table. So Maria and her sisters walk
warily if they have been unfortunate enough to
be brushed by a black butterfly.
Maria had good reason to regard the mariposa
negra with fearful apprehensions. Had not a
black butterfly heralded the death of her mother,
who was drowned on a voyage from Guagua to
Manila? To be sure, the party had departed
from the river town in a banca with but two
inches of freeboard. They had left the grassy
estuary of the Pampanga, and had faced the
choppy waves of the bay where, in spite of
tearful prayers to the saints and frantic baling,
the overloaded banca had sunk beneath them.
Unable to swim, four of the passengers, among
them Maria’s mother, had gone down under the
gray September sky. Maria announced with conviction that a black butterfly had entered the
entresuelo to warn her at the very moment her
mother had been lost. Numerous stories of
similar experiences were common among her
chattering neighbors, their effect being a general
exodus, or at least a rapid exchange of vantage
points, if one of these unpopular messengers
fluttered in among the market hucksters. But
Pepe refused to believe. He was a skeptic
so far as black butterflies were concerned, and
Maria swore by all that is holy that his cynicism
was the cause of his disastrous end.
It was a hot steamy day in September with
the tropical sun evaporating the moisture of the
previous day. Preparatory to leaving his
abode to sell his melodies, Pepe was trying to
tune his bandurria, but was having difficulty in
hearing anything but the boisterous noise of
the numerous young Garcias who were playing
gallina ciega, or blind-man’s buff. Maria was
busying herself as usual with household tasks,
paying little attention to sounds which were so
much a part of her daily life.
Suddenly through the open window fluttered
a large black butterfly, attracted perhaps by the
gaudy color and pattern of the musician’s nether
garments. As the butterfly alighted on his
knee, Pepe, in mood as untuneful as his unsuccessful efforts had left his bandurria, hit
wildly at the butterfly which flew gracefully
about his waving arm."


“Hombre,” shrilled Maria fearfully, "leave
the mariposa alone and perhaps it will leave
the same way it came in! It’s bad luck to have
one come in here—what will happen if you try
to kill it!”
No sooner had Pepe given vent to some comforting expletives than two of the tightly drawn
cuerdas snapped with a loud, reverberating hum.
“What did I tell you?” wailed Maria. “There
is the beginning of misfortune and we are lucky
if it ends there.”
With another oath, the irritated musician
made a lunge at the butterfly, which was perched
on a cluster of bananas, slowly opening and
closing its wings.
“Leave it alone!”
Maria’s excited voice informed the children
in the room overhead that something out of the
ordinary was happening, and down the stairs
they tumbled, a toddler of three bringing up
the rear.


Certain deaths which occurred with
the sinking of the interisland vessel
Euzkadi some months ago, were attributed to the malevolence of a mariposa negra. Presaging disaster, one of
these flutterers entered the house of
the third engineer, Rafael Lintojua,
the day before the ship grounded, and
flew about in crazy butterfly fashion
until the family was greatly perturbed.
“The ship ran on the rocks November
23", said the widow, "and on the morning of November 24 in the morning my
attention drawn to a huge black butterfly which came into the house and
passed round me several times. On
Seeing it, I at once thought of my
husband...” So the belief keeps up,
nothing being more natural, and brings
Mr. Hill’s story up to date.—Ed.


The family wash in a deep wooden batia filled
with water had inadvertently been pushed under
the lowest step, and the eager brood descending
with more haste than care were precipitated into
this washtub, from which, to the accompaniment
of soapy howlings they were hauled out just


OXY GEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure


HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hydrogen
99.8% pure


ACETYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes
WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops
BATTERIES


Philippine Acetyler. Co,
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, ACO


MANILA, P. I.


Prest-OMAt
Electr *
age Ienles


as the neighbors, with the  
of Manila vecinos, came fi g
e d megr the
cause of the commotion n ae
household. When they heard esin ".an the
black butterfly and wha' A Ia v. d, some
2 e y; others
hurriedly made the sigi
looked accusingly at Pep.
a g larkly
at his wife, the children, no WEno
ighbors,
and even more fiercely " n ah s *of the
black butterfly, took ur . ar 8. left the
house and made his wag
Chino
store, intending to repair ng wekan mgs.
Arrived at the tienda whie: sugpk a the needs
of the quarter, he found ton sis ay store
cugh a
of silver and copper had bsci r
a had negwide hole in his pocket, ha
m
irn to the
lected to repair. Not wn " of a young
house, he continued on 1.
renew his
student hoping to urge t la
a certain
musical attack on the a
beuse facing
young lady who lived in .
 dividing
the Estero Cegado, then
napo, named
Santa Cruz from the qu
for its unsalubrious wa...nm . the student
mes to renew
Ariston, after some pers
his jarana that evening, maa  a repair the
serenader’s bandurria "e aty produced
ne broken
after a little anxious
3 Rgers were
strings replaced, Pep.
.¡istrument,
soon bringing forth me 
roret his grievand in its harmonious ton
 true philosances and the black to rt
opher, he would enjoy then cut  atil reminded
that he must eat ard .in , wh it would be
borne in upon him thg iw :qis: ¿eplace the lost
coins.
With his instrument annea his arm, the errant
musico was passing thro . b one of the crowded
alleys of the quarter is: hat afternoon. The
darkening skies promih. lally deluge of rain,
and he was wishing he : i some of his melodies
converted into money  hat he might take as a
peace-offering to Marl. Sounds of merriment
reached him, and ha aised h is head and looked
hopefully in the dir ciion fro a which they came.
Despite the morning’s eucurrences, luck was
with him. Amanat nwind asaw him standing with his banima under his arm and motioned for him so er et. fIs irst thought had
been the money be migat e.n, but when Pepe
was in the midst mt the gatherii and had accepted a drink of qnieade, he was not so much
the professio'..' qusicias s h vas one of the
guests—enta tainir g the emaper in a passable
Voice with , cancion of Din Spam.


7.
1e


SrS 1al ag
Ciel." Sun


Po buede, no paedo sair,
“arque las ojos. aar nl,
Motera min, m mmg a mil
Over and oven agtin the r velers sang the
chorus. As ome drink foli wed another, the
party g. dvelier ani noliewer, and Pepe’s
brain Fecame more confan ad the while longpracticed. "agers stremmnos his instrument,
ceasing em, so stun sonia of the indigestible
bibinka nig a hungi:! a.
At mm o’clock. Ahe r
the guests depating, the hest, with a generous
measure of finite y, drn pel some silver coins


into  epe's hand
the money litos


'In


sen naving ceased and
in, spirits he slipped
e shouldered his ban

durria and went gany off h nne to bed. A peaceful night was not awaiting him, however, for
Maria greeted him with a sobering anger recalling the morning’s happenings, and when he
sought to console her with his afternoon’s earnings he discovered there was nothing left in his
pocket but the hole. Pepe took the offensive
and scolded his wife for her neglect in not reahung ne rent, but Maria wailed that it was
a3 tha ault of the black butterfly. They threw
moids e each other with such violence that the
chilna awoke and added their share to the
Silence finally reigned, but moody
hadl-:
discor still prevailed.
Nes morning, witn an aching head, the Santa
ng roubadour betook himself into the sunstreets in search of a few stray coins.
ad scorned the black butterfly, but now,
 he cursed inwardly at the thought of the
lonal, ast he had gone without, he began to
ngh e it had something to do with his mis

IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE CNER T CH4 BER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


August,


E


AMERI


HVINEBER OF CUMERCESRCJCRNANAL


23


He was not long without occupation in a
Manila which will always have music when it
can. At the corner of the plaza he was hailed
by a fellow-musician, attached to a wedding
party, who needed a bandurrista to complement
him. Pepe ioined the procession issuing from
the old church, and marched with his companions
of the guitar, violin and bajo, who were escorting
the strutting groom in tight fitting pantaloons,
and the little brown bride whose blushes were
visible through her dusky skin. This wedding,
as weddings usually do, ended in a feast at the
bride’s home. Tables were piled with food,
polished hardwood floor crowded with dancers
swinging their partners to the strains of old
contradanzas, with the elders on the sidelines,
complacently chewing icho, or pellets of buyo,
lime and the aromatic leaves of the tomo vine,
commenting to each other on the scene, or
joining lustily in some of the canciones. Musicians
and guests alike were absorbed in the merry
scene.
No one saw a black butterfly as it fluttered in
and alighted on the pink and white blossoms of
the cadena-de-amor decorating the tables.
Almost immediately it flitted away, circled above
a heap of headgear in an obscure corner, and
rested on the hat which crowned the pile. Alas
for Pepe; it was his hat the butterfly had chosen.
A matanda, an old man, industriously chewing
buyo, directed a stream with such good aim in
the direction of the perhaps not so innocent
cause of Pepe’s estrangement from home, that
the startled mariposa flew around and around
until it seemed to Pepe, who had come to rescue
his hat from further drenchings with buyo juice,
that he alone was singled out for persecution.
Smothering his annoyance, which was flaming
into rage, he endured somehow to the end of
the party. When he received his pay, this time
he carefully tied it in a corner of his none too
clean handkerchief, went triumphantly home
and turned both money and handkerchief over
to Maria, who set out to do the daily marketing.
Fearing he might start her on her pet grievance, Pepe had wisely refrained from telling
Maria whence came the spots on his hat, but to


himself he vowed a war of extermination against
black butterflies. During the next few days he
did destroy one or two, but generally they were
elusive adversaries. It came to be a kind of
obsession with him, and he was regarded by acquaintances with mingled feelings of awe and
admiration. Try as he would to conceal his
activities, rumors reached Maria, who, after the
fashion of women, attributed all the bad luck
attending the household to her husband’s failure
to heed her warnings.
If Pepe had a misgiving now and then, he
argued with himself that certainly not all the
myriad mariposas haunting the gardens of Santa
Cruz—and there were many in those days—
could presage evil fortune. Did Providence disperse misfortune only during the rainy season?
To be consistent, bad luck should be as little in
evidence during the dry season as were the attendant butterflies. But Pepe could not convincehisneighbors of his logic. They saw, they
knew, they believed; and they, as well as Maria,
were strengthened in their superstitions by the
visions of the village prophetess.
Dona Guadalupe was a pious old woman who
lived on calle Dulunbayan, devoting herself and
what wealth she had to the church. For a long
time she had suffered from hallucinations and
visions of the most terrifying variety, and because
of these she had a certain influence on both saints
and sinners of the quarter. Sometimes she
remained for more than a day stretched motionless on her huge carved bed, with staring eyes
and haggard countenance. Then, starting up,
she would reveal awful futures for the sinful and
thoughtless. The religtosos declared these visionsandprophecies to be a providential warning
to mortals, but though the good friars said she
suffered from ecstasy, the doctors called her
malady epilepsy. Whoever was right, she
became the boast of the quarter which had
its pride in the supernatural. They doubted
that the miracle of the loaves and fishes surpassed the revelations of their sage.
In the last interview Maria and some of her
gossipy neighbors had had with Dona Puping,
the epileptic-prophetess claimed she had been


spt thly ordered to have them repent and flee
from wrath to come. If their hearts remained
hard they would receive as a visible sign a visit
from the mariposa negra. Maria had burst
into sobs and rushed home, convinced that she
was already a marked victim of divine displeassure
If Pepe wished to forget the existence of his
Nemesis, he could not during the days that
followed. Black butterflies pursued him on
every hand, and he in turn pursued them. The
accidental killing of his pet monkey by a stone
intended for a tantalizing mariposa but furnished
another cause for his frenzied offensive against
the flying enemy. And Pepe as well as the
entire neighborhood was made uncomfortably
aware of Maria’s condemnation of his behavior.
Came the twelfth of October, the feast day
of the quarter, and a gala fiesta was under way—
processions with carozas carrying jewelled and
flower-decked statues of Nuestra Senora del
Pilar other saints, and a half dozen brass bands
marching with the more religious of the parish.
At the head of the procession, behind the manguilla bearing silken standards, proudly walked
Pepe, withtwenty other musicians, accompanying
in harmonious rythm the intoned Gregorian
chants, orplayingslowcontra-danzas. Urdarib:
watchful, piercing eyes of Spanisl trias o
neighboring quarters, the crowds on na ageoy
sidewalks observed a respectful ana dacoron
silence as the procession moved sloiy in an
out the short streets, careful not to go begona the
Santa Cruz boundaries into Binondo o"apoOn the south a paseo, where the thuh wasituated, ran along the Pasig river.
As the company emerged from a coling tour
of the side streets and swung into g na cow
causeway leading to the river ban: . blacl.
butterfly—portentous omen!—flitteo .citudis
Pepa,
about and settled on the hat of
of course! Exasperated, obsessed,y sropped
playing, made a grab for the ene n, which
saucily flitted ahead, flew coyly about cho crimson and purple banners, returned impertinent!
to Pepe and boldly alighted on his nose. Ifuriated, he lifted his instrument, and las the


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


S
CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIP
14-16 CALLE DAVID
MANILA, P. I.


TIE WVIMTEEMTRESS OF THETCFio


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


24


THE AMERICAN CEAMBE
DE CMMMERSZ JOUIN'AL


Zuguse, 1929


butterfly flew gracefully off again. Pepe s
after it. He would kill this insect at feast.
The procession halted in curiosity. The
startled musicians ceased playing, and were
chided by a tall friar who bade them continue.
Half-heartedly, they resumed, but all eyes
were intently watching an obsessed bandurrista
vainly batting at a black butterfly. The pursuit
took Pepe to the very edge of the embankment.
The next moment the insect had darted off
across the river, and Pepe, intent only on destroying his foe, seeing no danger, took another
step and plunged into the muddy current.
Heedless of the friars' reproofs, the crowd rushed
to the river’s edge. But the musician had disappeared beneath the whirlpools of the swollen
stream, and as they looked, his bandurria sunk
also.
River bancas were quickly manned, but the
unfortunate Pepe never came to the surface.
Had he met his fate chasing a phantom? The
procession wended its way to the church where
aves and pater nosters were offered up for the
soul of the troubadour who would draw no more
melodies from his instrument for the fiestas of


Santa Cruz.
When the sad news was announced to Maria,
between sobs she recalled each warning the
family had received—beginning with the morning
when Pepe had broken the strings on his bandurria, when he had first chased a black butterfly.
“If he had only listened to me!” she wailed.
A few days later the corpse was discovered by
an artilleryman of the King’s Regiment. An
eddy had whirled it beneath the arches of the
Bridge of Spain to a quiet pool below Fort Santiago. Thus did Pepe leave Santa Cruz. When
his fate was mentioned, neighbors shook their
heads knowingly. They agreed with Maria.
Though it was non-canonical to believe in superstitions, the natives of Santa Cruz had witnessed the occurrence, and after all, seeing is
believing. The good friars alluded to a religious frenzy, but they, of course, did not believe
in evil omens, and besides, they were knoyn to be
charitable souls. Certain it was in any case
that a black butterfly did bring disaster to the
musician Pepe Garcia.


the sensations and tumult of politics.. She
Her economic emancipation is bound to bring
in any way destroy the home, nor will the home
be deprived of its moral and religious backof the spouses and between parents and children.
The conjugal tie will no longer be a forced and
perpetual bondage, impossible of dissolution
even in the face of immorality, discord and unhappiness in the home. Its duration will depend
on the voluntary will of the spouses, of their
mutual respect and fidelity in performing their
duties.
The church, in the same way as the family,
will remain as a human necessity, because the
soul is linked to the supernatural, and reason
needs religion and faith to satisfy the longings
of man for immortality. But the individual
will no longer be forced to submit himself to the
religion of his parents, nor to the dogmas of a
particular religion. He chooses his religion
even now, and within it he accepts those beliefs
that satisfy his reason. If he worships and
follows his belief in good faith, he is entitled to
all rights and privileges as a man and citizen.
God has not disappeared from the conscience
of the modern world, but the conception of God
has changed in the sense that He is no longer
made to sanction crimes born out of intolerance
or the abuse of power, either by the father of the
family, the head of the Church, or of the State.
All authority is no longer absolute; it has its
corresponding limitations and responsibilities.
God is still the supreme sanction of individuals
and of nations. But God no longer abides only
in the tiara or in royal robes, but also in public
opinion and in popular assemblies.
WThe state is another necessary human institution, and whatever changes it may receive in
the future, it will always exist as a power of
unity and coordination for the determination of
the limits of freedom of the individual and of a
group. ‘The head of the state, as such, is no
longer irresponsible nor is he above the law.
His authority is exercised by delegation from
the people, and even in monarchies it is limited
by constitutions. The state can no longer
deprive a person of his life and n-pert
due process of law. The mun efa
and the privilege of comr anentna ma a inviolable as is one’s person banng in a extension. The ¡ndividual is  nata
not its slave, and public o rio" aee lect not



Understanding Our Age
(Continued from page 11)
and feed her spirit not only with knowledge of to ride on the back of the people but to be their
books and experiences of travel but also with servants.
In the realm of education, the doctrine of inattained her economic emancipation when she dividual freedom has manifested itself in the
saw wide open the doors of the office, the shop, elimination of the old practice—“Quod magister
the school and other fields of human activity. dixit.”  The teacher is not supposed to dogmatize. He has no longer the right to impose
about in the long run a common level of culture, on his pupils his own theories or personal beliefs.
a single standard of morality, an equality of He is expected to stimulate free discussion of
rights and responsibilities between the two sexes. the subject he teaches, leaving to his students
This change of system in the family will not the choice of the system of thought which best
satisfies their reason.
All these changes have been brought about
ground, because the love of the spouses and the gradually and by natural causes as a result of the
natural affection parents have for their children sufferings and miseries borne by humankind in its
ill remain essentially the same, however difdifferent stages of development. Humanity
pent may be the rules observed in the relations constantly tries new theories and doctrines, only
to give them up as soon as others more effective


JFIELD with a gun—
in the Philippines—
where game so abounds!
Here again we have everything to suit
S
you fro m
E
E

gloves and

hunting knives
to the guns
 themselvesWinchester, Remington,
Fox, Ithaca, Lefever: a
wide choice of the best.


SQUIRES BINCHANCO.
15 Plaza Goiti Manila, P. I.
Phone 2-13-01


ENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN


for the redress of past grievances and misfortunes are discovered. The tendency of humanity has always been for the better, inasmuch as
any people’s desire for change is prompted by
the need of freeing itself from the abuses and
excesses of institutions when the rust of time
and the greed of power have corrupted them.
Thus, because of the excesses of parental authority, the family regime was changed from the
communistic to the individualistic type; out of
the extravagances of the Holy Roman Empire
was born the Reformation which promoted in
later years religious tolerance; because of the
abuses of monarchs, popular assemblies were
brought into life. It is still to be seen whether
from the abuses of parliamentarism and democracies may come another form of government
which shall better respond to the exigencies of
our epoch.
Religion, morality, family and government
will always remain as essential and necessary
institutions in the world, and there is no human
force that can destroy them, because they are
founded on the nature of things. But their
forms will not remain the same and unalterable.
They will change with the ideals and aspirations
of humanity as fast as the latter discovers new
truths and understands better the workings of
matter and of spirit.
Now, in a world which guarantees complete
individual freedom, the education of men and
the women cannot teach the norms of conduct
and habits of action characteristic of an age which
subjected the individual to the control of the
family, the church and the state.
The best that education can do in our times
is to train the individual forfreedom in order that
he may make good use of it and not misuse it.
Training for freedom requires a constant and
methodical exercise of the will, in order to control
bad instincts and stimulate good ones. There is
need of creating moral restraints within, and not
without, the individual, by developing properly
in his conscience precise notions ot good and of
evil and leaving him to his own responsibility.
Man should do good and avoid evil as a matter
of duty, through conviction, and not through fear
or consideration of punishment. He should
feel ashamed of himself whenever he is willfully
at fault, even if no other detect his dishonesty.
If man were always inspired by what his conscience reveals to him and should endeavor to
suppress the lower impulses and passions which
torment him, then he would rise to a position
where he would be used to performing goodunconsciously and mechanically. This is the state of
culture toward which our age is bound, and this
can be accomplished if all the agencies for good
that exist in the world toregulate human conduct,
be it of the family, the church, the state, or the
school, coordinate their efforts and reconcile
their mental attitude with the ideas of our
century. The difficulty lies in the fact that
there are still many who will not admit that the
world has been improved, with its changes and
innovations, and that God is with the modern
world, in all its marvelous progress and scientific
discoveries, in the same form that He was with
the old world—when man knew little of the
laws of nature and enjoyed fewer comforts and
conveniences.
Why should we refuse to see the will of God
in the truths revealed to the human conscience
by the modern world? Who but God inspired
the prophets of the modern world, as wise and
learned as the prophets of the old, in the teaching
of new religious, moral, economic and social
truths which every day are enhancing the power
of human intelligence and opening new fields
for its research and investigation? Why place
our century at odds with God? Why should it be
considered that God has turned His back upon
our world, simply because it exerts every effort
to better conditions of human existence and tries
new forms of conduct and rules of action more in
accord with the realities brought about by the
inventions, exigencies and discoveries of our
age? Is it that God desires paralysis and stagnation in life? No, I would say not. God has
placed us on this planet in order constantly to
improve it and to beautify it. God has endowed us with the faculty to think in order that
(Please turn to page 29)
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


IN RESPONDING T


THI TAIHERICANCHAMIBEKUT CUMMEKCE JOUKNAL


Augw'
AN


29


guis of the Roman Catholic Church
GIBBON—(Continued from July)


The chaste severity of the fathers, in whatever
related to the commerce of the two sexes, flowed
from the same principle; their abhorrence of
every enjoyment which might gratify the sensual,
and degrade the spiritual nature of man. It was
their favorite opinion, that if Adam had preserved
his obedience to the Creator, he would have lived
forever in a state of virgin purity, and that some
harmless mode of vegetation might have peopled
Paradise with a race of innocent and immortal
beings. The use of marriage was permitted only
to his fallen posterity, as a necessary expedient
to continue the human species, and as a restraint,
however imperfect, on the natural licentiousness
of desire. The hesitation of the orthodox casuists
on this interesting subject betrays the perplexity
of men unwilling to approve an institution
which they were compelled to tolerate. The
enumeration of the very whimsical laws which
they most circumstantially imposed on the
marriage-bed would force a smile from the young
and a blush from the fair. It was their unanimous sentiment that a first marriage was adequate to all the purposes of nature and of society.
The sensual connection was refined into a resemblance of the mystic union of Christ with his
church, and was pronounced to be indissoluble
either by divorce or by death. The practice of
second nuptials was branded with the name of a
legal adultery; and the persons who were guilty
of so scandalous an offence against Christian
purity were soon excluded from the honors, and
even from the alms, of the church. Since desire
was imputed as a crime, and marriage was tolerated as a defect, it was consistent with the same
principles to consider a state of celibacy as the
nearest approach to the divine perfection. It
was with the utmost difficulty that ancient Rome
could support the institution of six vestals; but
the primitive church was filled with a number of
persons of either sex, who had devoted themselves to the profession of perpetual chastity.
A few of these, among whom we may reckon the
learned Origen, judged it the most prudent to
disarna the tempter. Some were insensible and
some were invincible against the assaults of the
flesh. Disdaining an ignominious flight, the
virgins of the warm climate of Africa encountered
the enemy in the closest engagement; they permitted priests and deacons to share their bed,
and gloried amidst the flames in their unsullied
purity. But insulted Nature sometimes vindicated her rights, and this new species of martyrdom served only to introduce a new scandal into
the church. Among the Christian ascetics,
however (a name which they soon acquired
from their painful exercise), many as they were
less presumptuous, were probably more successful. The loss of sensual pleasure was supplied
and compensated by spiritual pride. Even the
multitude of Pagans were inclined to estimate the
merit of the sacrifice by its apparent difficulty;
and it was in the praise of these chaste spouses
of Christ that the fathers have poured forth the
troubled stream of their eloquence. Such are
the early traces of monastic principles and institutions, which, in a subsequent age, have
counterbalanced all the temporal advantages of
Christianity.
The Christians were not less averse to the business than to the pleasures of this world. The
defence of our persons and property they knew
not how to reconcile with the patient doctrine
which enjoined an unlimited forgiveness of past
injuries, and commanded them to invite the repetition of fresh insults. Their simplicity was
offended by the use of oaths, by the pomp of
magistracy, and by the active contention of
public life; nor could their humane ignorance
be convinced that it was lawful on any occasion
to shed the blood of our fellow-creatures, either
by the sword of justice or by that of war, even
though their criminal or hostile attempts should
threaten the peace and safety of the whole community. It was acknowledged that, under a
less perfect law, the powers of the Jewish constitution had been exercised, with the approbation of heaven, by inspired prophets and by
anointed kings. The Christians felt and confessed that such institutions might be necessary


for the present system of the world, and they
cheerfully submitted to the authority of their
Pagan governors. But while they inculcated
the maxims of passive obedience, they refused to
take any active part in the civil administration
or the military defence of the empire. Some
indulgence might, perhaps, be allowed to those
persons who, before their conversion, were already engaged in such violent and sanguinary
occupations; but it was impossible that the
Christians, without renouncing a more sacred
duty, could assume the character of soldiers, of
magistrates, or of princes. This indolent or
even criminal disregard to the public welfare
exposed them to the contempt and reproaches of
the Pagans, who very frequently asked, what
must be the fate of the empire, attacked on every
side by the Barbarians, if all mapkind should


You’ve possibly wondered,
right up to now, why Scotchmen’s sticks are crooked.
—Judge.
But there’s one thing preeminently straight and fine about
the Scotch—
It’s
RCODERIBOIN
SCOTCH WHISKEY
For Highballs!
Of course,
For cocktails the knowing Manilan always relies on
UORDOly Giy


Kuenzle and Streiff
Importers
Manila, P. I.


adopt the pusillanimous sentiments of the new
Asct. To this insulting question the Christian
apologists returned obscure and ambiguous
answers, as they were unwilling to reveal the
secret cause of their security; the expectation
that, before the conversation of mankind was
accomplished, war, government, the Roman
empire, and the world itself, would be no more
It may be observed that, in this instance likewise,
the situation of the first Christians coincided
very happily with their religious scruples, and
that their aversion to an active life contributed
rather to excuse them from the service, than to
exclude them from the honors, of the state and
army.
(Continued in September)


Americans Occupy Manila:
August 13, 1898
(Continued from page 9)
superior force, as otherwise he would subject
himself to court-martial. The same process was
gone through, only in more dramatic form, on
the 19th, when the Americans took possession
of the custom-house almost at the point of
bayonets; and similar formalities, though less of
theatric display, were connected with the transfer
of control over the treasury, the mint, and internal revenue office. There was naturally
delay in assuming charge of the affairs of civil
administration, as the first days were occupied
with the posting of the troops and the military
and the provost organization necessary to control
the situation and police the city. For a few
days, the so-called Veteran Civil Guard (native
soldiers organized to serve as police in the city
of Manila) remained in their places under their
Spanish officers, but this was impracticable for
various reasons, not the least being the bitter
hostility of the native population to this organization, which was only too justly accused of
past abuses.
The conception which the Spaniards generally
had held of the Americans, as being no respecters
of persons, property, or religion, may be seen
from the astonishment which they expressed at
the literal fulfillment of the clause of the capitulation relating to the churches and other property pertaining to the Catholic worship. As
for the foreigners resident in Manila,
they have never failed to render tribute to the
effective way in which they brought about and
kept order in the city, with comparatively few
instances of disregard of private property.
Both Merritt and Dewey had dispatched
cablegrams to Hongkong, for tramsmission
thence to Washington, as soon as the city fell.
These messages did not reach Washington until
the morning of August 18. But Washington
had meanwhile received word of the arrival at
Hongkong on August 15 of the Kaiserin Agusta,
a German battleship, bearing there ex-GovernorGeneral Augustin and news of the capture of
Manila, this vessel having taken the Spanish
general on board and started for Hongkong just
before the flag was changed over the city. The
peace protocol had been signed on behalf of
Spain by Ambassador Cambon of France at
about 4.15 p. m. on August 12 in Washington,
or at the same time that the American troops
were drawn up in their trenches, all ready for
the attack, on the dawn of the 13th at Manila.
The orders to suspend hostilities, cabled from
Washington on the 12th, together with the
text of the protocol, which provided for the
occupation by the forces of the United States of
the city, bay, and harbor of Manila, pending
the negotiation of a definitive treaty, did not
reach Dewey and Merritt, through Hongkong,
until August 16. The Spanish governor-general
at once sought to have the terms of the capitulation nullified and the American occupation of
the city based upon the protocol; but the American official attitude at Manila, as also later at
Paris in negotiating the treaty of peace, was
that Manila was captured, and was not surrendered in consequence of the protocol.
(Please turn to page 29)


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


26



THE
AMERICAN CHAMBEKOF


E JUURNAL


Aug, 1929


Haphazard Studies in the English Language
The University Dictionary which is sold by the MANILA DAILY BULLETIN at two
pesos the copy, contains an essay on Common Errors in English by Dr. Farquson
Johnson that will be run in installments in this department, commencing with this
issue. For it is at once interesting and instructive; indeed, the editor of the JOURNAL,
benefited by it greatly in his own diction, has seen nothing comparable to it anywhere. For this essay alone, he would not part with his own copy of this convenient
English vocabulary at any price—unless he might, for the pittance at which it sells,
obtain another. Dr. Johnson’s pages fairly glow with linguistic erudition, as the
student will observe. But the original was proof-read carelessly, and the errors
which therefore appear in it have here been corrected. Where there are references
to the main vocabulary, etc., any standard English dictionary may be consulted.—Ed.
(Continued)


any. Often improperly used for “at all," as
in “He cannot swim any,” "She does not learn
any.” Such usage should be avoided. “He
is not any better” is permissible, though most
writers prefer "no" to "not any.
anyhow, anyway. These colloquialisms appear
to be strongly intrenched in American speech,
though objected to by certain writers. In
formal diction they are replaced by "in any
event, at any rate,” etc.
any manner of means. Used improperly
for "any means.” It is a redundancy, owing
a certain popularity to its alliterativeness.
any place. "Are you going any place?” should
be “Are you going anywhere?”
anyways, anywheres. Unnecessary variants
of anvway, anywhere.
apt. Frequently misused for likely and liable.
““He is apt to fall” should be “He is liable to
fall," or "likely to fall.” Apt is correctly
used when the meaning to be conveyed is
“inclined or disposed customarily.”
appreciate. A common error is to "appreciate
a person highly,” which is an impossibility,
since to appreciate is to set a true value on,
to estimate justly. In the sentence quoted
“esteem" should be substituted for “appreciate."
The word is also now used with the meaning
“to rise or increase in value” and is widely
applied to prices of commodities, real estate,
etc. In this sense it is the opposite of “depreciate," and this use is well established.
apprehend. Do not confuse this word with
comprehend, as is so often done. Look up
these words in the main vocabulary of this
dictionary and compare their meanings.
approach. Incorrectly used to mean to address, petition, or appeal to, as in “The policemen approached the council for more pay,”
which should be “petitioned.”
Approach is being used to imply bribery
or underhand methods; as, “Meanwhile the
senators were approached by a powerful
lobby.” One can approach a subject by suggesting it, or approach a person in any sense
involving bodily proximity.
aqueduct. Be sure to sound the final t in
pronouncing this word. So many times it is
erroneously omitted by those who should know
better,
Arab. Pronounced Ar’ab, not A’rab.
arabic. Mispronounced a-ra’bic. Should be
ar'a-bic.
arctic. The first hard c sound is often wrongly
omitted. The proper pronunciation is ark’tik.
area. Pronounced a’rea, not a/ri.
aren't. Colloquial contraction of “are not,”
but undesirable.
argue. Should be distinguished from dispute.
To dispute is to disagree. To argue is to
adduce reasons. We may dispute a bill, but
do not argue it.
Argue is properly used in the sense of manifesting by inference; to imply.
Arkansas. Mispronounced Ar-kan’zas. It is
Ar’kan-saw according to the law of that State.
arraign. Prepositions are often wrongly used
with this verb. A man is not arraigned at a
court, but in a court, at the bar, before a
judge, on indictment, for crime, upon his
arrest.
articles. In every sentence clearness of meaning is the first requisite. Too much attention cannot be paid to the correct use of articles, upon which the meaning often depends.


“The president sent for the secretary and
treasurer" may mean that he sent for one or
two persons. If two persons are intended, all
ambiguity would be removed by saying “the
secretary and the treasurer.”
artist. A much-abused word with which the
“doctor" and the “professor” can sympathize.
Properly applied to those who practice the
fine arts, its use has been commonly extended
to include “artists” in hair dressing, on the
tight-rope, and at the soda fountain, and the
bootblack "artist” barber’s hop. The original
artists now prefer to be called painters, sculptors, etc., rather than share the glory of the
term with its modern claimants.
as... as so... as. The former is used in
affirmative statements—“I am as good as he,”
the latter in negative propositions—“She is
not so young as you.” This distinction,
however, is too frequently overlooked.
So. .. as, in negative sentences, conveys
an impression that one of the persons or things
compared possesses some characteristic in a
considerable degree, as in the sentence, "Mary
is not so good looking as John.” Here it is
implied that John has a high degree of good
looks. This suggestion is lacking when as. ..
as are used.


Press verbosity has obscured the actual situation of the Philippine National Bank to an
extent which justifies a statement of salient
facts regarding it.
The reorganization act went into effect January 1, 1925. The bank’s total profits from that
date to June 30 this year have been P14,701,000,
distributed according to law: Reserve for
redemption of circulating notes, P3,500,000;
surplus, F6,176,000; to the government on
indebtedness, P5,025,000.
At the time of reorganization, to enable the


The
Phiippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS SURETYSHIPS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
Eoans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest
Callor write for particulars
Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
P. O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


as far as. Used interchangeably witpisforas,” except that the latter prevails umanphasis is to be laid upon the degree omh as
implied in the phrase. The rule applieSY
to as great as, as long as, as soon as, etc.
aside. Sometimes misused for apart. Prof.
J. S. Blackwell writes, "Aside, in the sense of
separately, as a subiect of thought, is an Americanism, and is unknown and altogether un;
exemplified in correct and classical English.”
In spite of which Dr. William Mathews boldly
uses "aside" and says:
“Words have a potency of association aside from their significance as representative signs."
asperse. Often confounded in meaning and
use with detract, defame, slander, and calumniate. “Asperse” has a meaning all its own;
it fixes a moral stain on the character. If we
speak slightingly of our neighbor, we asperse
him, though we may not defame, slander, or
calumniate him. The correct use of "aspersion" is seen in the words of Steele: “Let
those who may be apt to raise aspersions upon
our family please to give us an impartial account of their own, and we shall be satisfied.”
astonish. Do not confuse this word with
surprise. When Mrs. Blank discovered her
son taking a glass of milk from the cupboard
late at night, she said she was surprised.
Having studied the dictionary, he replied,
“No, you are astonished; I’m surprised.”
Look up the definition of these words in this
dictionary
at and in. “At" is less definite than "in" and
may indicate mere proximity to a place. It
is proper to use “at” before the names of
small towns, foreign cities far remote, and
houses. “In" should be used before the
names of the great geographical or political
divisions of the globe, countries and large
cities; as, "He teaches in Paris; she sings in
New York.”
“At" should be used before the
number of a street and "in" or "on" before
the name of the street; as “The officer was
found at 427 Jay Street.” "At" and "in" may
often be used interchangeably, as, "He was


bank to adjust its bills receivable to a sound
basis, with bad accounts written off, the government cancelled the bank’s indebtedness to it in
the sum of about P62,000,000, capital and deposits, reorganization providing, however, for
the redemption of this debt with future profits.
To date, P5,025,000 has been so redeemed, and
the amount remaining to be balanced off is
P57,000,000.
The bank is a heavy taxpayer, paying some
₱800,000 annually in taxes on its circulating
notes, deposits and capital, and in income taxes.
Last year the bank’s net profits were well
over two millions, and a better showing has been
made during the first half of this vear, net profits for the six months being P1,584,000—to
surplus, P396,000; to the government (included
in the P5,025,000 above), P1,188,000.
More than 50% of the bank’s business is with
the sugar industry, whence derives the bulk of
its profits. Its loans to sugar planters approximate P25,000,000; those to sugar mills (as
industrial capital, used in the main to build
the five bank sugar centrals in Negros), P29,000,-
000. Four and a half years ago, when the reorganization act took effect, this latter sum stood
ai P48,000,000; during 41/a years, that is to
say, the mills have repaid the bank P19,000,000.
As the stockholders, Filipinos, pay the bank,
they increase their paid-up shares in the mills.
Both the loans to sugar planters and to sugar
mills are classified apart from agricultural loans,
yet in effect they do aid agriculture materially
and directly. Since February it has been the
bank’s policy to undertake no new obligations
in sugar, owing to this commodity’s position in
the world markets. No loans for new centrals
are made, nor loans for planting additional cane
areas not connected with any existing central.
Crop loans are made, on the other hand, to
maintain the existing mills at their maximum
capacity during the grinding season.
It is said that this arbitrary restriction of the
sugar industry (so far as the National is con

Pr
Philippine National Bank’s Present Position


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


 UIIRlBER UA


OAnivaEia


urvran


born in or at Paris.” “At” is used after the
verb touch; as, “The vessel touched at QueensH. town.” Either may be used after the verb
lla
“They arrived at or in Liverpool.”
ng arrive; as, "
In the phrase, “Where am I at?" born in
Congress, "at” is redundant and unnecessary.
“In the South” is to be preferred to "at
the South,” though there is authority for the
latter. Say, “He is at home,” not “to” home
—a common error.
at all. This phrase is unobjectionable, though
usually superfluous. “I saw no birds at all”
would suffer no loss by the deletion of "at all,”
but the latter phrase is sometimes a convenient addition and is used by some writers.


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - WALTER E. ANTRIM


A Pair of Land Act Secrets


The extracts of land law in the Philippines
about to be quoted are from Act 3517, passed in
the first session of the eighth Philippine Legislature and approved January 30, 1929. Secrecy
veiled the course of the act here; if any section
of the press was aware of what was transpiring
between the legislature and the executive (Stimson at that time), a discreet silence was maintained. The first news Manila had of the act
came from Washington and announced that
President Coolidge had given the act his approval. The islands’ organic act required this.
‘The act purports to be an act to amend certain
sections of Act Numbered Twenty-eight Hundred
and Seventy-four, knownas “The PublicLand Act.”
Legislation concerning the public domain in
the Philippines now embraces four or five acts
and is quite a muddle even to men of legal training and experience. Whether designed deliberately to do so or not (at least much of it), it
confronts the pioneer homesteader with a problem beyond his ability to solve; he therefore has
no security in applving for and attempting to
develop a homestead, from which, by the device
of the law’s intricate procrastinations, he might,
when improvements were made and crops planted, be summarily ejected.
in an early issue, a digest of the public-lands


legislation as it now stands in the law will be
published, for the purpose of giving our readers
as much light on the subject as possible. Meantime, here are a pair of secrets belatedly divulged
in the complicated phraseology of act 3517:
“No member, stockholder, officer, representative, attorney, agent, employee or bondholder
of any corporation or association holding or controlling under lease or otherwise agricultural
land in excess of one hundred and forty-four
hectares shall apply, directly or indirectly, for
agricultural public land except under the homestead and free patent provisions of this act."
“Upon the final expiration of the lease, all
buildings and other permanent improvements
made by the lessee, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors, or assigns (,) shall become
the property of the Government.”
A paramount reason for attempting a clarifying digest of the land laws of these islands derives
from other conditions. The sugar industry
pegged at its present position, and emigration
drastically curtailed by exercise of the Federal
police power, more than ever before it becomes
imperative to establish settlers on the public
domain, and to mitigate the poverty which restriction of industry and freedom of movement
will entail.—Ed.


AREA IN HECTARES AND POPULATION OF PHILIPPINES PROVINCES


Provinces


Population
Commercial Non-Commercial
Cultivated Cogon and Open
Add 1.750%
Land
Forest
Land
Toret
Total
for each.
year since
1918


cerned) is based solely on the bank’s judgment
that sugar loans are extraordinarily hazardous
while sugar is selling at such low prices. As to
the other banks, there is effective supervision
through the bank examiner; the government has
means, in short, of making its restriction policy
felt.
Tolling the planters' crops 40% to 50%, sugar
centrals in the Philippines, on the long-term
milling contracts they have, are faring satisfactorily during the present period of market depression. But the planters aren’t doing so well
at their end of the industry. Renters particularly are in a bad way, while a small profit
still remains to the owner-planter who is a
thrifty manager. While the present governmental policy continues in force, production of
centrifugal sugar in the Philippines will be quite
effectively limited, in so far as banking can control the situation and the government’s fiat can
be enforced.
Frequent items appear in the Manila press
about steps being taken to convert the National
into an agricultural bank, the urge behind such
statements not being readily apparent. In
effect, it seems that the bank’s commercial
business derives directly from its agriculturalbank character. It markets large quantities
of sugar in America every year, for the centrals
it has financed; it has the proceeds to bring back
to the Philippines, and does this through the
medium of exchange. This is the basis of its
business as a commercial bank.
Sugar loans aside, the National now has out
on long-term agricultural loans nearly the maximum share of its capital and surplus, 70%, which
the law authorizes to be used in this way, the
loans amounting approximately to P11,300,000,
and terms ranging from one to ten years. There
are more demands, and the bank is preparing to
make use of its legal privilege and float real
estate bonds in the United States to meet these
demands. The bank is authorized under the
law to issue real estate bonds secured by existing loans and mortgages, the proceeds of the
bonds to go into other agricultural loans. This
is the proposed next step in aid of Philippine
agriculture.


INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBERETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: "YPIL,” Cebu.


20


75


Abra...............


46.3


77,025


33,910


Agusan.............


86. 5


61.83





74.565


Albay.......... . . . .


41.4


165.550


25.4


101,60


Ambos Camarines...


45.2


333,956


15.5


143,83


Antique .......... ..


16.8


3,250





46,555


Bataan.............


66.0


62605


84


10,060


Batangas.......


10.3


33,960


19.5


64,00


Balame..


ie


2,550


2ii


4.65


Bohol.............


21.


6500


4.2


16,740


Bukidnon...........


45.


.980
454,9


33


3,23
.


Bulacan............


79,353


1.1


36,765


Cagayan............


ei


38


5.8


40,578


Capiz.......... .. . .


San


17.5


7400


Cavite......... . . ..


9.3


11,215


Cebu............. ..


.5


23,000


AS


Cotabato...........


. 4


1,960,52





59,685


Davao.............


65.5


1,260,502


25.5


494,62:


Hlocos Norte........


$1.6


103,717


us
41,


locos Sur..........


ise


Iloilo...............


7.2


38,339


An6e


Isabela.............


61.4


180
644,


i


6,96


Laguna.............


15.4


28,836


a:


40,544


Lanao..............


65.4


412,88


25,970


La Union...........





SD0


Leyte ........ .. .. ..


50.0


9cea5


ea


47518


Manila.............


Mindoro............


. 49.0


499,296


13.4


136,456


Misamis............


a73


127,902


6i5


Moumtal...


6.8


949,055


11,339


Nueva Ecija.....


55.5


190,823


i


184,947


Nueva Vizcaya......


i60
2


6,420


Occidental Negros...


65





18,50


Oriental Negros.....


51.2





62


or


Palavan............


88.


85


1


eidof


Pampanga........





19,555


13.6


55



Pangasinan.........


26
91,02


.0


50,895


Rizal...............


520


12.1


ebe


Romblon...........


2.


g


4A


5.67:


Sumans..


65.0


s1s6e


14.


196,033


SOROEON.....!....


28.4


167


2


55.86.


Sulu..............


4



70


,545


Surigao.............


548,406


3.6


22,20


Tayabas............


22


45,382


2118


1033


farimer...





80
556,48


14.8


160,755


Zamboanga.........


1,320,233


3.


65,132


Zambales...........


39.3


144,595


14.2


52,228


Total. . .. .. .. .. .. 54.5016,120,190 9.1962,704,602


75


14,150


7
41.)


156,940


382,025


71,721


2


57,935


1.3


Age


1,112,146


44,358


9.6


117,554
162,541





3,72


39
6006


258.77


22.6


123


92,121


758,409


271,34


t1.7


30,62.


59.5


155.819


61,549


159,64-


20.1


25,00


5.8


,260


Iaa So


553,360


34


112,290


36.0


118,375


328,930


340,195


18


46.7


,8.935


19,166


8,214


7.3


10535


43.7



175


397,824


359,600


2.2


1,660


8.6


287,123


1,002,588


47,81


112,470


in


sioo5


60,813


248.562


25.9


201,253


15


154.056


778,813


95,93


21.2


96,136


44 2


155500


442,890


292,496


18,815


41.8


50,251


120,176


157.34


43.0


208,015


3


214,780


483,55:


857,41


0.6


14,130


2.9


72,640


2,491,580


169,1


53


106,567


13


6o.ge


1,938,874


119,30


19.6


65,570


36.5


123,755


334,887


18,951


$.6


68,263


38.8


44,35


114.478


2i7,an





145,398


de.s


292.550


528,360


508,27


193


193,860


19.5


204,460


1,040,468


uzso5


36.3


67,878


26.6


49,740


186,968


195.37


13


,090


7.9


50.730


631,701


94,946


54.4


483


25.3


34s40


50.650


160,575


26.3


205,026


7.5
100.6


132,444


778.205


557,995


1.7


17,761


34.5


3,620
351,975


62
1,018.424


283,613
73,822


3.1


8.244


6214


266.770


198,981


3.3


54,389


35.2


654,950


1,668,77.


50,023


12.1


64,944


17.8


55,157


Sesgnl


and


2it


165


154,070


$14,270


35,819


155


155,525


30.0


242,740


809,375



es2


18.3


89,920


24.1


118,573


492,618


215,541


40,26


4.4


61,038


1,455,321


65.061


105,975


28.1


50933


213,157


257.641


185.383


3.


131.754


503,46


567.644


14.


SG00


83,591


2


230,205


is.s


50
33,85


35.746


64,576


13.6


161.58


34


68,47


1,355,606


380,21i


24.3


143,345


36."


217,2


58
88,96


178,362


6.3


17,58


1114


siso


286,23.


B.


415


1.4


6.61


748.251


SEO


24.5


1450


38.8


isz


305,162


211,59


1.8


128.50


1s.5


201,255


1,086,505


72,022


1.9


31,506


78,924


1,653.197


147,551


16.5


40,277


34.8


25 300


368.039


83,620


12.5903,719,465


18.7705,548,838:


29,629,600


10,350,640


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


28


  OF COMMER


RNAL


 


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, The Robert Dollar Company


In Philippine shipping the month of July
was considered by owners as normal. Aside
from one parcel of 5,000
tons centrifugal sugar,
Trans-Pacific to the Pacific coast, there was
nothing unusual in that
trade. A slight falling
off in the eastbound
movement was noticeP
EEO
able, but this is the

usual condition at this
time of the year. The
westbound movement held up very well, imports
to the Philippines showing no noticeable change
either up or down. There was a decided drop
in exports to the Atlantic seaboard, due entirely,
however, to the light shipment of sugars, which,
at this season of the year, can be expected. The
milling season is completed in most sections during May; consequently, June, July, August,
September and October are off-sugar-season
months. The movement of other commodities
in this trade remained about the same as for the
month of June. The European trade was not
quite as brisk as usual, although shipments of
baled fibre remained at about the usual monthly
figure of 50,000 bales. There were also several
good-sized parcels of Philippine hardwood
shipped during the month under review to the
U. K. and the Continent. There was no noticeable change in the trade tonnage between the
Philippines and other oriental countries during
July. There continued the usual fibre and hardwood movement to Japan ports.


From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines, there were exported from the
Philippines during the month of June, 1929:
To China and Japan ports, 13,594 tons with a
total of 46 sailings, of which 2,137 'tons were
carried in American bottoms with 10 sailings;
to the Pacific coast for local delivery 19,133 tons
with a total of 13 sailings, of which 17,083 tons
were carried in American bottoms with 10 sailings; to the Pacific coast for transhipment, 1,669
tons with a total of 10 sailings, of which 677 tons
were carried in American bottoms with 7 sailings; to the Pacific coast for intercoastal 2,149
tons with a total of 7 sailings, all of which were
carried in American bottoms; to the Atlantic
coast 106,614 tons with a total of 26 sailings, of.
which 53,245 tons were carried in American bottoms with 10 sailings; to European ports 20,221
tons with a total of 23 sailings, of which 162 tons
were carried in American bottoms with 4 sailings; to Australian ports, 954 tons with a total
of 2 sailings, of which American bottoms carried
none; a grand total of 164,334 tons with a total
of 78 sailings, of which American bottoms carried
75,453 tons with 20 sailings.
Passenger traffic during the month of July
increased very little over that of the previous
month. (First figure represents first class,
second figure steerage): To China and Japan
138-378; to Honolulu 3-457; to the Pacific coast
82-339; to Singapore and Straits Settlements
33-16; to Mediterranean ports 14-2.
The Bank Line recently announced having
placed orders for two more motor ships for its
Pacific trade. Construction will take place at
Belfast. The Bank Line now has a total of ten
ships under construction, six motor ships and
four steamers. The general particulars are425 feet in length, 57 feet in beam, 38 ft. 6 in.
in depth, 9000 tons dead weight capacity, 26
ft. loaded draft and a trial speed of 14 knots.
The Matson Navigation Company of San
Francisco, California, one of the oldest and best
established American Shipping firms, has re

cently inaugurated a new fast direct freight
service from Los Angeles and San Francisco to
Manila, Iloilo and Cebu and ether Philippine
ports as inducements offer, to be known as the
Manila Direct Line.
The voyage from San Francisco to Manila will
be made in twenty-three days, which is the fastest as well as the only direct communication
between California and the Philippine Islands by
American steamers.
Three 13-knot, 10,000 ton modern freighters,
equipped with refrigerated space and deep tanks
for the carriage of coconut oil in bulk, have been
allocated to this service, beginning with the
S.S. Maliko which sailed from San Francisco
on July 12, arriving at Manila on August 5; to
be followed by the S.S. Maunawili on August 9
and the S.S. Maunalet on September 6 and every
twenty-eight days thereafter.
Returning homeward the above vessels, after
loading at other Philippine ports, will sail from
Manila for San Francisco via Honolulu at intervals of four weeks, beginning with the S.S.
Maliko on August 24.
It is expected that steerage accommodations
will be installed on these vessels in the near
future and it is further anticipated that the
Matson Navigation Company will inaugurate a
direct passenger service to and from San Francisco and Manila, although no definite announcement has been made as yet.
The States Steamship Co. has been appointed
General Agents in the Philippine Islands for the
Matson Navigation Co.
A very important announcement during July
came from the Dollar Steamship Line, San
Francisco, when executives of that company informed the public that commencing with the
liner President Hayes they inaugurate a new
service between San Francisco and Los Angeles
and the Philippines. This liner, it was stated,
will sail from San Francisco September 3, call at
Honolulu and arrive in Manila September 26 or
27, returning to San Francisco and Los Angeles,
via Hongkong and Honolulu, sailing from Manila
September 29.
It is proposed by the Dollar Steamship Line
shortly to place their liner President Monroe also
in this service and give an arrival and sailing at
each port of call each four weeks and it will be
noticed that the running time San Francisco to
Manila will be 22 or 23 days actual steaming,
dependent upon later announcement as to the
arrival date at Manila. This will constitute the
fastest service between the Pacific coast and the
Philippines.
The President Hayes and President Monroe
are sister ships, 522 feet in length, 68 feet beam,
speed 14 knots, with a first class capacity of
approximately 100 and 500 steerage passengers
each. Each lifts 9000 measured tons of general
cargo, in addition to 1000 measured tons of refrigerator cargo.


SHIPPING PERSONALS
F. M. Chalmers, manager, shipping department, W. F. Stevenson & Co., returned to Manila July 10 aboard the S.S. Machaon, after a
six months’ vacation spent in Europe.


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig S von Knobelsdorff
Agents
Phone 22324
90 Rosario, Manila


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


August, 1323


THE AIHERICAN UHAMBER OF COMMEKCE JOURNAL


29


H. M. Cavender, general agent, The Robert
Dollar Co., Manila, was a recent visitor to Hongkong in the interests of his company, having
left Manila on the S.S. Presideni Pierce June
28 and returned aboard the S.S. President Taft
July 8.


Robert Woodfine, connected with the operating department of The Robert Dollar Co., Manila, underwent an operation at St. Paul’s July 2.
Mr. Woodfine’s recovery was rapid and we are
glad to see him about again.


Leonard Yates, Far Eastern representative of
the Prince Line, with headquarters in Hongkong, was a visitor to Manila in July, having
arrived aboard the S.S. Machaon July 10 and
returned to Hongkong aboard the S. S. President
Tafi July 12.


O. D. Martinez, oriental operating manager
for The Robert Dollar Co., with headquarters
at Shanghai, arrived in Manila July 2 aboard the
S.S. President Harrison and returned to Shanghai July 6 aboard the S.S. President Jackson.
Mr. Martinez was on a business trip in the interests of his company.


Walter Sokall, formerly connected with The
Robert Dollar Co., Hongkong, accompanied by
Mrs. Sokall, passed through Manila July 16
aboard the S.S. President Johnson enroute to
Naples, Italy, where Mr. Sokall will take up
duties as general agent for the company.


S. G. King, formerly connected with the
Chicago office of the Dollar Steamship Line,
accompanied by Mrs. King, arrived in Manila
July 4 aboard the S.S. President Jackson to take
up duties in the passenger department of The
Robert Dollar Co.


Ole May, assistant passenger agent, The
Robert Dollar Co., was married to Miss Phoebe
Davis of Los Angeles on July 15. Mrs. May
arrived in Manila aboard the S.S. Prestdent
MCKinley July 15.


E. W. Latie, accompanied by wife and son,
arrived in Manila July 25 aboard the S.S. Empress of France to take over the office of the
States Steamship Co., as general agent, relieving Hecter Hunt, who is leaving Manila on the
S.S. Empress of Russta for the United States.


L. Everett, president of the firm which bears
his name, accompanied by his family, sailed
for Shanghai July 26 aboard the S.S. President
Jefferson.


F. A. Vezina, formerly passenger agent, Canadian Pacific, Manila, left Manila aboard the S.S.
Empress of Asia July 5 for Montreal on a six
months' furlough. Mr. Vezina has been relieved
by G. R. Razavet, formerly in the passenger
office of the Canadian Pacific, Hongkong.


J. M. W. Munro, formerly acting manager of
the shipping department of W. F. Stevenson Co.,
Manila, during the absence of F. M Chalmers
on furlough, is now in charge of the Tloilo office
of that firm during the absence of H. Thompson,
on furlough.
Americans Occupy Manila:
August 13, 1898
(Continued from page 25)
By the operations of the United States Signal
Corps, cable communication between Manila
and Hongkong was restored late on the night of
August 20, and the first message that it bore
direct from Washington was one of congratulations from President MCKinley. On the 26th,
General Merritt was instructed to turn over
the command to General Elwell S. Otis, who had
arrived on August 21, at the head of the Fourth
expedition, comprising nearly 5,000 troops on
four transports, and himself to proceed to Paris,
after consulting fully with Admiral Dewey, in
order to present his information and views and
those of the admiral to the Peace Commission
there.


Understanding Our Age
(Continued from page 24)
we may use it at all times to the best advantage
and in order that we may dedicate it to the task
of exalting human endeavor. Evil has always
existed, and will continue to exist, side by side
with good, in order to stimulate our diligence
and eternal vigilance in making the world better
fitted for habitation by intelligent and gregarious
individuals, destined to live within the pale of
peace and love and not as voracious beasts in
the wilderness.
I hope that our colleges will understand fully
their mission and will seek to train their students
not merely to be professional and technical men,
but something better—men of broad culture and
open mentality, men of their age who understand
that the world is in constant rotation and that
their country cannot remain beyond its influence; that everybody has the obligation of
contributing something to human achievement,
in order to make the world a little better than
when they came into it. The fountains of life
and knowledge are inexhaustible, to the end
that humanity may drink in abundance and
slake its persistent thirst for boundless and
infinite advancement.


The annual report of ex-Governor Stimson was
published in full in the Manila Daily Bulletin
of Thursday, August 8. It is for the year
Stimson was here, 1928, and reiterates that the
land laws must stand as they are, that Manila
is a place of intransigent sentiment, etc., some of
which is rather interesting reading. Coming at
a time when the JourNAL was being made ready
for the press, no more notice than this pageclose can here be taken of it. Maybe space will
be available next month.


AMERICAN MALLNNE
BOLARSIEAS LA
COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
SAILING
The "President” Liners Offer
ONCE A
ONCE A
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
WEEK
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
WEEK
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


TO SAN FRANCISCO


ROUND THE WORLD


VICTORIA


ANT
LOS ANGELES


President Wilson -
President Van Buren


Aug. 14
Aug. 28


AND
SEATTLE
via


Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu


President Hayes
President Polk


Sept. 11
Sept. 25


Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama


SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE FRIDAYS


President Garfield -
President Harrison -
Sailings every fortnight


Oct. 9
Oct. 23


SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS


24 Calle David


MANILA


Telephone No. 2-24-41


T EN  A EEN EEAN ANN O NEEAN CEEN G CN




E
THE AMEKICAN UHAMBEK UF COMMERCE JOURNAL


AugUSt, T925


30


On The Futility of Tennis
You serve your vis-a-vis the ball
And cut it—kindly thought;
You find you might have spared yourself
The pains—for "love" is naught.
Your fair opponent lofts the ball
And hits you in the sinus;
“Oh, deuce!” you cry; "Add out!” she smiles,
And adding leaves you minus.
You hit the ball an awful slam
To show the thing who’s boss;
Net profit meanly sneaks away
And leaves you with net loss.
-A. R. E.


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporation


Copra.—Heavy buying pressure principally
on the part of local mills
advanced the market at
provincial concentration points during the
mist thrce Wecis ol
July. Heavy buying was
undoubtedly the result,
to some extent, of the
much improved London market. Production was handicapped
Aduring the early days
of July because of bad
weather but registered considerable improvement during the last week of the month. Notwithstanding the strong demand from local
buyers, further advance in the market seems
unlikely, in view of anticipated good production,
unless outside markets re-act for the better.
Total arrivals at Manila during the month of
July were 334,474 bags as compared with 396,005
bags for July, 1928.
The improved bids from the Continent were
the outstanding feature in the copra market
during the past thirty days, prices having advanced approximately E3-0-0 for August/September shipment. This upward movement, we
are advised, was due almost entirely to shorts
covering, and the market closed with the London
market quoted inactive at 222-2-6 which is
approximately El-0-0 lower than the peak July
quotation. Latest cable advices as follows:
Manila, buen corriente, P9.00 to P9.25;
arrival resecada, P10.00 to ₱10.25; San Francisco, $.04-1/4 nominal; London, f. m. m. in
bags, #22-2-6.
Coconut Oil.—While large U. S. soapers displayed little interest in the improved European
market, buyers for the edible trade advanced
their bids for comparatively small lots of coconut oil to 7-1,/4 cents f. o. b. tank cars New
York. Trading at these figures might have
assumed fair proportions but sellers became cautious and displayed little eagerness to trade.
With the Continental market today is quoted
inactive at 7 cents f. o. b. tank cars New York.
Cottonseed oil, while on the whole steady thruout July, was reported easy as the market. closed,
due to favorable weather reports from the Cotton Belt. Latest cable as follows:
San Francisco, 8.06-578 to $.06-344 f. o. b.
tank cars; New York, $.07 f. o. b. tank cars;
London, no quotations.
Copra Cake.—Continued July strength in the
grain markets was reflected in a better demand
from all sources for copra cake. Some trades


for Hamburg were reported at prices ranging
between #8-15-0 and E9-2-6. Pressure of resales
during the last week of the month has caused
buyers to become cautious and though quotations remain practically unchanged at E8-15-0
there was little business to test the market.
With the well-sold-up position of local mills,
there should be nothing, as far as the Philippines are concerned, to depress the market up
to the end of the year. Latest quotations as
follows:
Hamburg, E8-15-0; San Francisco, $35.50 per
ton of 2000 lbs; Manila, sellers P65.00 to P70.00
per ton of 1000 kilos ex godown; no buyers.
Manila, August 5, 1929.


Here’s how to


get Manilas!


Genuine


Manila


Hand Made


Long Filler


Cigars are


obtainable


in your city


or nearby!


*


List of


Distributors


furnished


upon


request


to—


C. A. BOND


Philippine Tobacco


Agent:


15 Williams St.


New York City


or


DO


Collector of Internal Revenue


Manila, P.


.I.


Manilas


will


satisfy your taste!


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


RAw LEAf:—During July the greater part of
the new Isabela crop has been bought from
the planters. Average prices contracted were
about 20% above last year’s figures. This increase in price was chiefly caused by smaller
production and expectations of a higher proportion of appropriate cigar leaf. Exports maintain a satisfactory volume for July. Comparative figures are as follows:
Rawleaf, Stripped Tobacco and Seraps
Kilos


12,077
China......................
8i8,901
Czechoslovakia................. ..
33,844
Hongkong.............. . . . . . . . . . .
23,500
Japan........................ . . . .
30,911
North Africa.............. . . . . . . .
82,452
North Atlantic (Europe).....
Spain............. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,896,948
1,888
Straits Settlements.. . . . . . . . . . . . ...
53
Tonkin............... . . . . . . . . . . .
95,658
United States............ .. . . . . . .
14,421
Uruguay................ . . . . . . . . .


SANAOS
June, 1929................... 2,541,531
July, 1928................... 404,491


CIGARS:—July showed the biggest export to
the United States for this year, although yet
considerably behind the corresponding 1928
figure. Comparative statistics covering shipments to the United States are as follows:
July 1929, about 14,850,000; June 1929,
11,202,168; July 1928, 17,228,142.


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By L. ARCADIO
Acting Traffic Manager, Manila
Railroad Company.


The following commodities were received
in Manila June 26, 1929, to July 25, 1929, both
inclusive, via Manila Railroad:


1929


June


July


Rice, cavans..........
Sugar, piculs..........


 150,250


121,937


. 178,192


2,464


Tobacco, bales.........


35,040


36,120


Copra, piculs..........


168,200


221,100


Coconuts..............


. 1,886,500


3,226,300


Lumber, B. F.........


.. 733,050


734,400


Desiccated coconuts,
caseS.......... . . . . .


12,095


12,77


THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija.
Director, Rice Producers’ Association


Prices for both palay
and rice have taken an
small advance as predicted, the former bringing from P3.90 to P4.20
at buying terminals,
and the latter P8.80 to
₱10.00 according to
grade at consuming centers.
Weather conditions
affecting the coming
crop have been favor
able since the last ren
Afport but in general the
planting season will be
delayed some three weeks in the central Luzon
plain due to loss of seedlings and other causes
which will have their effect on the coming
harvest.
Prices of both palay and rice considering the
actual domestic supply, are still low, but this is


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


August, 1929


  


31


due in part to the overseas export supply and
price. In connection with this is the fact that
Tonkin rice is again becoming a factor in the
market. Tonkin was one of the chief countries
of Philippine supply until shortly before the war.
The area devoted to rice, together with an increasing population and the turning of their
energies into other channels, cut off this supply,
which was compensated by Saigon exports.
Recently the area torice wasincreased by irrigation
projects finished since the war, with a consequent
increase of supply. As far as can be learned,
this rice, formerly destined for South China, has,
on account of troubled conditions there, been
diverted to other markets, hence the fluctuation
of price noted during the last two or three
months.
With the exception of a small increase of area
to rice in Indo-Asia, the chief fact of significance
has been the increasing yields throughout
Japan, Burma, Korea, Siam and Indochina,
which is succeeding in augmenting the supply
to provide the increasing population. This is a
lesson that might be followed by the Philippines with excellent results, if we were not given
so much to doing things by laws, brain work and
noble words rather than really doing them. It
will be some time before we can equal the success
of the backward peoples of Asia, judged by
present results.


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
BY RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


A distinct firmness
characterized the market for the entiremonth.
Slight concessions were
made from time to time
but the prevailing sell
ing rate for Uss fr
was 1-1,80% premium.
There were keen buyers
of USs Tr ready and
forward at 3,4% premium, but little export
exchange was offering.
At the month end settle
ments were being made
at 1,4% premium for
lOJD credits and 3,40
discount for 60 d/s
D/P paper.
The following purchases of telegraphic transfers have been made from the Insular Treasurer
since last report:
Week ending—


June


15th.........


..... . .. . $1,040,000


June


22nd..........


'230,000
***


June


29th........ ..


925,000
*


July


6th..........


150,000
**


July


13th.........


150,000



July


20th.........


750,000



Sterling quotations remained pegged throughout the month with sellers quoting 2,-7716 for
TT and buyers offering 2/-9/16.
On the last business day of June the New
York-London crossrate was 484 15/16. The
lowest point reached was 484 27,32 on the first,
second and third of July. A high of 485 15732
was touched on July 29th and the closing quotation was 485 5716.
On June 29th the London bar silver rates were
24 148 for ready and 24 3/16 for forward. The
low for July was 23 15/16 ready and 24 forward
on the third of the month. Quotations rose to
a high of 24 13/16 ready and 24 748 forward
on July 20th, and declined to 24 1/4 ready and
24 348 forward as of the last day of the month.
The quotation for New York bar silver on
June 29th was 52 1/4. During the first three
days of July silver stood at 51 7/8. The rate
rose to a high of 53 344 on July 19th and on
July 31st closed at 52 578.
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows'on July 31st:"
Paris, 12.35; Madrid, 149 3/4; Singapore, 114;
Japan, 94 3,8: Shanghai, 84 3/8; Hongkong,
98 3/8; India, 136; Java, 122 172.


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


July sales are somewhat lower than in
1925, 1926 and 1927,
but exceed the July
totals since 1919 as
shown by the following:
1920, 882,659; 1921,
480,105;1922, 1,029,019;
1923, 717,859; 1924,
975,450; 1925, 1,635,527
1926, 1,843,930; 1927,
894,398; 1928,, 1,478,-
663.


Sales City of Manila


June 1929


July 1929.


Sta. Cruz.......... . ..


₱175,680


249,923


Binondo..............





16,500


San Nicolas...........


105,400


406,278


Tondo............. . . .


155,547


21,720


Sampaloc.............


66,269


88,033


Quiapo.............. ..


89,712


10,500


Intramuros............


44,650


16,000


Ermita............ . . . .


20,000


121,500


Malate........... . . . . .


23,551


142,381


Paco.................. 45,801


23,047


Sta. Ana........ . . . . . .


35,225


20,001


Pandacan.............


115,417


1,809


Sta. Mesa.......... . . .


 25,300





TOLAN PAMNIINS


Me
E
B
EIN


EIIVITPED


Across America


o
 /ITH either Seattle or San
OO Francisco as your Port of
Entry into the United States, you
can take the smartly appointed
and serviced no extra fare Oriental
Limited to eastern America. From
Seattle or Portland, it reaches
Chicago in 68 hours. Follows the
courses of ten great rivers and traverses over 1200 clean, cinderless
miles behind giant electric and
oil-burning locomotives, through
mountains, forests and prairies.


Enroute you will see the illuminated New Cascade Tunnel, longest in the Western Hemisphere—
8 miles through the Cascade
Mountains—shortening the distance across America on the Great
Northern Railway. At Chicago
make connections with fast de
luxe trains for Detroit, Cleveland,
Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, New
York, Boston, Washington, D. C.,
and other American cities.


CLEAN. CINDERLESS, LUXURIOUS, SCENIC ROUTE


Apply to Tourist Agencies orTrans-Pacific
Steamship Lines or write
J. Wesley Young, Gen’l Agent, Pass’r Dept., 1205 4th Ave., Seattle, Wash.
A. H. Hebb, Agent, 916 Government St., Victoria, B. C.
Edw. A. Dye. Gen'l Agent, 607 Hastings St., Vancouver, B. C.
C. A. Gerken, Gen’l Agent, 1009 Hearst Bldg., San Francisco, Cal.
M. J. Costello, West. Traf. Mgr., Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hilirail


ADependable Railway


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


32


  


August, 1929


JULY SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


NEW YORK MARKET
—A material improveN E
ment was registered in
the New York market in
the first week of the
8
month under review,
owing to increased interest by speculators who
believed that there would
be some form of crop
control in Cuba next season, both as regards pro
duction and disposal.
The market closed very
firm on the 3rd with sales of present shipment


We live in ruined mansions,
Live as ghosts
Prowling high corridors
Where simpler men believed
And knelt and prayed unshaken in their
faith.
We make the gesture too—
Ghastly and tragic, futile and dismayed,
On winds of doubt our prayers are
whisked away,
And on we wander, doubting, after them.
Happy is he whose work becomes a fetish,
Or who for brood and spouse
Rejoices he’s a slave;
But weary he who has an hour to think,
At least to muse, beside a river’s brink
Or in a garden’s fragrant solitude
Where he beholds the old remorseless
feud
Between grim Nature, who ten thousand
SOWS
Just to make certain that the species
grOws,
And each of those ten thousand who
would be
One with the mother of eternity.
The more one ponders it,
The more he comes to feel
The Nazarene perhaps was right:
We build when we tear down,
By squandering what we own,
By making ourselves prodigals.
And now, we can’t—
Pent within cities as we are,
Far from the field, the pasture, and the
mine,
We cannot say, "Partake, good neighbor,
all is thine;"
For when we do, we starve,
And ere men learn the art of starving
They go mad.
What we must learn is how, with these
new tools,
To order living by the ancient rules;
And that’s not easy,
It will take much time
As we, in cycles, measure lapsing years.
There are great epochs,
We are in one now,
Like Babel knew in her ambitious days,
When tool-contriving has devised apart,


Cubas to refiners at 1-31/32 cents c. and f.,
equivalent to 3.74 cents l. t. for P. I. centrifugals.
In the second week a further improvement was
recorded, the market being firm at the close on
the IIth, with buyers of prompt shipment Cubas
2-1,16 cents c. and f. (3.83 cents l. t.). The
market continued its upward trend and small
sales present shipment Cubas were made to refiners on the 18th at 2-3/16 cents c. and f. (3.
96 cents l. t.), at which price 2500 tons P. I.
afloats (June shipment) were sold. The highest
price for the year was obtained on the 22nd
when small sales present shipment Cubas were
sold to refiners at 2-5716 cents.c. and f. (4.08
cents l. t.), owing to the rumor that the decree
for a single selling agency in Cuba would be
issued on the 24th of July. The following day,
however, the market was depressed with a downward tendency, when the quotation was 2-1/4
cents c. and f. (4.02 cents I. t.) at which price
there were sellers but no buyers. Prices gradually sagged thereafter owing to the uncertainty
as to the outcome of the single-seller suggestion,


Existence not of spirit nor the heart
And distant far from Nature—
Who goes slaying mercilessly until
human ken
Sets things aright within her realm again.
Such is our epoch: we can but strive
Like animals—we are!—to be alive;
To eat, to breathe, but hardly to be sane,
The latchstring drawn, no altar light,
no fane,
Only relentless effort
To keep from hungering on the bounteous
plain,
To keep from thirsting in the gracious
rain.
To keep on living.
Such is the cost of something—
Is it sin?
We have not sinned,
And less have sinned our fathers;
We are, as they, materials
With which Omnipotence, or Nature,
All’s one in the end,
Is building something for an age far
hence
Which we shall not enjoy:
So it has always been,
And Moses on that mountain, viewing
Canaan,
Is a poesy the Hebrews wrote
Into an ageless book
Telling the tale of all our lives
And ending with a tramp who damned
it all,
A game not worth the candle—
For Christ, death, in any form they
willed it,
When they willed.
He was but telling us
To build up loftier mansions than beasts”
lairs;
And when the tools we’ve made
Cease mastering all our hours,
We can: those distant generations can
Who have applied philosophy to urban
life,
As patriarchs in ages gone applied it to
the fieldOur children’s children’s children, coming
on,
Will find God in a paving stone,
And we have lost Him in the running
brook.


and P. I. sugar was quoted on the 30th at 3.83
cents at which there were sellers but no buyers.
The month closed with a firmer market, however, and the operators were buyers of Cubas at
2-178 cents (3.89 cents I. t.).
The visible stocks in the U. K., U. S., Cuba
and European statistical countries are 4,423,000
tons as compared with 4,063,000 tons at the
same time last year and 3,759,000 tons in 1927.
Putures. Quotations on the New York Exchange during July fluctuated as follows:


High


Low


Latest


1929—


July.........


.....2.23


1.88


2.19


September...


.... .2.25


1.97


2.10


December...


.....2.34


 2.09


2.20


1930-


January......


....2.34


2.13


2.21


March.......


.....2.34


2.17


2.23


May.........


....2.45


2.24


2.29


July.............2.44


2.38


2.37


Philippine Sales. During the month of July,
sales of Philippine centrifugals in the Atlantic
Coast—afloats, near arrivals and for future deliveries—amounted to 38,500 tons at prices ranging from 3.64 cents to 4.25 cents l. t. as compared
with sales amounting to 26,500 tons during the
same period last year at prices ranging from
4.02 cents to 4.33 cents landed terms.
Europe:—F. O. Licht published his third
estimate of the 1929-30 beet area in Europe of
2,625,000 hectares as compared with 2,634,554
hectares for 1928-29, these figures including
Russia.
Dr. Gustay Mikusch, in his report dated May
29, reviews the movement of sugar into consumption in Europe. Although only seven to
eight months of the current sugar year are
covered in the statistics received from the various
countries of Europe the consumption figures
show an increase of about four per cent over last
year, while for the last month covered by his
report (April) the increase is five per cent.
Surplus stocks were materially reduced by the
heavy exports.
Local Market:—The local market for centrifugals, in sympathy with the American market,
showed a material improvement, and fairly
large quantities of sugar changed hands in the
first week at P8.875 to P8.90 per picul ex godown. In the second week, prices further
advanced to P9.00 ₱9.121% but very little
sugar was procurable even at this price. In the
third week the market was firmer at the advance
but stocks were so reduced that the season
might be said to be practically over. Buyers
WVere offering ₱9.25 to ₱9.50 but no sellers
could be found. In the first two weeks muscovados were neglected at unchanged (nominal)
quotations. In the third week, however, the
muscovado market became firmer on renewed
inquiries from China for higher grades and there
were buyers on the basis of P6.25 for No. 1.
Crop Prospects. Reports indicate that too
much rain has fallen in the southern part of
Negros and most of the sugar districts on Luzon.
The setback received by the young cane during
the season of severe drouth in March, April and
May has been accentuated by the heavy continuous rains during June and July. This is
particularly so in unirrigated districts which,
however, constitute an insignificant percentage
of the area in cane. Besides heavy downpours,
intermittent squalls and storms passed over the
Philippines during July which fortunately did
not occasion heavy damage in either Luzon or
Negros, but an estimated loss of ₱10,000 from
storm damage was reported from Mindoro.
Philippine Exports. Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for 1928-29 crop, from November
1, 1928, to July 31, 1929, amounted to 614,720
tons, segregated as follows:
Metric tons


Centrifugals............... 587,474
Muscovados............... 20,241
7,005
Refined............... . .


 614,720
Total.................


JAVA MARKET:—The Java market was firmer,
large transactions having been consummated at
unchanged prices. There was an active demand
but business was somewhat checked by an
advance of Gs 0.50 per quintal. In the third
week, large sales of present crop Superiors were


Architecture


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


August, 1929


  


33


sold by the Trust at Gs 1212, Gs 12-548 and
Gs 123a successively and Browns at Gs 11,
Gs 1134 and Gs 111e. The following are the
latest quotations, after further large sales chiefly
to Japan were made by the Trust at full rates:
Superiors—
Aug./Sept, shipment Gs. 13— P7.02, per P. I.
picul f. o. b.
Oct./Nov./Dec, shipment Gs. 1334—P7.15, per
P. I. picul f. o. 5.
Jan. /Feb./Mar Shipment 1314— P7.28, per
P. I. picul f. o. b.


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the
Manila hemp market for
the month of July with
statistics up to and including July 29th, 1929.
U. S. GRADEs:—The
market in New York
opened quiet with shippers rather anxious to
sell with buyers holding
off. Selling prices were
nominally on the basis
of: D, 13-344 cents;
E,1 2-344 cents; F, 11-
112 cents; G, 8-144
cents; H, 7-3/4 cents; I, 11-3,8 cents, 41, 9-374
cents; Si, 11-348 cents; $2, 11 cents; $3, 8-172
cents. This condition existed until about the
middle of the month when there was a slightly
better tone and prices moved up to: D 14 cents;
E, 13 cents; F, 11-3/4 cents; G, 9-748 cents;
H, 7-748 cents; I, 11-1/8 cents; J1, 10-344 cents;
S1, 11-344 cents; $2, 10-548 cents; S3, 9-578
cents. Sales during the last half of the month
were few and prices declined to: D 13-3/4 cents;
E, 12-1/4 centsF, 11-3/4 cents; G, 8-374 cents;
H, 7-3/4 cents;I, 11-1/4 cents, J1, 10-1/4 cents;
SI, 11-348 cents; $2, 10-344 cents; S3, 9-344
cents. The asking prices on some of the grades
showed a gain for the month but, on the average,
values were practically unchanged.
In Manila the market was quiet on the first
of the month with shippers paying the following
prices: D, P29.50 E, P27.50; F P25.50; G,
17.75- H, ₱15,1, ₱24.25;31, ₱21.25,81, ₱24.50;
$2. ₱23; 83, Pis. Receipts were smaller than
at any time during the year but owing to the
lack of demand in the New York market, prices
moved up very little and by the 15th shippers
were paving: D, P29.50; E, P27.50; F ₱26;
G. ₱18.25;H, ₱15.25;1, P25; 71, P22;81, P25;
S2, P24; 83, ₱18.50. For the balance of the
month the market remained quiet and closed
with shippers paving: D ₱30.50: E, P28.50;
F, P26; 6, ₱is.25;H, ₱15- I, f25; J1, P22;
Si, ₱25.50, $2, ₱24, 83, ₱18.75. These prices
showed a slight gain for the month but most
of the houses showed very little interest in hemp.
U. K. GRADES:—The U. K. market opened
quiet to dull with shippers offering to sell at:
32, 237.5; K, 232.15 Li 232.15: L2. 230;
MI, 230; M2, 226; DL, E26.5; DM, #22.10.
Toward the middle of the month some sales
were made and the market was rather steadier
with shippers offering at the following prices:
J2, 238; K, 234; Li, 234; L2, 231.10, Mi,
231.10; M2, 226.15; DL, 227, DM, E22.10.
The smaller receipts had its effect and by the
end of the month the market was steady to firm
and prices were quoted as: J2, 238.10; K, 233.5;
Li, 233.5; L2, e30.10; MI, 230.10; M2, 227;
DL, E27; DM, E22. This showed a gain for
the better qualities while the lower grades
remained practically unchanged.
In Manila, the market for the U. K. grades
on the first of the month was quiet with buyers
paying: J2, P17.50; K, ₱14.50; Li, ₱14.50;
L3, ₱13; MI, ₱13; Me, Pil; DL, PIl; DM,
₱9.25. Conditions improved slightly and by
the middle of the month the exporters were
buying at: J2, ₱18.25; K, ₱15.25; L1, P15.25;
L3 ₱13.75; MI, F13.7o; M2, Pillso, DL,
₱11.50; DM, P9.25. The market for the U. K.


qualities continued steady throughout the
balance of the month and at the close shippers
were buying at: 92, F18.25; K, ₱15.50; LI,
₱15.50 L2. ₱13.50; Mi, ₱13.50; M2, ₱i1.25;
DL, ₱i1.25; DM, F9.25. There was a gain
of from ₱0.25 to ₱1.00 a picul on the various
grades with the average slightly more than
₱0.50 for the month.
JAPAN:—This market bought a fair quantity
of hemp during the last week or ten days due
to the firmness of the U. K. market. Reports
would indicate tha there is still a fair stock of
hemp on hand in the Japanese ports and consumption is only fair.
MagueY:—There was practically no change
in this market throughout the month. Buying
prices averaged Fls to P13.50 for Cebu No. 3
and ₱11.25 to F11.50 for Cebu No. 3. A few
sales were made in the U. S. and the U. K.
markets but sales did not keep pace with production. The Manila Maguey season is over
and while there is a fair amount of fiber still
stored in Ilocos Norte and Ilocos Sur, there will
be no shipments of any consequence until November or December.
ProDUctioN:—There was a decided falling
off in receipts for July and it is doubtful if balings
will exceed 120,000 bales. The bad weather
had its effect and also July is usually a month


of low production due to the fact that food crops
are being planted in June which limits production and has its effect on the hemp arriving at
market during July. Indications are that
August production will be greater than July
but will not equal the early months of the year.
FrelGur RATES:—There is no change in rates
on hemp since last report.
STATISTICS:—The figures below are for the
period ending July 29th, 1929:


Manila Hemp


1929
Bales


1928
Bales


On hand January 1st....
Receipts to date.......


158,452
965,306


139,624
781,312


1,123,758


920,936


Shipment to—


1929
Bales


1928
Bales


U. K...............
Continent...........
U. S.................
Japan............ . . .
All Others..........


205,701
1o2,770
341,384
235,141
44,809



203,856
121,424
207,762
197925
65,156


929,805


786,167


via the
66I
iorth
Coast


Limited"


Travel
East


TOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between the
AN
North Pacific Coast and
Chicago! Leaves Seattle at
11:00 A. M. for all the principal
cities of the United States. Two
days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel
is its diner service.


The luxurious, new Observation-Club car with its deep, restful lounge—cushioned chairs—
library—writing corner—club
rooms—showers—and maid and
valet service—affords many


erful, new locomotives.


You will find unusual travel comfort and courteous, personal service aboard this fine
train. The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos. Cook & Son,
Shanghai Commercial & Savings Bank or any trans-Pacific steamship company, will
gladly furnish additional information.
Oswald Crawford, G. A.
R. J. Tozer, A. G. P A.
E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
501 Granville Street
200 L. C. Smith Bldg.
912 Government Street
Vancouver, B. C.
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.
Victoria, B. C.
Northern Pacific Railway


hours of pleasure.
New-type Pullmans and pow

Stop off at
Yellowstone Park
Season June 15-Sept. 20
Without exception this is the most unique
outdoor playground in all the worid-3,500
square miles of geysers in eruption—hot colored pools--bolling lakes—the deep, brilliant
gulf of the Grand Canyon—and big, friendly
Bears to amuse you.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


34


  
August, 1929
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR WEEK ENDING JULY 20, 1929


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of MeCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.


MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


Luzon Stevedoring
Co., Inc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Phone 2-16-61
Port Area


1. Total Loans, Discounts and Over

July 20


July 18


draftS........................


₱125,174,994


₱126,251,247


2. Total Investments...............
3. Total due from banks, agencies and


19,753,237


20,320,688


branches in Philippine Islands...
4. Total due from head office and
branches which supply working
capital to foreign banks doing


20,890,877


20,865,874


business in the Philippine Islands.


8,244,591


7,358,668


5. Total due from other banks.......
6. Total cash on hand:


48,881,667


45,383,702


(a) Treasury Certificates.........


19,009,967


17,337,709


(b) Other cash available for reserve


1,221,905


1,009,866


(c) Bank Notes.................


622,137


642,256


(q) Other cash..................


418,828


403,716


TOTAL........ . . . . . . . . . .
7. Total resources (Not a total of


21,273,437


19,393,547


above items)..................


249,808,852


250,584,689


8. Total Demand Deposits..........


70,026,747


68,301,763


9. Total Time Deposits.............
10. Total due to Head Office or other
offices, representing working
capital of foreign branch banks
doing business in the Philippine


59,141,210


57,450,147


Islands............. . . . . . . . . . .
11. Total due to banks, agencies and


39,156,710


40,968,557


branches in the Philippine Islands


10,774,598


11,750,331


12. Total due to other banks.......
13. Total exchange bought by banks


1,555,976


1,656,439


since last report—spot..........
14. Total exchange sold by banks since


3,096,025


3,236,048


last report—spot..............
15. Total exchange bought by banks


4,871,069


4,043,492


since last report—future........
16. Total exchange sold by banks since


3,300,602


2,124,565


last report—future.............
17. Total debits to individual accounts


3,794,906


2,940,433


since last report...............


31,646,165


28,771,351


GOVERNMENT
Exchange:
1. Total exchange sold by Treasurer


REPORT


on New York—demand.......
2. Total exchange sold by Treasurer


on New York—telegraphic.....
3. Total exchange sold by Treasurer,
New York, on Manila—tele

1,500,000


300,000


graphic............. . . . . . . . . .
Circulation:
4. Government—


(a) Philippine Coins............


21,377,069.96


21,901,238.65


(b) Treasury Certificates........
(c) Available in Treasury for cir

98,896,980.00


100,407,941.00


culation.............. ...


(14,716,169.00)


(7,417,204.00)


21,309,984.70


5. Bank Notes........... . . . . . . . . .


21,271,284.00


TOTAL CIRCULATION. . .. .. . .
Government Reserves:
6. Gold Standard Fund—Treasury,


142,045,334.00


149,619,164.35


Manila............ . . . . . . . . . .


10,577,132.31


9,066,887.32


7. Gold Standard Fund—New York.
8. Treasury Certificate Fund—


18,487,229.88


19,987,229.88


Treasury, Manila.............
9. Treasury Certificate Fund—


21,641,281.00


21,641,281.00


New York............ . . . . . . .


84,125,107.00


84,125,107.00


ToTAL Reserves...........


134,830,750.19


134,820,505.20


(Signed) BEn F.


WRIGHT,


IN RESPONDING TO ADVDRTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


August, 1929


  


35


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


May,


1929


May, 1928


Monthly average for 12 months
ending May, 1929


Quantity


VON


25


Quantity


Value


30


Quantity


Value


5


SUa


76,076,050
* *  .. *


₱11,415,817


43.7


52,100,919


₱ 8,907,251


9.7


49,417,217


₱ 7,976,093


28


A


14,919,336
* * .. ..*. .


1,471,378


7.0


14,77727.


719,384


19.0


15,769,305


4,693,728


Coconut Oil...
* 
*
* 
.......


7,939,245
* . * * .. ..  *


2,576,026


,997,065


3,073,378


2.4


15,028,903


4.882,791


Copra.
* 
* ............ ..............*.....


12,291,107
 ... .


,300,04


14,762,380


2,968,854


2.0


19,245,976


3,848,71


E


Cigars (Number).


14,817,649
 *.. **. ..


59,36


H


13,986,209


97,250


2.5


17,725,370


1,136


Embroidery .......

 . * *
.....



... .


958,97


.6


51
9


2.2


837,28





Maguey.......
* . * . .
.. . *
* *.......... .... . * 


1,148,245
..


225,15


O.8


1,664,997


342,15


.4


1,351,413


282,375


Leaf Tobacco...
* 
* * * * * * . * *.. ... * *.........*


634,187
.. .. ..


163,99:


.6


2,083,706


22,592


2.5


1,331,420


620,312


Desiccated and Shredded Coconut........................


1,830,886
* ....


615,058





1,608,735


600,81


4


1,812,052


558,60.


Hats (Number)..
* * *
* 
 .* *
* *
leteri".............


41,949
 


131,084


0.5


2,493


356,38


1.4


136,954


678,163


Lumber (Cubic

* ..... . *


13,089
*.... .


143,3


7


15,962


296


2.0


14,128


38
494,7


Copra Meal
 * . .* * . ......
.............


6,444,113
... ..


425,838


1.6


1,951,631


128,220


8,366,195


613,293


Oruago.


515,897
...


263,374


185,811


58,514


1.0


373,519


323,689


Knotted Abaca...
*.. .*. ..* ......*. ....
* *. ..


94,151
*....  ..


349,492


25,21


6,805


0.2


48,609


160,387


Pearl Buttons (Gross
* ....
 .......



7,033
......4


59,316


74,197


70,292


0.3


61,835


65,290


Canton (low grade cordage fiber) .........................


802,520
.. * * . .


61,242





713,096


138,025


0.6


538,499


105,312


All Other Products.....................


 ..........


1,024,593


3.9


589,264


2.4


902,407


3.2


Total Domestic Products.................................





P26,062,334


99. 6


₱24,596,613


99.5


₱27,712,987


99.4


United States Products........................... . . . . ..


**


109,616


65,303


O.


129,300


0.5


Foreign Products......................................


* .. ....


12,124


35,067


0.2


42,606


O0.1


Crrand lOi.





P26,184,074


1O. 9


P24,696,983


100 O


P27,894,382


100.0


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


CARRYING TRADE


Monthly average for
May, 1929
2 months ending
Articles
May, 1928
May, 1929.


IMPORTS


Value


20


Value


75


Value


75


Cotton Cloths..........


₱3,272,7


12.6


₱2,505,832


12..


₱3,656,815


15.9


Other Cotton Goods.....
Iron and Steel, Except


1,227,003


4.7


1,058,044


5.4


1,192 267


5.4


Machinery...........


2,626,351


10.


1,564,773


1,896,473


8.3


Rice..
......4


624,642


.4


101,61


0.5


659,606


Wheat Flour...



1,432,078


270,4


9


786,319


Machinery and Parts of..


,379,956


5.a


999,36


5.


1,427,185


Dairy Products.........


507,70


96:
39:


4.8


513,106


Gasoline...............


331,62


1.3


29
2,,


eeg


Silk Goods.............


868,621


25,976
P


3.6


3.2


Automobiles............


1,132,968


4,118


3.6


32,27


Vegetable Fiber Goods...


51,453


121,503


697
427





Meat Products.........


400,09


1.5


340,04


195,0


Illuminating Oil........


473,302


1.8


367,256


24,59


Fish and Fish Products..


523,806


2.0


28,103


..6


409,766


Crude Oil..............


32,980


2.1


241,898


138,651


i


Coal.......

Chemicals, Dyes, Drugs,


464,785


1.8


393,616


2.0


445,030


2.0





474,962


1.9


375,81


1.9


409,845


1.8


Fer
ers..............


477,162


O.


504,152


2.


363,344


1.6


343,903


1.3


390,846


Vegetables ............
Paper Goods, Except


,115 1


Books.....
Tobacco and Manufac

543,790


2.1


465,203


2.3


427,710


1.8


tures of..............


899,894


3.5


726,668


3.6


543,733


2.3


Electrical Machinery..
Books and Other Printed


403,191


1.6


295,397


1.5


409,179


1.7


Matters.....
Cars and Carriages, Ex

247,374


1.0


182,048


230,317


0.9


cept Autos...
* ***.


492,08


1.9


86,584


193,635


0.8


Automobile Tires.......


6,936


0.5


210,672


302,664


1.


ruits and Nuts........


362,413


207,49


293,01-


Woolen Goods..........


71,273


112,94


113,757


.4


Leather Goods......


367


2e
00,871


246,031


0.9


Shoes and Other Foot ware


708


22,246


129,916


Coffee ........
* .
Breadstuff, Except


185,620


132,999


o."


162,717


0.6


eat Flour..........


188,653


149.7.


190,669


0.8


* 
Eggs..
Perfumery and Other


213,512


0.9


182,015


0.9


209,362


0.9


Toilet Goods .........


132,679


0.4


111,678


O.6


143,543


.6


Lubricating Oil......
Cacao Manufactures, Ex

313,968


1.1


215,833


1.1


191,539


0.8


cept Candy..........


206,267


238,540


146,877


.6


Glass and Glassware.....
Paints, Pigments, Var

189,243


8


140,363


63


175,769


O.7


nish, Etc......... . . .


136,852


O..


141,890


83


151,503


0.6


Oils not separately listed.
Earthern Stones and


150,368


0.5


148,044


147,791


0.6


Chinaware.



146,007


0.5


103,472


131,377


Automobile Accessories..
Diamond and Other Pre

188,416


0.6


110,524


64


163,892


62


cious Stones Unset....
Wood, Bamboo, Reed,


183,209


0.6


102,463


0.5


123,169


0.5


Rattan.............


141,205


0.5


93,671


.5


119,452


9.5


India Rubber Goods....


159,929


0.5


93,738


0.5


115,833


0.5


Soap....


173,306


100,77


0.5


185,67


Matches...............


74,782


0.2


112,557


0.6


80,4:


ia


Cattle.................


45,738


O.I


23,63


.1


30,939


O.1


Explosives.............


114,544


0.4


59,957


0. 3


37,734


O.1


Cement.........


33,325


O.1


7,296


0.3


91,133


0.4


Sugar and Molasses.....


7,750


76,79


27,051


O.1


Motion Picture Films....


38,434


O.


38,600


33,334


O.)


Other Imports.........


1,898,305


7.2


2,230,184


11.2


2,581,817


11.2


Total..........


P26,510,893


INO S


₱19,789,865 1


NO. O





100.


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for
Ports
May, 1929
May, 1928 12 months ending
May, 1929.


Value 0
Value
Value
22
7%


Manila................ P35,357,866 67.0 P30,642,789 68.3 P34,648,892 68.0
9,185,814 17.6
olio
6,612,572
14.8
6,714,297
Ap
6,168,74
11.7
Coou.
4,490,799 10.2
6,401,768
560, 130
Zamboanga............
586,183
165,437
87,154
o1o
57,034 O
95,673
1,057,602
2.0
Davao.
1,525,87.
3.5
1,392,580
279,659
Leganpl..........
692,340 1.6
0.5
1,050,535 2.0


TOtP52,694,967 100 0 P44,486,348 100.0 P51,193,065 100. G


Monthly average for
Nationality of Vessels
12 months ending
May, 1928
May, 1929
May, 1929.


Value


20


Value


70


Value


25


American..........


₱10,880,273
 ..-


42.2


₱ 8,910,05


44.7


₱10,174,157


44.


British.............


9,134,2



35.4


6
6,335,29


31.8


7,476,06


32.4


Japanese...........


1,334.966



5.4


1,000.054


5.2


1,015,184





Dutch..............


541,20
* *


2.4


746,821


3.9


666,460


German............


1,891,235



7.5


1,793,894


9.1


1,644,330


Norwegian.........


178,754



3.2


33,88


O.


1,114,472


Philippine..........


75,172
*..


0.6


104,873


124,530


panish............


165,866
* * .


0.9


324,634


2


179,453


Chinese............


234,131
 ..


1.2


11,897


0.1


19,412


0.2


Swedish............


13,343



7


Dannish...........


507,072
* *..


2.6


159,613


0.6


Usechoslovak.......


* *


French............


* . *


56,277


0.2


By Freight.........


....P25,649,385


96.4


₱19,261,383


97.3


P22,659,441


97.:


By Mail...........


861,508
 *


3.6


528,482
AN


2.7


538,825


2..


Total......



 T26,510,893


100 0


₱19,789,865


100. O


P23,298,599


100. 0


EXPORTS


Monthly average for
Nationality of Vessels
May, 1928
May, 1929
12 months ending
May, 1929.


Value


25


Value


7


Value


25


American..........


....₱ 8,441,84


30.3


₱ 8,986,280


36.2


₱12,972,833


46.:


British.............


9,376,817



33.9


9,453,886


38.0


7,534,292


26.


Japanese...........


3,695,350



12.0


3,441,063


13.9


3,173,764


11.2


German............


843,120
*


840,483


3.5


948,112


3


Norwegian.........


442,999



1.6


592,796


2.5


807,561


2.8


Spanish.............


* *


102,896


0.3


Dutch.............


2,201,743
*


8.4


622,985


2.6


613,077


Philippine..........


70.324



0.2


111,017


0.6


172,476


0.5


Chinese............


44,720
* * . .


0.1


12,184


Swedish............


1,214,549
* *..


4.6


252,013


0.8


French................


4,880


Dannish...........


1,292,382
..


4.9


667,272


2.3


By Freight.........


P25,623,992
*..


98.0


₱24,048,510


97.3


₱26,777,755


96. 1


By Mail...........


560,182
* * *


648,473 2.7


1,116,624


3.9


TOhall......


126. 181,074


100. O


₱24,696,983


1O 5


P27,894,382


100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for
May, 1929
Countries
May, 1928 12 months ending
May, 19


Value


77


Value


75


Value


6


United States........


.. ₱37,234,215


7.


₱29,493,707


₱35,722,554


63.


2,248,184
.


65.5


2,007,541


United Kingdom.....


1.2


1,757,120


9


Japan..


2,974,492



5.5


3,743,989


8.3


3,400,62


hina.......



2,233,064
* *


4.


2,003,151


4.5


1,784,32


23


French East Indies...


602,160
*


10,930


O.


66


Germany ............


1,488,160



1,419,127


3.2


1,29


Spain................


1,192,66
*


1,08


2.4


1,085,90:


Australia.............


32,604



O


479,000


1.)


British East Indies...


1,028,647
 *


1.8


759,957


i.7


708,68


Dutch East Indies....


117,83
* 


O.8


670,306


516


I


France................


19,9


2
I.


514,400


Netherlands..........


222,983


0.4


266,612


12


SMIA


Italy..


37,53
 


0.6


558,782


1.3


391,81


O.


Hongkong.............


P



0.5


272,164


O.


239,194


Belgium..............


575


D.8


495,878


471,968


Switzerland...........


163,06


0.3


203,437


0.5


296,016


apanese-China........


173,464


.3


114,099


0.3


136,99:


Siam........


42,350


49


37,69.


Sweden...............


2,175



33


106,977


Canada...............


105,937


91,3


108,931


Norway..............
Austria...............


169,505
6,362


.3


62,270
,529


O.


35,736
13,741


O.:


Denmark.............


20,479
*


27,678


O.


34,837


O.1


Other Countries.......


267,000


0.5


222,381


0.5


232,301


0.4


TOt


132,094,967


100.0


₱44,486,848


100.0


₱51,193.065


100. O


  


Angust, 1829


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
E
(*
“SILVER FLEEI"
Express Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigcrated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


41


E 


CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


mestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18
BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.


Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


ANIYA
5
CEALORING CO. INC
OAANA


73 Escolta 73


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


“LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
P. O. Box 1423
Manila, P. I


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: "SALEFIBER”


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


2
AR
Y
UN


 


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
P26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE


110 P. Faura


Tel. 5-69-44


Telephone 22070
P. O. Box 1394
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Investments
Collections
Income Tax
121 Real, Intramuros Manila, P. I.


Mr. Manuel Valentin
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.


244 Plaza Sta. Cruz


Manila, P. I.


Phone 2-61-30


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


IN RESTONDING TO ADVERTISENENIS FIEASE MENTION TRE ANERICAN CRANBER OF GONMERCE JOURNAL


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to be!) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


kn m
AADI
SHALL YOUR EXECUTOR BE A BANK:
You make a Will so that the needs of your dependents may be
adequately provided for. You make it now because you know the
uncertainties of human life.
These reasons argue forcibly for the appointment of a corporate
Executor under your Will. A bank does not become ill, die, or move
away. It does not go to the United States or to Europe on an
extended vacation. Its facilities do not become impaired by time or
accident and its decisions are the result of collective judgment.
This Bank makes a business of managing estates. Its fees are
the same as would be paid any other executor.


INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION
TRUST DEPARTMENT


TRUNKS


RIU HERMANOS —623-ESCOLTA-623


Manila Wine Merchants
Limited
174 Juan Luna Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


Recommended By Leading Doctors


Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake



TEL. 5-73.06


Nature's Best Mineral Water


E NO NIENANN NNN NE E MTEAN CMNEN OTCNN 


4
An acknowledged advance


in Fine-Car Style
As a motor car owner you will recognize
the spirited style and fine dignity of the
new Dodge Senior as something you have
long wanted in your car. Here you will
find a rare blending of modern smartness with large-car ease and stability—a
Walter P. Chrysler achievement.
Its excellence of engineering assures fine
performance. Its sound construction guarantees long life. And its new, advanced
style commands universal admiration.
To appreciate how richly public approval
is deserved you must see this car and drive
it yourself.


DODGE BROTHERS


CHRYSLER MOTORS PRODUCT


SOLE AGENTS
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, INC.
ILOILO
MANILA
CEBU


IN RESTONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS FLBASE MENTION THE AMERICAN GRAMBER OF CONMERCE JOUE


EY


A Size-Up of the Talkies.—A Size-Up
of Dirigible Transportation.—Editorials on
Timely Questions.—A Legend of Mount
Apo: Ivon Gruner Cook.—More from Percy
A. Hill.—Your Newspaper: First Paper
in a New Series Interpretating Our Philippine Environment.—A Pleasant Philippine Prospect: Being the Davis Article.—Lilio, Model Philippine Town.—Diet
and the Duration of Life.—Drama for Manilans: Gladys Traynor.—Trial of Alamit
the Civet: Alfred Worm—Fable of Philippine Animals.—Horticulture: P. J. Wester—More Plants to Benefit Us.—Taal
Church: Gilbert S. Perez—Another Short
Poem.—Usual Reviews of Philippine Commerce and Industry.


For Students of English:
Third Installment of Farquson Johnson


A .MAGAZINE  PREEMINENT IN - THE  PHILIPPINES


EHE EXPERIENCED
Smoker of Manila cigars
knows the quality of
ABRCALMRA
Made from the finest selected
Isabela leaf tobacco, properly
aged and cured to bring out
the best characteristics.


Try one of our CORONAS


THE STORY OF THE GOODRICH AIR CONTAINER

When a nail punctures the Air
Container it is tightly gripped by
the compression member. When
the nail is withdrawn compression
instantly closes the opening.


The tread surface of the tire,
down to this point on either side,
is reinforced by a pliable bridge
of compressed rubber similar to
an arched bow of sprung steel.


During inflation the stretch in an
Air Container is confined to that
part supporting the lower side
walls of the tire and extending
down around the beads and flap.
Another Success by
the Producers of
SILVERTOWN TIRES


Strong compression is created by
building the compression member
upon the OUTSIDE of the tube,
and then turning the tube INSIDE OUT before splicing.


Side wall blows delivered at either
edge of the compression member
are resisted, just as the sprung
bow resists further bending; and
side wall breakdown is retarded.


All inflation stretch in the Air
Container is at an approximate
right angle to the compression
member, keeping it "live” with
every flex of the tire while in
service.





THE GOODRICH INTERNATIONAL RUBBER COMPANY, INC.
DERHAM BUILDING, PORT AREA, PHONES 5-69-42 AND 5-69-43
P. O. !BOX 1482
MANILA, P. I.
L. A. COOPER, Branch Manager


N LE    EN MAMAg O MEEA V


  


ptember, 1929


Interior Street-Car Advertising
Small in Cost—Large in Results


For Rates and Particulars—Call Up
Telephone 2-19-11


Manila Electric Company
A. B. TIGH


Advertising Manager
134 San Marcelino


Manila, P. I.


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM


can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Islands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


A-INIE


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS
14-16 CALLE DAVID
MANILA, P. I.


THE WHITE EMPRESS OF THE PACIFIC


E
A MEENS O AEEO MEN TAETEN OE EENAN LEANN O N A


2


  


Septenmber,


6G
otamp


SEP3O'25AM
You have no idea how much trouble
you eliminate and how much time an
inexpensive stamp will save you.
Time stamps, date stamps, stamps for
every purpose; rubber stamps, metal
stamps; no matter what your needs, we
have it.
If you are not sure of what you could use
effectively, let us talk it over with you.
Philippine Education Co., Inc.
101-103 ESCOLTA


It’s a fine day, folks
“Rainy, yes; chilly, yes; but starting off with
a warm bath makes you face these things
with a smile. Plenty of hot water available
with a convenient
WATER HEATER
Install one in your home for your comfort and
convenience. Low in price; economical in operation; dependable, and plenty of hot water at any
moment of the day or night.
Telephone us and our representative will call
Manila Gas Corporation
Downtown Showroom:
Main Office:
Tel. 5-69-34
Tel. 2-16-43


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette Mfg. Co.
Manila, P. I.
31 Tayuman


IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALI ED!


MA 


E MEEN O NEENE EEN ENL TO NANNN NIN O


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
The American Chamber of Gommerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.
Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
P. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, VicePresident
Tohn L. Headington, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
I. C. Rockweli
Kenneth B. Day
Alf Welhaven


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Frank W. Butler
Wm. H. Rennolda


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
H. L. Hcath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Cari Hess
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
'. A. Meyer, Chairman
Alf Welhaven
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wilson


COMMITTEES
FINANCE
W. H. Rennolds, Chairman
E. M. Gross
O. M. Schuman


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
L. L. Spellman
M. M. Salccby
PUBLICATIONS
A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Benneit
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, Chairma.
W. J. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, Chairman
P.
V. Butler
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
, Chairman
I A. VIaN
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
G. P. Bradiord
L. E. Nantz
INVESTMENTS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender


A Pleasant Philippine Prospect
Governor Davis is already able to see the beautiful in the Philippines,
which means of course that he is acquiring a genuine liking for the islands
and the people living here. In his Rotary speech early in August he suggested the desirability of exploiting the islands as a visiting place for tourists, and he is following up the suggestion with plans coordinating the agencies most interested in travel, the railway, the Manila and Pines hotels,
the steamship lines. To effect what Governor Davis most commendably
wishes to effect, here are a few of the things to do:
Complete the road into Olongapo giving week-end access to that navag
station and to the beach on Subic bay.
Complete the road around Laguna de Bay.
Complete the road to Silang and Tagaytay ridge.
Complete the road from Bangui, Ilokos Norte, to Aparri, making a
circle route by motor from Manila through the Ilokos region and up the
Cagayan valley.
Extend the Manila hotel into a system of first class railway-owned
hotels, and have these operating at convenient points where tourists should
wish to travel. If necessary, guarantee 4% on the investment. The
essential is to have all the hotels under centralized responsible management.
Educate some guides, to show off Manila herself; and administer slow
poison to any of them (as hopeless cases) who conduct visitors to Bilibid
or to cabarets—the one being inevitably depressing, and cabarets inevitably discovered.
Get the Franciscans to train a willing brother to guide parties visiting
their churches and monastery in the walled city. Get them to prepare a
little pamphlet on the place. Similarly with the Augustinians, similarly
with the Recollects, similarly with the Dominicans.
Preserve, by all means, the Ayuntamiento from the city-hall crowd.
Keep it to become a museum eventually. Have guides there to exhibit the
archives, show visitors into Marble Hall and tell them something about it,
and provide them with pamphlets giving more details.
Fort Santiago is always accessible, thanks to the courtesy of the U. S.
army, but a pamphlet on the fort is sadly lacking; an illustrated, instructive
pamphlet should be prepared.
Arrange with the Ateneo de Manila for guidance through St. Ignatius
church, and for a pamphlet on Jesuit architecture in the walled city and an
historical sketch of their celebrated school.
Preserve the whole walled city, and place it under the special administration of a competent committee. Preserve Sto. Tomas museum.
For places outside the walled city, have available a pamphlet with map.
Arrange for parties tovisit Santa Clara convent, to talk, in the locutorio,
with the nuns, and to be furnished pamphlets sketching the history of the
place and its sainted foundress. For the entire city have available what is
now so lacking, a good guidebook and map.
Persuade the Augustinians to remove the wire fence they now have
around Guadalupe, and to have a guide available there. No hotel is


AES
Si0.8
Ex-MA


¡PE
ASH
ga)


MENTALLY AT EASE...
YHEN you drive the New Ford Car, you are mentally at
WW ease because you are sure of its mechanical performance.
No matter how long the trip or rough the roadway, you know it
will bring you safely, quickly and comfortably to the journey’s end.
BUY WISELY—BUY A NEW FORD!
Easy Terms May Be Arranged
“After We Sell We Serve”
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY COMPANY
MANILA
Bacolod
Iloilo
Cebu


a 


IN


ERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


4


THE AMERICAN
HAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


September, 1929


needed, but a good refreshment stand is; and
again pamphlets and posteards should be procurable.
Begin on Luzon. With success there, extend
activities to other islands when inviting interisland ships become available.
Quote fixed times and charges, always with
first-class accommodations: a week in Manila, so
much; Provincial Trip No. 1, Baguio and return,
so many days, so much money; and so on. This
implies an adequate travel folder. Not one
folder, but a series, is needed; they should not
copy Hawaii but be distinctively Philippine.
Have the railway really undertake the exploitation of Legaspi and Tabaco as visiting
points. Let the baths at Tiwi-tiwi be improved.
a good hotel be operated at a suitable beach
point, or high up the slopes of Mayon.
Reestablish a hotel at Los Banos, and exploit
those springs.
Establish a hotel at Sibul, and install more
baths. The springs at Los Banos are boiling,
curative of rheumatism, etc.; and those at Sibul
are quite cool, their sulphurous waters are unexcelled for disorders of the alimentary tract.
Sibul certainly, and Los Banos possibly, may be
made world-renowned. Tiwi-tiwi should draw
patrons even from Manila; with excursions regularly advertised and good hotels provided, no
doubt they would.
The trip to Taal to view the bubbling lava,
the chinese chapel and the church, should be
broken for the night (or for lunch, if the start
were early enough) at a hotel at Balayan or
Nasugbu, by the sea. The trip to Pagsanhan
could be best broken at a hotel in Lilio, several
thousand feet up Mount Banahaw, about midway between San Pablo and Pagsanhan. The
culture of Lilio is quite purely Malayan, influenced only by the Spanish church. Chinese
don’t live there. The same hotel would be
patronized by travelers making the circuit of
Laguna de Bay.
Many Americans may reasonably be expected
to winter in Manila, when they learn of the
place, and Manila now lacks an attractive beach.
This convenience, with golf course and tennis
courts, should be developed at Caridad, Cavite,
both for travelers and Manilans. Road improvements should continue until Caridad is
easily within half an hour’s motoring distance
from Manila. A beachside hotel should be
maintained at Caridad.
Begin advertising, but with discretion; regularly, the Post Collier'’s, the Atlantic and
Harper’s are enough among the magazines, these
to be supplemented with some newspaper advertising when such publications in large cities
are getting out their seasonal travel editions.
In the Post and Collier’s, M columns; in the
Atlantic and Harper's, 1e pages. Sunset, a good
west-coast magazine, should be patronized.
Advertise just what is to be had by comfortable
travel; let every visitor feel that he has had more
than was advertised, and above all, be sure that
he has been comfortable. Advertise in the dead
of winter the time when a tropical prospect appeals. Telling people in America in July or
August to hie away to the Philippines, keep cool
at old Cavite, bask in Baguio, would not pay.
It is only desirable to have people come to the


islands when they are sure of pleasant weather,
that is, from November to February inclusive.
But as Governor Davis has said, Baguio should
attract year-round patronage from the orient:
it has its perennial advantages as a health and
recreation resort for this part of the world.
Were the government to carry out Governor
Davis’s plans, and were it to be begin spending
something with the American magazines on advertising, it would soon remark a changed attitude in editorial circles toward the Philippines. Thus, the free publicity it would soon
be getting would far outvalue the paid advertisements, for editors would no longer be slow to
accept Philippine manuscripts. It is true that.
in judging manuscripts, editors have no direct
regard to what advertising may be in their
magazine. But they do have direct regard to
public interest. Advertising presupposes this
interest, and no advertising, or only very limited
advertising, proclaims the absence of public
interest; and if an editor, whatever his own
interest in a piece may be, feels that his public
is not interested, he pins on a rejection slip and
sends the piece back to oblivion.
There is nothing strange or occult in the fact
that these islands, charmingly beautiful as they
are, are little written about; the whole explanation is that they are little advertised. When
the Philippines are liberally advertised they
will be copiously written about, never fear;
and editors will then be willing to feature what
is written, they will respond to the public interest the advertising will be substantial evidence of. Governor Davis has a capital idea,
which we are heartily in favor of capitalizing.
Incidentally, Malacanang should be accessible
to visitors. Permission to drive through the
grounds, a brief how-d'-y-do and glad-to-see-you;
well, it may be a little bother, but it never fails
to please the Manila ticket-buyer, and it gets
right into letters home and from them into the
papers.
Davis Greets
Judge Jones
In Manila
So says the El Dorado Buncombe, quoting at
length the local jurist’s pleasant impressions of
the Philippines—impressed by that moment of
executive goodwill—but scores of other papers
in other towns give severally thetr local globetrotter as the hero of the welcome at Malacanang, and quote at length his letter. When
all these men return home, they give club and
radio talks and interviews; their wives address
women’s meetings. Advertising begins to pull,
as is said. Philippine bookings increase.


July’s unceasing rains continued well into
August. Tile roofs on Escolta buildings sprouted, and Stimson’s annual report as governor
general came out. Omnipotence itself, says Pliny,
has no power but obivion over the past. El
Debate came out too, with a story that Governor Davis will be leaving us in January.
Davis said he couldn’t give time to denying
fool rumors. Everyone knows now, of course,
that he will be here for considerable time—he has
said he will rid the government of graft. The
offending paper evidently did not grasp the full
purport of this statement.


There was an incipient outbreak of feature
articles on The Manuel Quezon I Know, as one
of the pieces was titled, but it stopped before the
versatility of the senate president’s character
was fully canvassed. The gentleman the authors
flattered ceased debating with Emilio Aguinaldo and had a birthday, his fifty-first. He
gave out a birthday statement explaining that
the functions of government and the responsibility of the cabinet now all center in the legislature, by which means the legislative and
executive branches are nicely independent of
each other. The other achievement of his fiftyfirst year was postponement of the time when
our products will be subject to American duties,
a boon for which he is grateful to the United
States—in common with us all.
Don Mariano Yulo, doctor, sugar planter and
capitalist of Negros, died in Hinigaran from an
automobile accident in which his skull was fractured. He was a senator. The funeral, for
which six horses and a hearse were imported
from Manila, took place in the afternoon, about
4:30 o’clock, and the convention nominating
Judge Manuel Zulueta his successor immediately
followed it. By sundown honor had been done
the quick and the dead.
Dr. Yulo had been governor of his province
three times, going out the third time in 1916
when Matias Hilado defeated him in the popular
election. Hilado, quixotically enough, in aristocratic Negros where men are men usually
only when they have haciendas, is a son of the
people, whom Negros knew first as a humble
circus performer—a daring contortionist. But
he had the gift of gab and the grit and native
sense to make himself a lawyer; and in 1916,
with his election over Yulo, he made himself
dictator of Negros and compelled the salaams
of those who considered themselves his betters.
With him, the star of the Hilados rose; we now
have an Hilado as lands director.
Let’s get back, however, to the house of pain
and mourning at Hinigaran, to the deathbed of
one of the best of his type to be found anywhere.
The fatal accident occurred on a night trip over
a flooded road, the driver missing a culvert and
the machine turning turtle and being carried
downstream. The law might have held culpable the chauffeur, who survived. Dr. Yulo
knew this, and in his conscious moments until
his death he kept repeating, to impress it upon
everyone, that the chauffeur was not to blame,
that the accident was unavoidable.
Yulo’s wealth is counted in millions, yet he
never used a bank. He had a big safe in his
residence and was, in effect, a bank in himself.
Yulo was much of a type with your oldtime
country squire in England, bound by quite a
strict code to those dependent upon him. Yulo’s
was an expansive, generous, honest character;
he was a man of quiet force and dignity, appreciative above all of goodwill—to which he
unfailingly responded. George Vargas by the
way, under secretary of agriculture and natural
resources, is a close surviving relative by marriage; Mrs. Vargas is a surviving niece, and her
deceased uncle was a bachelor. The fortune
will not undergo wide division. Much of it is
in sugar-cane lands.


SOCONY Long life oils
do every thing claimed
for them, and do it well


LOING LIEBOILO
“Look for the blue tin"
STANDARD OIL COMPANY OF NEW YORK


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


5


Lilio: A Model Municipality


Nestled upon one of the spurs of legendary
Mount Banahaw, the town of Lilio commands a
magnificent view of the surrounding country.
From the old church tower, crumbling with age,
but that has stood the test of time, defying
typhoons and earthquakes, one cannot help but
exult with pride upon seeing in all directions the
products of industry of the inhabitants of the
region. Without any other crop to mar the view,
one can see the magnificent coconut groves
stretching from the shores of Laguna de Bay up
the steep mountain sides. Only the tops of the
houses, with their galvanized iron or cabo-negro
roofs, break the green of the coconut fronds.
Towards the northwest is the lake, from the
heart of which rises Talim island, exhibiting as
with pride its virgin pinnacle, the Susong Dalaga.
The town itself dates back to the very first
year of the Spanish occupation of Luzon, having
been visited by Juan de Salcedo in 1570.
At the beginning, the town was a barrio of
Nagcarlan and it was not till 1604 that it was
made an independent municipality. The town
is reached by two principal routes: by way of
Pila, or by way of San Pablo, with excellent
macadamized and asphalt roads. The layout
of the town will not suffer by comparison with a
modern one, with its wide straight streets and
curbs on either side. There is excellent drainage.
From an early beginning, a mountain stream
was diverted in order to serve as an open sewer
for the whole community, and lately a modern
water system was installed, supplying the inhabitants with excellent potable water. At the
street intersections, fire hydrants were placed.
The streets are clean and what is more pleasing
to the eyes of a sanitarian is the absence of the
common scavengers, found in many other municipalities of the Islands: omnivorous, omnipresent, unkempt and underfed pigs. Pigs are
raised,—pork being one of the principal meats
consumed in the locality,—but they are raised
where they ought to be, outside of the poblacion.
A water-power electric plant furnishes excellent
light.
The houses are well built, the great majority
being of the strong-material type, with galvanized iron roofs, although some of the older ones
are still thatched with cabo-negro mossy-grown
from age.
Wealth appears to be evenly divided; outside
of farm labor, no personal labor is hired. Lilio
does not to this date know the servant problem.
So self-sufficient do they feel themselves that not
a single Chinese tienda is found within the town’s
limits, and yet its inhabitants are famed throughout the province for their hospitality. So solici-¬
tous are they of their visitors’ comforts that
during the first days of American occupation,
when the roads were bad and vehicles of no avail,
they constructed special palanquins for the
comfort of the then Governor Tait and his wife.
The presidencia occupies the greater part of a
block not far from the old church. It is of
strong-material construction, with a cement
base. The offices of the municipal treasurer, the
postmaster, and the chief of police occupy the
ground floor, while those of the municipal presi

dent, the municipal secretary, the court of the
justice of the peace and the council hall are on
the top floor. The offices are neat, with plenty
of light and ventilation. The building is provided with toilets of the modern type.
The public schools, where intermediate, primary, and domestic classes are held, occupy a


The Church at Taal
By GILBERT S. PEREZ
A calm between the June ty phoon
And the steady drip, drop, drip
Of September rain,
And the glow of sunset reds
Seeking their evening rest
In the cobalt blue of balmy Balayan Bay.
Silently beckons the ancient pile
Of dull gray stone
As it rears aloft its craggy
Lichen-covered walls,
A massive man-made mound of stone
On a God-made hill of clay.
It stands a grim memorial
Of a sacerdotal dream,
Of tongues that were wet with hunger
And of lips that were parched with thirst,
Of the silent drip of women’s tears
And of sweatdrops on mortar and stone.
On the footworn floor of checkered tile
Two roughly nailed death boxes
Silently await the incense wafted
Priestly benediction;
Two black robed groups
Of mourners, widows and orphans
Heartsick but tearless
Await the toll of the bell
In the massive limestone
Belfry,
And the bats
Flutter and flitter
Under the arches and over the burnished
Silver altars
And gather
On the dark and littered
Canvas ceiling.
A spatter of sacramental drops;
A funeral minor chant is heard;
Now the cortege slowly wends its way
To the town below, to the graveyard
By the sea,
As the brief southern twilight
Hastily merges into tropical night.
But at ten, the heavens
Send moonbeams and stardust
To the high-buttressed walls,
To the shadowland of fancy
In the angles and in the corners
Of the grim old church of Taal.


commanding position in a sloping portion of the
town. Like other school buildings, they are
ample, with adequate light and ventilation. The
domestic science building, which is sufficiently
large, was built almost entirely from private
funds. The buildings are cleanly kept and at

tractively painted. In common with many
other municipalities of the present date, it is the
school buildings that attract the attention of the
visitors in contrast with the church and convent
of Spanish days. This is but the reflection of the
present-day attitude towards education, in contrast with the old, in which religious instruction
and other pious activities were emphasized.
Here, then, we have two distinct features of the
two cultures—the Spanish and the American.
It seems that a blending of the two cultures is
the ideal goal to be pursued. Already, we are
beginning to feel the sad consequences of the
lack of a proper moral standard in many of the
youths of the country; and, while the situation
appears to be gloomy, it is still opportune to take
the necessary steps to remedy the evil.
The school playground is large and well kept,
with ornamental fountains and a monument of
Rizal in a conspicuous place to serve as an example to the aspiring youth of the land. The
churchyard which occupies parts of two entire
blocks may also be used as a playground for the
children of the town, although it is not so used
at the present time, possibly because of its gruesome association. Calachuches centuries old,
still tower proudly to the skies, but not far from
them several men and women, suspected of
being spies, were executed during the troublesome days of the Revolution.
The principal crop is the coconut and its byproducts. At the present time, there is a copra
drying plant within the confines of the municipality, where fresh copra is sent and better
products are obtained. It will be remembered
that there is no waste in a coconut palm. The
leaves may be woven into mats and the midribs
converted into brooms. Coconut husks find many
uses. Rope may be made from them, although
their chief use is for door mats. The shell itself
may be made into cups, ladles, money boxes,
and other articles of ornamental character. Fine
scrapings from the shell are used as a healing
powder for the umbilical cord and in circumcision wounds. The chief use of the shells during
the World War was for charcoal powder for gas
masks, which was found to be the most effective
and the best agent for neutralizing the poisonous
effects of War gas.
The lanzon is another important product of the
municipality, and shares fame with the lanzon
of Paete for its fine flavor. Cacao beans and
bananas are minor products of no mean importance, although they are mostly grown in house
lots, in association with flowering and other
ornamental plants. Another minor product
which has given fame to the region is arrowroot
flour from which fine biscuits are made. The
canabojo attains here a diameter as large as 8 or
more inches and is used in the same ways as
ordinary bamboo in other places.
Lilio, in common with other towns hoary with
age, may feel proud to have produced some personalities that not only made names for themselves but also served the town with patriotic
endeavor. The Dimaguilas, the Misticas, and
the Parfans are well known. The Misticas have
been prominent in town affairs since the middle
of the last century, and one of the Parfans, Don
Maximo, served as executive of the town under


Retail
Importers
OVP


ine American Drug e
BOTICA BOIL


Wholesale
Agents


MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
e have been selling drugs for 98 years


G JOURNA
TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OF COMMEL


6


  


September, 1929


three regimes: the Spanish, the Filipino, and the
American. Don Maximo Parfan, especially,
in spite of his more than three score years and
ten, is still intellectually active and in fact is a
living chronicler of the town, past and present.
The town of Lilio had an estimated population
of 7,332 in 1928. The total mortality for the
year was 160 or 21.82 per thousand inhabitants.


live births in 1928, representing a rate of 31.91
per thousand inhabitants, thus showing a substantial increase in population from vear to
year. The town has been reputed so healthy
and the quality of its waters so excellent, that
the late Dr. T. H. Pardo de Tavera frequently
spent short vacations there whenever the labors
of an active political, scientific, and literary life


method; that is, the pulp, either ground or chipped, is boiled under high pressure in a caustic
solution. The sulphite method later discovered,
employing sulphuric acid as the reducing agent,
has proved more satisfactory for extracting
pulp for ordinary papers, including news print.
Hugh Burgess and Charles Watt made wood
pulp by a chemical process, the soda process, in
Reading, England, in 1851, patented their process in 1852, and Burgess took it to the United
States in 1854, securing an American patent the
same year.


The birth rate is high, there being a total of 234 permitted.
Your Newspaper


This is the first of a series of articles on Your
Newspaper, another series interpretative of our
environment in the Philippines. It will run
until the subject has been briefly canvassed in all
its departments. Newspapers are associated
with constitutional government. They are
dependent for their existence upon one particular
product, paper; and it is one of the ironical circumstances of history that in Spain, the country
to which the modern world is indebted for paper,
the notion of a free press has never taken hold
upon the government and the business of talking
to the people through the medium of the newspaper remains closely supervised by a censorship.
Out of paper, of course, the first material
cheap enough to be utilized in printing matter
to be sold to the people, came the reforms of the
modern era and the spread of education. Paradoxically, the movement has prospered everywhere else more than in Spain. But the art of
paper-making survives in Spain, and the skill of
her artisans in the mysterious craft is unexcelled.
The Chinese seem to have been the inventors
of paper. They were making paper long before
the Christian era; through them, by way of the
Arabs, the art reached Spain. In 751, Chinese
invaded Samarkand. They were repulsed by
the Arab governor, whose troops captured many
Chinese prisoners—among them some who were
paper-makers, who imparted the secrets of the
craft to their Arabian captors.
The Arabs then began manufacturing paper
throughout their dominions, and notably in
Spain whence there was access to Italy and all
Europe. The Arabian kingdom in Spain was
finally overcome by the medieval Christians of
that country, but the arts of the Arabians, including that of paper-making, were happily preserved—to serve in time to come, who knows,
as the basis of a revival of commerce and industry in that irrepressible country. No doubt
Spain lost the paper trade because of her sales
tax, the alcabala, the deciding factor in her economic decay; the imposition of this tax enabled
rival countries making paper to deliver their
product at lower prices; at least it soon turned
out that Spain had the renown of mothering the
industry, her lot in so many instances, and other
countries had the paper business.
For more than ten centuries, or until the
period of popular education and of newspapers,
the material used for making paper was linen—
old linen rags. The Arabs were supposed to
have used wool or other fiber, but the Encyclopedia Britannica reaches the conclusion that
their raw material too was flax fiber. Even
after the advent of newspapers, linen was so
widely used, that linen rags supplied enough fiber
for all the paper the printing presses requiredbut linen gradually declined, and the use of
cotton for cloth came up, and cotton fiber is not
so well adapted to the making of paper because
it is not so strong. The intermediate step in
paper-making was, of course, to mix cotton and
linen together; and paper of this type continues
to be made for purposes which wood-pulp or
other material will not serve.
The rise of the German state founded by Frederick the Great, the liberalization of French
institutions, the success of the British colonies
in America (which made themselves into the
United States of America), the expansion of
maritime commerce which was the making of
modern England, the progress of democracy in
Scandinavia and Italy—in a word, the popularization of political institutions and privileges
in Europe and America, followed by the Restoration and the modern era in Japan—all this resulted in the daily newspaper and such demands
for paper upon which to print it as the decreasing
quantity of old linen could not supply.
There was a long period of anxious experimen

tation with other vegetable fibers during the
second quarter of the 19th century. England
turned to esparto grass, France to grain straw,
Germany to straw and wood-pulp, and Scandinavia, the United States and Canada to woodpulp. This material, wood-pulp, is for the present the most dependable fiber supply hence
Scandinavia, the United States and Canada
have world-wide commerce in paper; and Germany, getting her wood-pulp from Norway, is in
the business too. Japan imports large quantities
of paper and makes a great deal from straw and
from Manila hemp (it is believed). Manila
hemp, obtained from old cordage, was one of the
first linen substitutes used in the United States
for making paper, and on this account America,
pioneer buyer of this Philippine fiber, imported
a great deal of it during the twenty years just
prior to the Civil War."
Again we turn back to China and the ingenious
Chinese, who had always known how to extract
wood-pulp, especially the fiber of the mulberry
tree, and to utilize it for paper. But it must be
remarked that their manner of printing makes
lesser demands on paper than ours, and that they
do not require paper of such firm and uniform
texture as we must have for printing purposes.
The observations of western paper-makers were
of the wasp, which lines its nest with wood fiber,
and the secrets of this process were those to be
discovered. The mulberry was tried in America, it is true, because it had been imported from
China and widely planted with a view to the
introduction of silk culture in New England.
Basswood made paper; in fact, all plants run
75% to 78% cellulose, or fiber, and all this fiber
will make up into paper.
Economy determines what fiber shall be used.
It is necessary to free the fiber from foreign
substances, the resins, etc., making up the portion of vegetable matter which is not fiber, and
methods were found in Europe and America for
doing this chemically at about the period 1850.
Caustic soda was first used, and is still one


Milton D. Whipple of Charlestown, Mass.,
patented a method in 1855 for preparing wood
for pulp by grinding it on a stone. Chipping
was patented later; the chips and sawdust which
are waste or boiler fuel at a sawmill are suitable
for making paper, as the object of the pulpmaker is to get the wood into pieces small enough
for the chemicals to act upon it quickly. After
ways were known for laboring the wood and
extracting the pulp, knowledge which appeared
in Europe and America at about the same time,
still there was speculation as to what woods to
use. But economy soon dictated the wisdom of
backing pulp and paper mills close up to a fir or
a hemlock or a spruce forest; for there is the
material in abundance.
Then came the expansion of the American
west, the maximum period of European immigration into the United States, the rapid increase
of the population, the establishment of thousands of new communities throughout the western states and territories—all of them having
schools and newspapers and demands for paper
—and the hogging of the forests followed. In
looking up the data for this article, resort was
had to illustrated books and periodicals; among
the illustrations are photographs of many men
identified with the paper industry in America
now and during the past century, and all of these
faces are hard; there is no doubt that the game
itself has been a hard one, and that it has fashioned the men engaged in it to its necessities.
Few communities have had, in the past, more
forlorn histories than those built up by and
dependent upon the paper and lumber mills.
Where there was virgin forest, there the mills
were placed and towns established. While the
woods were nearby, everything flourished: property had value, trade was brisk and money
plentiful from the large payrolls. But ruthlessly
the timber line receded, until economy forced
the closing down of the mills and their removal
to new locations. And the towns perished,
wanting anything to sustain them; desolation"


Atiantit dull alt ratiie Co.


OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNA


September, 1929


  


7


 
ADELPIA


(1) Mill of the American Wood Paper
Company, Royer’s Ford, Pa., 1863, one of
the first wood-pulp mills in America. (2)
Papermill trademark of Joseph McDowell,
Philadelphia, 1825, making nine tons of
paper daily. (3) Curtisville, Mass., woodpulp mill of the Curtis family, historical
in the American paper trade. (4-5-6)
The way paper-making and lumbering
leaves the primeval forest when laws do
not restrain man’s cupidity. (7) First bill
of wood-pulp made in America, a Curtis
triumph. (8) Modern wood-pulp papermill, the Oxford, Rumford Falls, Me. (9)
Newest papermill in America, capacity
200 tons daily, Port Townsend, Oregon.
(10) Early mill for hand-made linen paper.
(11) The Willcox Ivy Mill, Delaware Co.,
Pa., 1729, one of the first in America.
(12) Water mark of Willcox Ivy Mill.
(13) Smallest wood-pulp papermill in the
world, the whole process from vat to
sheets. (14) Rittenhouse’s watermark.
(15) Third Rittenhouse mill on the site of
the first in America, Germantown, Pa.,
1690, established by Wm. Rittenhouse
and associates.


10334


AA Mig An
NA MA MA
232 Neef Thd. 4.
*  
& NEER
R4 N VMAK 


P
BNERRORTTOSER


PENSILVANIA


8


  


September, 1929


reigned where the woodsman’s axe had made a
dismal place for it.
Such has been history, but the paper and
lumber industries themselves are seeing the folly
of such methods. So now there are such precautions on the part of the Federal government
as the forest conservation laws, and on the part
of the states such laws as the forest law of Oregon, enacted with the approval of the lumber and
paper industries while yet the state has 13
million acres of virgin timber. It is reported
that the timber will be amply protected and new
plantings undertaken, so that lumbering establishments will remain where first set up and
lumbering and paper-making may be the activity
of permanent communities.
But if paper has desolated some places, it has
made others; picturesque Port Townsend, Oregon, for example. The grand prospects of this
pioneer port on Puget Sound of forty vears ago
were blasted when the transcontinental railways
failed of making it their western terminus. Port
Townsend, the key city of the Northwest, went,
like old Macao, on lentils and soup—until paper,
just recently, opened new vistas of fortune to
her. The forests of Olympic peninsula are still
shading Port Townsend, so a paper mill turning
out 200 tons of paper daily has been erected in
the town and given it what, under the new
forest law, may prove to be a permanent profitable industry.
The art of making paper is very simple, despite its repute as a mysterious art. Paper is
composed of fiber. The fibers, "first separated
by mechanical action," says the Britannica,
“are then deposited and felted together on wire
Machines for
cloth while suspended in water.”
doing this took the place of hand methods during
the first quarter of the 19th century. One
machine, the Fourdrinier, has undergone unceasing evolution and improvement in both
Europe and America and still bears the name of
its French inventor. Like many another inventor, Fourdrinier was ruined by his genius; but
his British successors reaped the profits he should
have had, were fortune always kind, and the
Scotch especially became the paper-makers in
Pn: nd and America. Scotch mechanics were so
yilot, employed in American paper mills that
tho nfluence served for a time to give prefeconce to British-made findings, especially felts,
y.a hose made in America, which later proved
ro he superior.
vhile the art of making paper is a simple
ong he process itself is complicated and parnke. many economies effected by the use of
 e machinery. The capital required for
 omic paper mill is therefore large, while
the selling of the product of many mills can
easily be centered in a single organization. The
result is that capital in the industry tends to
concentrate, single paper companies owning and
operating many mills. The first American
mills were of course on the Atlantic coast, the
rest of the continent being wilderness at that
time and much of it for generations afterward.
The first printing press in America was set up in
Boston in 1638, but Boston maintained regular
commerce with London, whence came her paper.
The first newspaper in America dates later than
1700; the first paper mill, of course making onlv
hand-made paper, was the Rittenhouse mill
established near Philadelphia on Wissahickon
creek by Willem Rittenhouse and associates in
1690. We have seen that the most recent Amercan paper mill is that at Port Townsend on the
Pacific coast, established only last year, and that
it is one of the largest in the United States.
Thus moves the tide of empire west. The
western mills are interested in the paper trade
of the Philippines.
Critics who perhaps have made but little
study of the economies of the intelligent division
of labor and the utilization of machineny, often
deplore the fact that the Philippines do not make
their own paper. But even if a local mill were
amply capitalized and enjoyed the entire market,
the question is debatable that it could be made
to pay. For the entire paper market of the
Philippines—that is, the news-print market—
would but run the Port Townsend mill two
months. Paper, like steel, to be made econcmically must be made in quantity; we have a
similar example in our sugar industry. No


doubt, when the Philippine demand is enough,
and when a suitable substitute for the backend of an Oregon forest is found at deep tidewater somewhere in the islands, our papermaking industry will begin. But someone’s
scraping together a few tons of fibrous material
and acclaiming it the raw product for a brand
new paper-making industry, is no cause for investor’s excitement.
We might have a paper industry here, if we
used enough paper. So we might have a steel
industry, if we used enough steel. It is enough
to say that we have neither industry, simply


because our market is too small to maintain an
economical unit. America must be our present
principal source of paper. What America will
do when her forests are gone, if she really lets
them go, is strictly her business. And it may be
our opportunity.


The next paper in this series will be made un largelv
trom data kindly lurmished the editor by E. K. ThibauK
of the f-V.f newspapers. For the references making
this first article possible we are deeply in the debt
Whipple S. Hall. The pictures are from a book from
Mg horaty, Hisory ol Baba: Manwyacirino ta tne Unaca
Slales, Lyman Horace Weeks. As the articles progress,
we shall give eredit to those who assist their preparation.


A Legend of Mt. Apo
By IVON GRUNER COOK


When wise old men of the Bogobo tribe dwelling in the remote countryside of Mindanao, the


"Waiter: Listen, you! I been
waitin’ on this table for twenty years,
an' I—
Customer: Yeah? Who was
your other customer?
—Judge.


The trouble probably started right
with the cocktail, the dumb waiter
trying to pan off on the customer a
substitute for—
uURDOr ony
Always the same and the
same is always best!
Then, of course, for highballs,
there’s a preferred whisky too—
RODLRIDON
SCOTCH WHISKY
The whisky that the
discriminating demand
Kuenate &. Streiff Inc.
Importers
Tel. 2-39-36
343 T. Pinpin
Manila, P. I.


southernmost island of the Philippines, look
across the plains or up the mountain slopes to
Mount Apo, they recall a tale told to them by
the patriarchs of their childhood. Smoking
their pipes lazily in the tropical sunshine, present-day grandfathers gather small boys about
them, who listen with awe to the legend of how
Mount Apo suddenly appeared on the island.
Many hundreds of years ago, there was no
mountain rising above the waving coconut
palms.
Manama, the creator of all things, sitting on
his throne among the white clouds, looked down
upon his children of the earth and beheld two
enormous eels sporting in the waters of what is
now known as the Davao river. The sun’s rays
shining through the clear transparent water
upon the long, black bodies beneath were diffused into all the colors of the spectrum. Now
gleamed a flash of bright silver, and now the
smoky fire of an opal with its changing tints of
red, blue, yellow and green, dazzled the smaller
creatures who lived near the river. The eels
were brother and sister, and Manama, who had
made them, called them Eolo and Aeel. He
thought they were extraordinarily beautiful, and
he enjoyed watching them whenever he could
turn his attention from the many things which
occupied him. In those days, the god of creation still had much work to do.
A twittering came from a large vine-hung
tree beside the river. A golden oriole had flown
to one of the branches reaching out over the
water. He cocked his head speculatively on
one side as he spied the huge eels. He was a
lovely little creature perched there among the
soft forest green, and if he could be accused of
vanity, he was to be forgiven. He hopped to
a vine below, so perkily that he almost lost his
balance.
“I don’t understand how anyone can like to be
as big as you are,” he chirped to the eels.
“It is a trial at times," replied Eolo. They
were good-natured, friendly, simple creatures,
but the brother was the more talkative of the
two. “You see, we don’t have very much water
to play in because we take up so much room.
When there is no rain we are very uncomfortable, for then there is not enough water to cover
our backs and our skin becomes hard and stiff.
It’s not pleasant.” He shook his huge body
so emphatically that the wide river overflowed
its banks.
“Do be careful!” exclaimed Aeel, impatiently.
“It hasn’t rained for three days, yet you spill
water as though it were raining continuously.”
“I’m sorry,” her brother apologized contritely.
“When I thought of the dry weather and how
miserable we are I felt so sad that I just couldn’t
help it.” A great tear rolled down his cheekas
he spoke, and made such a splash in the river
that the yellow bird fluttered nervously off the
vine.
“Don’t cry about it,” he said, resuming his
perch. "Perhaps I can help you.” Witli all
his conceit he was a kindhearted little bird.
“Do you really think vou can?” His large
friends were dubious. “You are very tiny to
offer us assistance."
The little oriole puffed out his chest until he
resembled a perfect ball of fluff. He always
did this when he wished to concentrate. While
he thought of a way to help them, the eels waited


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


9


with ill-concealed eagerness. Finally, he spoke.
“I know! The sea is the place for you! It
is many times greater than your river. It is
so vast that I have flown a long time over the
water toward the sun, but I have never been
able to glimpse a tree top. As far as I could see
there was no land. I am sure there is always
enough water there to cover your backs."
“We should like the sea!” Brother and sister
spoke simultaneously. “How cool it sounds!
Do you think we could reach it today if we
started immediately?'
“Certainly you can! It is still early, and all
you have to do is to follow this river and swim
toward the sun.”
“Thank you, Golden Oriole,” said Aeel, first
to remember her manners. “I hope some day
when we are nicely settled in our new home you
will call on us. If we can ever help you, please
let us know. Good-bye!” Wasting no time,
she slipped gracefully off through the water
toward the east.
The prospect of realizing a Utopia long dreamed of was so exciting to Eolo that he had not listened carefully to the little bird’s instructions as
to how to get to this wonderful place. Though
he was larger, he was not as clever as his sister.
“Would you mind telling me again about the
sea? How shall I know where it is?”
“The sea is also called the ocean. It is very
clear and as blue as the sky, and as large as a
thousand rivers. It makes a great noise, like
thunder. Be sure to swim toward the sun and
you cannot miss it.”
“Im terribly excited, but I think I’ll find it.
Thank you and good-bye!”


As Eolo swam slowly away, repeating to himself what the oriole had told him, the little bird
burst into a lively song. How delighted the
eels would be when they reached the big sea
where they would have all the water in the world
in which to frolic happily!
Aeel had undertaken the journey to the sea
in a businesslike manner, and she soon found the
large body of water described by the golden
oriole. Her more sentimental brother made his
way dreamily, thinking of the pleasures awaiting him. He was so engrossed in the alluring
picture painted by his little friend that he did
not notice that he had arrived where the river
branched. He swam absent-mindedly on to
the left, instead of to the right toward the sun.
Presently he thought he would stop to rest, but
just then he heard a noise which sounded like
water rushing over large rocks. He listened
intently.
“That must be the sea. The oriole said it
made a great noise. I must hasten if I want to
reach it before dark.” And with renewed energy
he swam onward. A moment or so later, the
river widened and seemed to stop abruptly. He
paused, thinking to himself "the sea must surely
lie just beyond," and with a tremendous lunge
he threw himself forward. Poor Eolo had been
mistaken. The noise he had heard was not the
murmur of the ocean, but the sound of a mighty
waterfall plunging over a steep cliff to sharp
boulders below. Headfirst, he went down and
down and down, straight on to the cruel stones
of the rapids below. He lay there stunned until
the river gradually swept the life from his body.
That evening, before Manama spread the
dark star-sprinkled cover of the night over the
earth, he thought again of his two enormous
pets, and his eyes sought them in their resting

place in the river.
What was this? They were not there. He
followed the river to the sea, where he saw
Aeel cavorting unrestrainedly about in her new
home, pausing now and then to look expectantly
toward the river. But where was Eolo?
Manama anxiously scanned the rivers until he
finally discovered him, lying woefully crumpled
on the rocks.
Sighing for the loss of this pet, whom he had
liked the better of the two, the god gazed meditatively at the gigantic motionless mass. One
fold of lifeless body rose over another like rolling
hills on an undulating landscape. Manama
was struck with an idea.
“Some day,” he thought, “there will be little
eels swimming up the rivers from the ocean. If
I should remove this one they may be just as
foolish as he and meet with the same unhappy


Realizing its potentialities for the creation of
new wealth, the United States department of
agriculture for more than 20 years has maintained an office of foreign plant introduction.
This is manned by a large staff, has one or more
field explorers in foreign lands, maintains several
plant introduction gardens in different regions of
the United States, and has made more than
70,000 separate plant or seed introductions since
the organization of the service. A review of the


more important plant introductions made by
this office will be made in a subsequent article.
Since its organization the Philippine bureau of
agriculture likewise has pursued a policy of introducing new plants, and one after another the
new plant immigrants gradually find their way
throughout the islands. During my inspection
trips I often run across relatively new plant
introductions in unexpected remote localities.
Among the most valuable plant introductions
are the new improved sugar cane varieties, the
Robusta and Excelsa coffee, improved kamotes,
standard varieties of oranges, mandarins, lemons
and grapefruits, the chayote, cherimoya, and
the cinchona or quinine tree. Other useful
plants that could be introduced to advantage
include the following species:


end. I’lI change him into a mountain, so tha.:
whenever they raise their heads above the water
they will see his folds and take heed where they
swim.”
Thus it was that poor sentimental Eolo, dreaming of an ocean paradise, suddenly became a
range of high mountains, the highest peak of
which is called Mount Apo. Aeel, his shrewd
sister, lived an obscure happy life, in time raising
a large family. She did all she could to discourage them from becoming dreamers, but,
though many of her descendants still live contentedly in the great sea, there are some who,
in spite of her warnings, swim up the Davao and
other Mindanao rivers. When they lift their
heads out of the water and behold the sun lingering intimately on the summit of Mount Apo,
perhaps they agree with Bogobo children that
Eolo’s fate was not so unfortunate after all.


The TAMANI, Bauhinia esculenta, a perennial
plant with trailing vines up to 5 meters long,
growing from a large cone-shaped woody stem,
found in the Transvaal and Bechuana, South
Africa, to at least 100 meters elevation, doing
best in sandy soils. The yellow flowers are
followed by pods containing 2 to 6 large beans
which are a staple food in some localities. They
are eaten roasted or boiled, or ground into a
powder and made into a beverage said to taste
somewhat like cocoa. Europeans use them like
almonds. They are an excellent hog feed. The
tamani is a relative of the peanut.
The BLAKEA, Blakea gracilis, is a handsome
terrestrial shurb or epiphyte, a native of Costa
Rica. The leaves are long-petioled, leathery
obovate-elliptic and pointed. The large handsome flowers are borne on long stems growing
from the leaf axils. The flowers are common in
the markets of Cartago, and the thick fleshy
petals are eaten, and made into an excellent
jelly, for which purpose they are much esteemed.
The RYERA, Bombaz globosum, is a large forest
tree with a trunk 10 meters high related to the
kapok, ranging from Guiana to northern Brazil.
The white flowers are followed by round fruits
4 to 5 em. across, containing seeds the size of
filberts enclosed in silky fiber. The seeds are
eaten roasted, when they are of good taste.
The Rihi, Brachystegia edulis, is a large spreading tree found from Kenya to Rhodesia below
1300 meters altitude, thriving on sandy land.
It belongs to the bean family. The pinnate
leaves are up to 12 em. long and have 3 to 5 pairs
of leaflets. The large beans are eaten. A good
timber tree.
The BREADNUT, Brosimum alicastrum, is a tall
tree related to the breadfruit, native of tropical
America. The leaves are-oblong and pointed,
to 18 cm. long. The round fruit contains a large
seed. In Jamaica the seeds or nuts are roasted
or boiled and pounded into a paste, in taste
resembling the chestnut. Both the leaves and


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNA


(Please turn to page 12)


For Your Electrical Work
Phone
2-32-40
AVAONAA
MORA ELECTRIC CO., INC.
7 CALLE SODA
MANILA, P. I.


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - - WALTER E. ANTRIM


Useful Plants in Foreign Lands
By P. J. WESTER
This is the second article in a series on this subject by Mr. Wester. The
next will appear in an early issue.—Ed.


19


  


September, 1929


REASONABLE
In an editorial in a series of articles on the defects of the merchantssales tax the Manila Times cited one particular instance which it would
be advantageous to correct even if the tax remain in general force—as of
course it will. Reference is to the factory manufacturing in the Philippines
and shipping to a home-office outside the islands, the shipments not being
sales but goods delivered from one branch of a business to another, and the
factory selling nothing whatever in the Philippines or elsewhere. To apply
the sales taxin suchinstances is to burden the cost of manufacturing in the
islands and retard the development of industries using our raw material
and employing our labor. In fact, all taxes upon exports are disadvantageous to the country: as the sales tax in one form or another will be continued in force, means should be found of applying it equitably to the entire
quantity of imports and domestic goods entering domestic trade; and by
equitably is meant that the tax be the same in Manila as in Mauban, for
example, levied once and then no more during the transit of goods from
source to consumer. There is nothing new in this, so we refrain from elaboration of it, but it seems very reasonable and in practice should prove satisfactory.
COMMENDABLE
The government sent no exhibit to Barcelona, for the year’s exposition
there, but the Tabacalera, with an excellent exhibit, supplied the lack.
This company’s activities advertised the islands well, as well as the company itself. Nine Filipino craftsmen were sent, two of them carpenters
who built, it seems, a typical group of Philippine houses of bamboo and
nipa. Seven are cigar-makers, who remain at Barcelona until the exposition closes. They demonstrate a craft in which the islands are today preeminent, the manufacture of hand-made long-filler cigars. Spain has been
running two expositions, for there is one at Seville, but that at Barcelona
has had the better fortune with the public and is drawing visitors to Spain
from everywhere.
BUTCHERING AN INDUSTRY
It is unlawful to import beef cattle into the Philippines, saving that
one man by competitive bid has been given the privilege of supplying 40%
of the Manila market, the only large one in the islands, with imported cattle
on a quota based so far back that he really supplies about 53% of it. He
brings the cattle from northern Australia, whence there is no country besides the Philippines that the cattle may be shipped; it is said upon good
authority that they cannot be shipped even into a state of Australia without
undergoing quarantine for six months at the state line. The packing industry in northern Australia having failed, he buys the cattle at his own
price; and he pays our government the nominal duty of P2 a head. He
may not sell the beef above P0.60 a kilo; his imported bullocks dress about
225 kilos each; his gross profits are estimated at very close to 100%. For
his accommodation, the government maintains a killing station at Sisiman,
at the head of the bay, charging him P0.03 a kilo for its use. He does a
thriving regular business, running to about 150,000 kilos of beef a month,
while shipments of Philippine cattle remain unsold in Manila weeks on
end. He pays income taxes, of course.
Our cattlemen pay income taxes, land taxes, animal-registration
fees, and P0.05 a kilo, not P0.03, to the city for the use of the Azcarraga
matadero. On this showing, the government is not consistent in encouraging home industries. Our cattlemen may, in their extremity, begin sending
frozen beef into the United States, from which may arise another agitation
against Philippine products.
TELL IT NOT IN GATH!
While the water main under the Mariquina river was broken, the
minority of Manilans felt the inconveniences that the majority endure all
the time. But we had gathered our data for this comment before the main
was broken. The health service tells us there are 36,002 houses in Manila,
and that only 9,788 of them have sewer connections. Barbarism in milder
or sterner form is the only recourse left to the families in the others. Yet
the health service does not ask for more sewers, only for more pails! Some
20 and odd years ago, the ordinance, said to be still on the books,


requiring all houses built to be connected with sewers was passed; it has
been a dead letter, apparently, and the olfactory evidence of this needs
no emphasis.
During ten years the expenditure for sewer mains has been P175,000,
about as much as the water administration has paid out in a single salary;
and 15,000 meters of mains have been laid, about 14 kilometers, approximating one mile, each year. Another small appropriation, P250,000,
is being spent on mains in Sta. Cruz, on Rizal avenue (the extension, no
doubt), calle Florida and elsewhere—odd jobs here and there. Someone
wants a main on upper Juan Luna, where conditions are revolting, but
nixie. The means of being decent, it seems, are restricted to those who can
pay for such luxury. Getting a sewer connection depends upon having a
toilet, bath and wash basin in one’s house. The sewers should, however,
be extended to all public places, and these places should be adequate in
every community.
While we place blame nowhere, we think it time Manila had more
sewers and we are sure there are practical ways of providing them.


"FOR THE TIME BEING"
For the time being, said President Hoover, June 21, in the exercise of
the police powers of his office, no persons from China or the Philippines
may enter the United States excepting in accordance with regulations of
the treasury department; and coincidently the department quadrupled, by
new regulations, the space for each steerage passenger from the Philippines
or China, permitted embarkation only from Shanghai, Hongkong and
Manila, and that groups from each port be segregated from the others.
Fourteen days quarantine of steerage passengers under the supervision
of a U. S. public health officer prior to embarkation is also required.
For some weeks, or until the President’s proclamation was amended
to include Amoy as an embarkation point, no steerage passengers came into
the Philippines from China, since they don’t embark from Shanghai or
Hongkong; but now they will be coming into the islands again, only in the
greatly reduced numbers dictated by the treasury regulations dividing the
registered steerage capacity of ships by four. The total cessation of Chinese immigration into the Philippines for a while, will be followed by moderate immigration only; the annual net increase of our Chinese population
by a surplus of 6,000 immigrants over the total number leaving the islands
annually will be cut down—or more ships will go on the Amoy-Manila
run and immigrants will pay higher for their passage.
The prevalence of meningitis in China during the early part of this
year gave rise to the new requirements for the time being, and our guess is
that the time being will be a long, long time indeed. There is, we surmise,
state policy of the United States, if not of the Philippines, behind the movement; and the police power of the government was invoked to obviate the
necessity of legislation. Or, even if originally the requirements were but a
temporary expedient, what President, now that they are in force, would
choose to revoke them? Surely not one hailing from California. The
customs house tells us that during August this year, 329 steerage passengers
from Manila went to Honolulu, 72 to Seattle, none to San Francisco; comparing with 750 to Honolulu during August of last year, 230 to San Francisco, 35 to Seattle and 35 to Vancouver, totals being 401 during August
this year and 1,050 during August last year.
Hawaii has been getting more workmen than she needs, and any number to Seattle or San Francisco is more than certain elements there want.
It seems that Honolulu will now get fewer workmen, but possibly as many
as she needs, Seattle will get a few each month, and San Francisco none or
very few, the Hawaiian quota taking all the space on boats on that run.
By carrying no Filipino steerage passengers for Seattle, the Canadian Pacifc may disregard the regulations and traffic on the old basis between China
and Canada, but even one steerage passenger from Manila to Seattle on
that line would compel compliance. Figure it any way you like, approve
or not, thus the situation stands for the time being. More than ever before,
in view of the facts, it is imperative to get more young farmers onto our
own idle lands, the place they would all prefer.


FRANK W. BUTLER
We record with sorrow the death on August 26 of Frank W. Butler,
a young member of the Chamber of Commerce who was the manager of
the Walk-Over Shoe Store.
He had lived in Manila nearly twenty years and was of sterling character and ability. Floral offerings and a crowded Cathedral on the occasion
of the funeral, September 1, conducted by His Grace Archbishop Michael J.
O'Doherty, attested the esteem in which Mr. Butler was universally held.
In him an exemplary citizen and neighbor was beckoned away at a time
when life had seemed to open promisingly before him. Sympathy is sincerely extended to surviving kin, who, in the Philippines, are the widow, the
daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles M. Cotterman, a son aged seven, Charles,
and daughter aged twelve, Marietta. The body rests in La Loma, beside
that of a son lost in infancy ten years ago.


September, 1929


  


11


Let’s Take a Fortnight’s World Tour


Heroic comparisons: Commanded by Magellan
until he was killed at Mactan, Philippines, April
26, 1521, the first voyage around the world
began in six ships putting off from Sanlucar de
Barrameda, Spain, August 10, 1519, and ended
at that port September 7, 1522, with the arrival
there of the Victoria, the one ship left of the
six making up the original royal fleet of His Majesty Charles I, commanded by Juan Sebastian
del Cano and manned by the nineteen men,
ragged and nearly starved, who were the sole
survivors among the hundreds who composed
the original crews. That was man’s conquest
of the world’s seas, a voyage of three years and
twenty-eight days. Spiritual fortitude bore the
men up, with solemn rites the voyages began
and ended.
In this year’s August, the 17th day thereof
at 11:39 p. m., to the 29th day thereof, at 1:13
a. m., a crazy bouyant craft known as the Graf
Zeppelin, a balloon with steering and propelling
equipment—a balloon as big as a steamship and
lighter than a feather that large!—circled the
world in a voyage of some 19,000 miles from Lakehurst, N. J., back to port in that town again at the
average speed of 66 miles an hour—lapsed time
being 21 days, 7 hours and 33 minutes and actual
voyaging time 11 days, 23 hours and 14 minutes.
Thus in three centuries three years and seven days
have been cut off the time it takes to go around
the world by  he fastest feasible transportation
known to eitr r age, that of Magellan or this
of our times anc that of Commander Eckener.
Magellan was out of touch with land the
moment he was out at sea, but Eckener was
always in instant communication with the world
by means of the radio telegraph: a thousand
inventions and discoveries, most of them dating
with our own times, aided Eckener; and Magellan, with the aid of the compass, charted his
route as he traversed it, only guessing wildly at
latitude reckonings. The world cheered on
Eckener, and the German people, whose subscriptions defrayed the cost of the Graf Zeppelin, sent through the ethereal waves their
messages of confidence; and presidents popularly
elected, with kings but tolerated on their thrones,
as constitutional monarchs, joined their hosannahs with the rest. Daily and hourly, in an
audience far-flung as all the inhabited lands of
earth, the peoples of the world had the news by


facilities of dirigible flight to be extended here
within five years; the writer, at least, expects
nothing less.
The world-flight of the Graf Zeppelin is the
biggest job man ever got through with successfully, and is capped with the bigger job of the flight
from Lakehurst to Friedrichshafen, the home
port in Germany, under command of Captain
Ernest Lehman, who took the big blimp through


I KNOW A GIRL
She's so dumb she thinks Graf is a dirty
dig at the post office, and Zeppelin is a new
kind of fabric—maybe Zebra skin, they're
going in so muchnowadays for queerleathers.
She thinks it must be precious, too, since a
dirigible is hurrying around the world with
it. She hopes the passengers won't suffer
too much from meteorological conditions;
she had something like that once and it
was very painful and annoying; and she
supposes that's why Captain Eckener is a
doctor. She hears there's a woman aboard,
but personally she disapproves of such highfliers. Also she couldn’t understand why
anyone would wish to hangar round Japan
so long. With all that wine aboard, she
thinks it may be a new bootlegging scheme;
she wanted the U. S. coastguard service to
overhaul the dirigible when it reached the
ten-mile limit and search it. She doubts
that the thing ever went 65 miles an hour,
and she doesn’t see how they know—there
isn't any water to trail the little string in
with the dingus on the end! She hopes they
chose a light log, and won't have trouble with
knots. She doesn’t quite understand the
gas bag the papers talk about, but thinks it
may have something to do with ether at high
altitudes, which probably is unhealthful
when breathed direcily; and she supposes
passengers and crew use the gas bag in
common—a kind of improved gas mask
exemplifying Teutonic economy. She believes fuel must be very scarce in Japan.
Since the dirigible floals of itself, the fuel
would be for the kitchen stove only, and just
think how long it took to get even that muchl


  ESEe S S
TIAPEN

E
 HE  GI N


Mr Philip S, Frleder
P.O. Box 2233
Memila


TIMES Phota!


Via the Graf Zeppelin to Japan, thence steamer to Manila: August, 1929. The insert shows the blimp
at 800 feet over Yokohama.


JACOB


LEVY


PHILIPPINE HATS


Buntals


Bamboos


Calasiaos


Balibuntals


Correspondence Solicited


227 Calle David
Cable Address: "


Manila, P. I.
“TEXTILES”


the time of the flight around the world is briefer
than from Lakehurst; it is only 20 days, 4 hours
and 18 minutes. Such are the marvels of our age,
remarkable in its practical adaptation of scientific knowledge to the abiding problem of mankind, that of existence—how to energize more
energy.
The Graf Zeppelin makes the world but little
more than a neighborhood. With admiration
we contemplate such deeds, right eagerly we
scan the progress of such novel arts; and dismally we turn to the realm of politics, to find that
men plodding wretchedly along there have
learned nothing and forgotten little since Magellan’s age, and that the maximum benefits of the
inventive age will not be available until better
statesmen fill the chanceries of the nations.
Still, Briand speaks of a United States of
Europe, respecting commerce. While there
is science there’s hope, even in politics.
—W. R.


My Cocinero
Oh, thou, who dost the tater pare,
Who breaks my choicest chinaware,
Who weights the flaky crust of pies
And fills the kitchen up with flies;
Oh thou, who makest Number Two
Do all the work that thou shouldst do,
Who late dost come and early leave
With food and silver up thy sleeve,
Oh thou—I do not mean to salve thee,
Cook—but how I’d love to halve thee!
—A. R. E.


Some folks insinuate that the Luna bill to
amend the banking law is mostly moonshine.


Because many still believe the higher-ups in
the posts bureau will be caught, a wag remarks
there’s a lot of fish that never saw the sea that
will bite at anything.


Anay have eaten four million pesos in the
vaults of the treasury, but a quick-witted partisan explains that they probably began gnawing
during the Wood administration when there
wasn’t cooperation!


Governor Davis has found out what is wanted
in Mindanao. Now if it can be found that the
Legislature wants it too, all should be well.


microphone and the printed page in their several
languages—there being a universal telegraph
code.
No hostility, on the contrary the most spontaneous aid was encountered by Eckener, who
remains in America to assist the GoodyearZeppelin company at Akron, Ohio, in the building of Zeppelins for new passenger-express routes
over that country and between that country
and others beyond the oceans.
When there is a hangar, zeppelins will come to
Manila on scheduled voyages—just as steamships come here now; and we may expect the


two bow-on 50-mile gales. Not a passenger or
member of the crew was lost or injured during
this world voyage; there was no scurvy, no want,
but only abundance, comfort and security—all
this in and above the clouds, and over frigid and
temperate seas and lands alike! The crew numbered forty, passengers twenty, the latter each
paying a fare of g9.000. Letters from the
United States were carried at $2.05 each; much
express was carried, at high rates for quick despatch and delivery, and the voyage is reported
to have netted $500,000.
Reckoning from Friedrichshafen and back,


General Dorey and Datu Piang embraced in
Cotabato. In what outlandish fashion is that?


Stimson thinks 2,500 tracts for farming are
enough, but it is said Davis believes this might
be stretched a bit for rubber.


Senator Broussard wants duties on Philippines
products sold in America, and a concord of
nations guaranteeing independence—which
smacks of going some ambitious chap’s security.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


12


THE AMERICAN
HAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


September, 1929


Useful Plants in Foreign Lands
(Continued from page 9)
seeds make a valuable feed for domestic animals.
The tree yields excellent timber.
The EMI, Butyrospermum parkii, is a tree to
about 12 meters high, resembling a gnarled oak
in habit; found at low elevations in central and
tropical West Africa. The leaves are oblanceolate-oblong, leathery and thinly hairy beneath,
15 to 22 em. long. The fragrant white flowers,
borne in dense axiliary clusters, are rich in honey.
The fruit is ellipsoid to 5 em. long, yellow and
one-seeded. The pulp is of pleasant taste and
consumed in large quantities by the natives.
The emi thrives in a dry climate and on poor
stony soil, is of slow growth and suckers freely
from the roots. In many regions, especially in
the French Sudan, Upper Dahomey and Nigeria
there are big emi plantations. The large seeds
constitute 35 to 60 per cent of the fruit, and are
dried and exported like copra. They contain
about 50 per cent edible fat, known as sheabutter in the trade. A productive tree may
yield 40 kilos dried nuts per annum. Owing to
lack of transportation from the interior to seaboard, large quantities of seeds annually go to
waste. So far little or no cultural attention has
been paid to the emi, though it would appear
to have commercial possibilities as a source of
vegetable fat. It is a relative of the chico.
The PoLeo, Clinopodium laevigatum, is a shrub
to 150 centimeters high, native of Sinaloa to
Oaxaca, Mexico, related to the coleus. The
opposite leaves are lance-oblong to ovate-oblong,
2 to 8 em. long, and are made into a popular tea
in some places on the west coast of Mexico.
The RITALI, Clitandra orientalis, is a shurb
related to adelfa, native of Kongo to Uganda
below 1200 meters altitude. The leaves are
oblong or lanceolate, leathery, glossy above, 8
em, long. The flowers, borne in dense clusters,
are followed by roundish warty pale green to
orange-yellow fruits 5 to 12 em. long. The fruit
has a thick rind containing blood red acid edible
pulp much esteemed in Belgian Kongo. The
plant yields excellent rubber.


The OLOSAPo, Couepia floccosa, is a medium
sized tree with spreading top, found in cultivation only in Costa Rica, at low altitudes. The
thick leaves are ovate, dark green above and
white velvety below to 8 em. long. The flower
clusters are followed by oblong-ovoid wrinkled,
yellowish-green fruits 6 to 8 em. long, with
yellow highly aromatic deliciously flavored
flesh, ripening from May to July. The olosapo
is highly prized by the Costa Ricans.
The Cuchinito, Elaterium ciliatum, is a vine,
related to the squash and chayote, a native of
Central America below 1200 meters altitude.
The white star-shaped flowers, tender shoots
and immature fruits are crushed and mixed with
cheese. This mixture is placed between two
tortillas and cooked. This is a popular dish in
Salvador.
The Fonio, Digitaria exilis, is an annual slender
grass to about 60 em. high, a native of the highlands of tropical West Africa, where it is extensively cultivated as a grain and, together with
rice, forms a staple food of the natives. Several
varieties are grown, maturing in from 90 to 150
days. The yield varies from 800 to 1000 kilos
per hectare in the early maturing sorts, to 1500 to
2000 kilos in the late ones. Fonio thrives on
poor sandy soil and is fairly drought resistant.
The grains are small, white and shining. They
are of pleasant taste and are eaten as porridge or
pudding, with butter, milk, or palm oil. Milled
and mixed with wheat flour they make a good
light bread. The fonio was first noted by Europeans in 1798, but probably was domesticated
very long ago.
The Anserine, Chenopodium amaranticolor,
isan annualerect branching leafy herb, sometimes
more than three meters high. The leaves are
reddish on both sides and make excellent spinach.
The anserine is a mutant which appeared in
the environs of Marseilles, and was described in
1907, since which time it has been successfully
introduced in Tunis, Madagascar, Indo-China
and other parts in the tropics. In Java, where it
is cultivated as a vegetable, it has become naturalized above an elevation of 1200 meters.
The anserine was introduced into the Philip

pines last year and as in Java would appear to
have a future here as a vegetable.
The PeRAh, Elateriospermum tapos, is a large
tree, often more than 25 meters high, native of
the Malay peninsula and the western part of the
Malay archipelago. 'It is related to Para rubber,
lumbang, and cassava. The leaves are linear
oblong, to 17 em. long. The cream-colored
waxy flowers are assembled in clusters 10 em.
long. The fruits are roundish, three-ridged, to
about 45 mm. in diameter. The seeds are
oblong-oval, about 3 cm. long, and much esteemed as a food by some of the native tribes in the
Malay Peninsula. In Sumatra they are marketed in rather large quantities. They are usually
eaten boiled or roasted like chestnuts, and contain 39 per cent of an edible oil.
The CABACINHA, Eugenia Klotzchiana, is a small
shrub with many stems, to at most 2 meters
tall, commonly unbranched, native of Brazil.
The leaves are lanceolate to obovate-oblong,
shining and dark green above and whitish below,
to 14 em. long. The fruits are elongate-pvriform, golden yellow, 5 to 10 cm. long, the fiesh
resembling a pear in color and texture, juicy,
spicy, aromatic and of refreshing taste, containing one to 4 relatively small seeds.
The Andesserrr, Rubus glaucus, is a semiclimbing bramble, which trained in bush form
attains a height and spread of about 3 meters,
found in the mountain regions of Mexico to
Ecuador. The canes are whitish. The leaves
are trifoliolate with toothed leaflets. The flowers are large and white, nearly 25 mm. across,
borne in large terminal sprays to 30 em, long.
The fruits are oblong to oblong-oval, often more
than 25 mm. long, of rich aromatic pleasantly
subacid taste recalling the raspberry. They are
used as a dessert fruit and also made into preserves and syrup. There are two forms, one
dark maroon and another light red which latter
has more delicate flavor.
Rubus erythrocladus is a spiny shrub about 1.5
meters high, found in the mountain regions of
the States of Minas Geraes and Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil. The leaves are 3 to 5 foliolate, with
large leaflets, 5 to 10 em. long. The fruit is


Stomach Disorder?


FORMULA:
Alcanfor.......0.03%
Ess. Menta.....0.036%
oa A Cannabis
Elirir Paregofico sa.....03075
Alcohol .......17.605
Excipiente C.s.. My.


Why suffer the
pain—take
LICOR
SIOMACAL
of Dr. Luna
—it will relieve you of stomach
ailments such as DYSENTERY
COLIC, INDIGESTION,
DIARRHEA, and other stomach
complaints.
Keep a bottle or more in
your home—its necessity
is indispensable.
On Sale at All Drug Stores
in three different size bottles or can
be secured direct from us.


Farmacia de San Fernando
MANILA Telephone 4-80-85
835 San Fernando


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


13


roundish, 14 mm. across, dark green, and considered the best flavored of all the fruits of this
genus in Brazil.
Both the foregoing species would be likely to
thrive in Baguio.
The PARANA PINE, Araucaria brasiliensis, is a
stately pyramidal tree, 20 to 30 meters high,
with a straight upright trunk. It ranges from
Uruguay and Argentina to southern Brazil where
it forms immense forests, especially in the State
of Parana from which its popular name has been
derived. The leaves or needles are linear-lanceolate, to 5 em. long. The flowers appear in
August and the seed cones ripen after 10 to 11
months. The cones are round and large, meas

uring 15 em. across, and contain many large
seeds or nuts, 5 cm. long, about 100 of which
make one kilo. They are boiled or roasted like
chestnuts and are of good taste. Dried and
ground they yield a flour of excellent keeping
quality. A starch made from them is much
esteemed.
The Parana pine is the principal source of
pine timber in South America, the annual output
approximating 150 million board feet. This
stately ornamental tree, which also might be
useful for reforestation, would be likely to thrive
in Baguio in common with its near relatives the
Bunya from Queensland and the Norfolk Island
pine which were successfully introduced there
many years ago.


So This Is Broadway
By WALTER ROBB


Now that the talkies have come to town, it’s
time to talk about them. We saw/heard them
at the Radio, Harry Everett’s house, the old
Majestic, on Santa Cruz plaza. We saw/heard
Syncopation, Lucky Boy and one other. The
apparatus is the Phototone, R. C. A., and
the synchronization of labial gesture with word
reproduction is well perfected; audible words
flow properly with the movement of the lips.
The process is mechanical, but the excellence
of dialogue, songs and acting, when they are
excellent, enables one to note this very little.
Getting immediately to business, what does
the final statement above import? It imports
that the future of the talkies cannot be achieved
by the hit-or-miss method of the movies; the
talkies must choose the best of drama, the best
of actors of the speaking stage. Mortality
among the talkies will come to compare with
mortality among dramas, and it will be quite
as swift and decisive. In fact, the talkies derive
from the drama, not from the movies; the movies
are but an agency, a dimensional agency, giving
the world in shadows what Broadway and the
Strand beholds in the flesh.
Don’t put the picture first in going to the


talkies. That we learned quickly enough.
We went expecting to hear, to enjoy the songs
and revel in the dialogue, and we heard ervey
word. To us it was, as it ought to be, just the
unfolding of a stage play—with of course certain
depictions impossible to the stage because of
the stage’s limited space. So, while the talkies
derive from the drama, the medium, moving
pictures and mechanized locution, by which
they are given to the public, places them in a
field apart from the drama and the movies alike;
they will probably take the place neither of the
speaking stage nor of the movies, but they surely
are a third type of show that is deservedly winning popularity.
One would never see a movie the second
time. But Syncopation so pleased us that we
saw/heard it three times! There’s a characteristic
of the talkies—the bad ones pall at once, the
good ones never. A year from now, five vears
from now, we see/ hear Syncopation if we should
have the chance. We should, of course, prefer
the stage play of any pleasing drama. But we
like acting as the art has been developed on the
stage, and usually we abhor it as it has been
developed in the movies; so we should always


prefer moving shadows of Broadway to moving
shadows of Hollywood.
We do not have the critics’ objections to the
talkies, that they do not compass the range of
the human voice, and that the finer subtleties
of vocal expression escape them. The criticism
is true, but obvious and trivial. The Phototone
at least reproduces sufficiently well to get the
show over; one has the satisfaction of this much,
and the further satisfaction of imagining the
superior excellence of the stage version. Hearint
satisfactorily depends much upon real attention
the mere will or purpose to hear. You can’t
help seeing the pictures, however, and you may
quite miss hearing unless that faculty is on the
alert. Surely this is true of all spoken drama;
when the curtain rises, an appropriate and instinctive hush falls on the house—the audience
intently listens. If your first experience with
the talkies was disappointing, perhaps another
trial or two will reconcile you to their limitations.
There is a knack to hearing the talkies, and
one is commonly green at anything at first.
The talkies will take the English-speaking
world and cut into the movies greatly wherever
choice lies between the two. The reasons are
simple: the talkies demand a better type of shoy
and a better grist of show folkthey
a
better show. The movies began witklus,ethrowing humor and barn-storming tragedy and
seem destined to end there: everything they do
they do extravagantly, with the vulgar gestures
of burlesque; they delight in the impossible,
they preferably choose melodramatics and
circus antics; usually they are either too libidinous for children or too dull for adults. Deft
suggestion does not suffice the movies; born of
Hollywood they go the whole hog or none. They
debase Shakespeare and exalt Kyne and Patullo;
and they make Barry weep.
So it came about that, as soon as the magnates
were faced with the talkies, actors and plays
were in demand. So-called stars whose charms
are in their hips if they are women, and in outlandish cavortings if they are men, were suddenly
and permanentiy out of jobs. It is a pleasure
indeed to go to the talkies and behold a picture


THE
RELADLE LAMA


ELMAC INC.
P. O. Box 625 MANILA 627 Rizal Ave.


Built by
Filipino Craftsmen
Men Want Comfort
They are willing to
put up with the
knocks and setbacks in business but
they want their feet
to be comfortable.
That is why so many
of them choose
HIKE Shoes.
HIKE SHOE FACTORY
STYLE CREATORS
MANILA, P. I.
286 SAN MARCELINO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


14


MMERCE JOURNAL
  


September, 1929


drama unfold that tells a good story well. The
new dramatis personnae seen/ heard in the talkies
are quite as able to run the gamut of emotions
as the imbeciles of oldtime moviedom were, and
they throw no canniption fits in doing it. They
show anger without glowering like gorillas,
pleasure without thwacking their heels together,
even passion without pruriency. In short, they
behave like human beings.
Better one talkie than a dozen movies. Perhaps the challenge would hold even with the
veteran movie-goer, that he can not remember
having seen a dozen pictures which were even
passable. There surely are not twelve first
rate movie actors living, men and women together. Truly good ones, such as Chaplin is,
need not go into talkies and need not fear the
talkies; the talkies will do them good by forcing
imbecility and mediocrity out of the movie
field and leaving it to them alone. As the
talkies must show only good plays or go boom,
so the movies, now that the talkies are here,
must show much better pieces or vield the field.
The process will only be retarded by the monopoly of theaters the movie corporations have on
circuits in America, but even this will count but
little: the talkie will elevate the whole tone of
che movie or elevate it off the lot—where censo beg has but pricked it on to ruder audacities
and debaucheries.
But the talkies will help the movies in another
way. Movies will be principally made for exportation, and will therefore cater more to what
is really wanted abroad. Those movies which
continue to be made principally for America
will be good enough to please the world at large.
All this is easy to foretell, and Americans living
¡broad will be grateful that foreigners who only
“ee America through the movies are to have more


V
IN WHICH IS RECOUNTED MY CONVERSATION
ND EXPERIENCES WITH PADRE JOSEP PATERA, COMMISSARY OF THE INQUISITION IN THE
PHILIPPINES
Faithful to the orders I had received from His
Excellency to get in touch with the news of the
city, the day after the wordy encounter between
the high personages representing the Church and
the State I made my way to the Episcopal Palace,
a short distance from that of the captain general.
I noticed a great number of people engaged in
animated discussion, the most of whom were of
the regular clergy. I also noted that two churches were celebrating funeral honors for the
rest of some soul, the name of whom was withheld. Inside the Episcopal Palace were, besides
the friars, officials, swashbucklers, soldiers,
alcaldes, merchants and individuals of a dozen
other trades; and loud discussions were taking
place in both Spanish and Latin.
Making my way among the crowd I suddenly
came face to face with Fray Jose Paternina, the
Commissary of the Inquisition, who peremptorily demanded the reason for my visit.
replied that there was no particular reason except
to visit my friends, as was my usual custom after
mass. The conversation gradually led up to
occurrences well-known in the city, resulting
from certain differences of the heads of the
Church and State. Addressing me directly,
he spoke in the following insolent manner:
'You are a Spaniard of pure race,”—as distinguished from the new Christians, converts from
Islam to Christianity when the Moors were
expelled from Spain and to whom stigma attached—“But, more shame to you, the blood that
runs in your veins is not so pure. We know you
give little attention to the state of your immortal
soul and that heresy is undermining your body.


exact views of her.
Another thing noticed about a talkie program
is the comedy. Here again is the speaking stage,
not the movie lot. One or two comedians are
always enough for a stage skit, and so it is with
talkies' comedies. The talkies will soon bring
us Will Rogers’s merry shade, Al Jolson’s and
the rest. But not Hollywood celebrities.
What about the talkies with Filipino audiences? It is Filipinos who have crowded into
Harry Everett’s theater. The talkies have a
field here because of the instruction in English
in the schools, and Filipinos who acquire the
knack of hearing the talkies will soon derive
material advantage from hearing the English
language spoken by those whose profession it is
to speak it well. Filipinos will patronize the
talkies, too, because they are better shows than
the plain movies, and because of the music.
Their appreciation of music and of good drapatization will make the talkies popular with them;
because all talkies will be tolerable. No quantity of advertising could possibly put over a
talkie flop; these will be dead loss—hence very
scarce.
It is Broadway the talkies have brought to
Manila. Thank goodness for that.
The new Lyric theater, where we hear the
talkies are soon to be introduced, ought to do
well with them; and good luck is wished for the
Rialto and all other pioneering talkie enterprises.
A benefit to the public and to the small theater
will be, we think, the patronage that will be
distributed to talkies wherever they appear.
Patrons will choose talkies carefully, not with
respect to the place where they are shown but
with respect to their intrinsic merits as good
shows.


You, as a good Christian should be arrayed under
the banner of Christ to help extirpate heretics
from the Holy Roman Catholic and Apostolic
Church, denouncing such as come to your notice,
and seeing that they do not abuse society here
in Manila. We know of your sinful relations
with the woman Lutgarda and we know that this
illegal union is contrary to Holy Church canons.
She is not sanctified and you are now dwelling in
mortal sin. Prepare yourself to repent, or the
Holy Inquisition will take means to see that you
do, and you will suffer in consequence."
“But, Padre,” I protested to Fray Jose, "“I
cannot tolerate this public affront, this accumulation of insults.”
“Wait a moment,” he said sardonically, “I
have not finished. I will tell you some other
truths. You as one of His Excellency’s confidentes should inform him of the sinful union of
his chamber-woman and his cook. This native
has always been a bad subject. The case is not
only immoral, but all those who have knowledge
of it are equally guilty if they do not expose the
sin. We have not vet informed the King of
conditions here which are countenanced by his
governor, but I advise you as his friend to see
that such conduct is immediately rectified or,”
here he pursed his thin lips, "suffer the consequences.” I could see that he thought he already
had me in his web—a human spider intent upon
his prey.
“But, Padre,” I was nettled, yet a little fearful.
“His Excellency commands here. Who am I
to advise or warn? Besides. ..”
He did not allow me to go on, but continued
his tirade. “Yes. When it refuses to suffer
more, the Catholic world will rise in revolt against
heresy, and tyrants will fall into the hands of
God’s faithful ones. You know the indio, the


native; he is faithful so long as he is ruled by
force. When the rein is lightened he abuses
this weakness and commits crimes. Treason
is inherent in them as chivalry is in the
Spaniard. Instead of being grateful and honoring the hand which feeds him, he will bite it.
Unfortunate is the man who interferes with the
designs of Providence.”
Why this outburst against the native? What
connection had his words concerning Providence
with his charges against me? I could not for
the moment make out. But evidently the
Commissary was under the impression that I
was won over by this harangue. His small eyes
glittered under their deep lids.
“Come with me, my son. Come. I have
something to show you.” Without further
words he passed through an antechamber and
led me to a room with double walls, in a part of
the buildings behind the Episcopal Palace.
Double doors opened to the Grand Inquisitor’s
peculiar knock. Within I saw a large chamber
lighted by oil lamps. Three black-robed figures
were seated at a table in the center of the room;
on the great table before them lay an immense
crucifix of gold and enamel set with brilliants.
At both ends of the table sat two friars whom I
knew, Fray Juan and Fray Mateo. The three
seated at the table wore high black cowls with
openings only for their eyes. Flanking the
crucifix were two tall candles whose flickering
yellow light gave a sad and gloomy aspect to the
chamber. At one side, on a bench without back
or sides were seated various individuals, among
whom I recognized the Chinese Christian, Santiago Ong-Kiam, and various natives. Through
a door opening off the grand sala I could plainly
see in an adjoining room stocks for both hands
and feet, chains, other manacles, and a long hardwood bed piled with haiberds, swords, ropes and
daggers. The scene, the air, and my predicament—for I knew not what Fray Jost might
suggest—made me dizzy; I felt a little weak and
began to perspire copiously.
“Do you see the vellow book in which they
are writing?” asked the Commissary. I nodded
my head affirmatively. “That is,” went on



A friumph of the Cross Over Majesty
By FRANCISCO DE AGUAREnA
Sometime Private Secretary to His Excellency Don Diego de Salcedo, Governor
and Captain-General for His Majesty King Philip IV, in the Philippine Islands.
1663-1668
(As Translated and Arranged by Percy A. Hill)
SYNOPSIS.—A typical prolonged dispute is developing between the royal governor of the Philippines, D. Diego de Salcedo, and the friars.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


1.


Fray Jose, “the process against His Excellency
for heresy.” As he spoke a chill came over me;
I became depressed. Don Diego was as good a
Christian and as good a Spaniard as any within
the city walls. Saying I desired a breath of
fresh air and that I had seen enough, I walked
over to a small grated window close to the Postigo, where fresh breezes from the Bay helped
me to regain composure.
Turning to me at last Fray Jose said, "You
may go, but I advise you to bear in mind the
things you have seen. Beware lest a similar
process obtain against you. As a good Christian
comply with the laws of the Church and you
need not fear."
I felt that this latter harangue was in the
nature of an intimidating lecture to me, private
secretary to His Excellency. By this time we
were back again in the principal reception room
of the Episcopal Palace. So much noise and
confusion filled the room that conversation was
difficult.
Just then six soldiers of the guards, under the
command of an adjutant of the Governor’s palace,
entered; and the adjutant presented to His
Grace, the Archbishop, an order from His
Excellency. The paper was read and there
followed a hot discussion between the officer of
the guards and His Grace.
“You may return to the Captain-General and
tell him I cannot comply with these Royal Provisions because they are contrary to the rules of
our Holy Church,” said the archbishop.
“Illustrious,” replied the adjutant, Don Fermin
Altayde, "we have strict orders that His Excellency’s decree must be complied vith or we are
commanded to use force."
“Return to His Excellency and inform him
that if he persists in acting contrary to all pontificial privileges he will be faced with excommunication.” His Grace was stern.
“Your Grace,” said Don Fermin, "you understand that we are mere emissaries,—simply
soldiers obeying our Governor’s order, and that
if you do not comply we are here to seize your
person and to convey you to Mariveles under
a decree of banishment for the good of the
republic,” (The Philippines were often so named
in early documents) "and because vou refuse to
submit to His Majesty, the King. We, therefore,
prostrate ourselves before Your Grace and pray
you will not compel us to use force.”
“I cannot and dare not comply,” replied the
Archbishop. I could not but admire the bearing and composure of the officer of the guards
in his difficult position, surrounded as he was by
potential enemies, wielding the subtle power of
the Church.
“May God pardon me and my men" he cried
as he commanded the soldiers who began to
file into the chamber, shields on their arms and
pikes at rest. Fifty guards were outside under
the command of the Master of Camp, Don
Augustin de Cepeda, and behind them were a
multitude of curious citizens eager for excitement. Above the tumult we heard cries of Viva
el Rey.
His Grace seated himself in his episcopal chair;
he was shaking and beads of perspiration covered his bald head. With the following words he
surrendered: “Bien, I will comply with the
order," and making a sign to young Padre Pedro,
Curator of San Francisco, who brought him a
crucifix, he continued in a trembling voice: “I
protest before the Almighty and Merciful God
against this attempt by force to impose upon the
Divine precepts of Holy Church, and to His holy
disposition I commend my spirit and soul."
He made the sign of the cross with his right
hand, saving, “Go and tell His Excellency that
by force I obey, but God pardon me, as the rules
of the Church prohibit me wholly from complying with these royal provisions."
Directing himself to the hierarchy and assembled friars, he said, “Brothers, say to His
Excellency that I obey the order he has sent me
only under duress; and give the rank of Prebendary to Don Diego de Cartagena, at the same
time protesting to God at this imposition."
At this point the prelate fainted in his chair
and was borne reverently to a chamber and
placed on a bed. I took advantage of the excitement to leave the Palace hurriedly. At last I
breathed the free air of the narrow streets, and


later passed more tranquilly through calle San
Jose where groups of friars stood conversing
with the natives, explaining to them the differences that distracted the city.
I directed my steps to the Royal Palace and
found His Excellency in conference with a group
of Spaniards discussing maritime business.
As they took their leave a little later I recognized among them Don M. Acha, L. Perez, and
J. de Zapater. (One of the chief reasons for the
animosity of the clergy was the fact that upon
his arrival in Manila, Diego de Salcedo had taken
steps to re-allocate more equitably the number
of boletas absorbed by the clergy and to allow
merchants to engage regularly in the trade of the
one galleon allowed by the Spanish government
each vear. This redistribution brought down
upon his innocent head the charge that he was
a heretic for interfering with the perquisites of
the Church. The merchants themselves as well
as general trade benefitted greatly by this reallocation.)
I did not at once tell His Excellency what had
happened to me in the Episcopal Palace. A few


moments later the adjutant Don Fermin Altayde
entered and in a few words said His Grace had
complied with the Royal Order under protest and
acquainted the governor with the details. His
Excellency pounded the desk with his closed
fist. “They want trouble and dissension, eh?
Well, they shall have it, and before long, too.
How many insults must a servant of His Majesty
endure in these Islands torn with petty intrigue,
merely to have a simple order enforced? If God
is as good as they say, He knows how to judge
good and evil.”
Turning to the adjutant he dismissed him. "Don Fermin, you may go, but
give orders that today I am not receiving visits
from anyone”
I also took up my hat and prepared to depart,
but, at a sign from His Excellency, I laiditdown
again. Apparently he wished me to remain.
He closed the door after the adjutant, and told
the guard to stand some paces off.
"Sit down, Aguarena,” he said, "I should like
to hear your account of the events that have
just transpired.”
(Continued in October)


MeCormick-Deering Power Unit
(S. A. E. 28.9 HP)
for


Shovels—Cranes—Hoists—Dredges—Sawmills
Logging Equipment—Concrete Mixers
Welders—Compressors
Electric Generators
and many other special uses
THE MCCORMICK DEERING Power The heavy-duty crank-shaft mounted on
Unit is another power product of the ball-bearings, removable cylinders, the
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER COMPANY. high tension magneto with built-in impulse
This unit is a stationary power plant of starter, the air cleaner, the built-in factory
the same high quality of design and consealed governor and other distinctive feastruction that has made the MeCormicktures promote that smooth flow of power,
Deering Tractor such an outstanding
success. This power unit has the same backed with an ample reserve for the peak
engine as the MeCormick-Deering loads so essential in this type of equipTractor which combines simplicity ment. These features also tend to assure
economy of operation and maintenance.
with ruggedness of construction.


Write Us or Visit our Showroom for a Demonstration
MAULEOD AND COMIAINI


154 Marques de Comillas
MANILA


TACLOBAN DAVAO
ILOILO CEBU VIGAN
LEGASPI


Here is the Inexpensive


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


16


  


September, 1929


Diet and The Duration of Life


BY JAMES A. TOBEY*


The span of human life has been set by the
psalmist at three score years and ten. A more
generous biblical writer seems not to have been
satisfied with so ephemeral a human existence
and so in the Book of Isaiah (Lxv:20) he offers
us an additional thirty years, saying, “the child
shall die an hundred years old.” Both of these
declarations have become literally true in numerous individual instances, but neither is now or
ever has been correct with respect to any race as
a whole. Nowhere as yet has the average span
nf life of any people attained even to seventy


dairy regions of that country are always vastly superior to the more numerous natives who live only
on cereal grains.
A climate which is continually hot does not seem
to have a deleterious effect on physical welfare when
nutrition is good. Arabia is an inferno, considerably worse with respect to temperature than the
Bahamas, but the Arabs now have, and, so far
as observed, always have enjoyed a most excellent physique. Even Napoleon’s surgeon-general,
on the great commander’s Egyptian campaign,
described these lean, sinewy hawks of the desert


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.


Kneedler Building


Manila, P. I.


Telephone 2-36-74


years, but there are definite indications that the
proverbial length will eventually be reached and
probably exceeded.
The nutrition of the race has been demonstrated to exercise a definite effect on longevity.
called "newer knowledge of nutrition" is
de most recent of the sciences, for it has been
volved almost entirely within the Twentieth
Century, but it is one of the most potent in its
ffect on the general welfare.
What we eat or what we do not eat throughout life has a definite effect on how long we live.
‘This is no idle statement but is supported both
iby human experience and by scientific investigation. If you delve into history you will find that
certain races have been more vigorous and longived than others, a fact which can not be explained on a purely biological basis. It has been
food selection rather than natural selection
"ich has caused this phenomenon. As has
een pointed out by Professor E. V. MeCollum,
of the Johns Hopkins University, the pastoral
¡peoples of the world who have had possession of
Wany dairy animals and whose diet has consisted
Amainly of the products of these animals have, without exception, always displayed the finest physical
levelopment and the greatest tendency toward lonavity.
In a remote part of the Himalayas is an isolated
ace with magnificent physique, the members of
which seem to have found the fountain of youth,
for they retain until late in life the characteristics
y youth. Since gland transplantations have not
jet made their way into this secluded part of the
world, the explanation for this unusual virility and
lfertility is to be found mainly in diet. As reported
by Dr. Robert MCCarrison, of the British Medical
Service, these people subsist on a frugal diet, consisting mostly of goa” milk and vegetables. Another British scientist in India, Dr. D. MCCay, has
found that the pastoral Indians of the few good
The American Mercury: July, 1929


as more perfect in physical structure than most
Europeans.
There is an Arabian proverb to the effect that
he who has health has hope and he who has hope
has everything. The Arabs are fortunate in
that they have something besides hope which
contributes to their health, and that something
is milk. According to various writers, the fare


of the pastoral Arab is mostly milk, supplemented with only a moderate amount of meat, cereals,
and dates. The milk is that of goats; camels,
and sheep, and because of the intense heat it is
soured at once and eaten in the form of curds.
Throughout wide areas in Asia milk is also the
staple article of diet of many races who lead a
precarious existence. The Mongols must live
on milk or starve. They do not starve, but are
wiry and vigorous, though a thin race. The
Tartars at times live almost exclusively on mare’s
milk and thrive on it. Marco Polo on his peregrinations was much impressed by a milk wine
which has been manufactured by the Tartars
since the Thirteenth Century.
The dominant and aggressive peoples of the
world have always been those whose nutrition has
been of the best. It is related of David that he was
carrying ten cheeses for the nourishment of his
cohorts when he met and conquered the redoubtable
Goliath. The conquerors have always been users
of dairy products in abundance, and not of grasses
and grains nor of meats. The beef eaters, socalled, of England have also been drinkers of
milk as well as of more potent beverages. The
Scandinavian countries, where the span of life
is so much greater than ours, have always been
noted as dairy countries, and the same is true
of Holland, another country where the average
life is longer.
That the right food can actually extend life
has been demonstrated by a series of interesting
investigations conducted by Professor Henry C.
Sherman of Columbia University. For about
ten years in his laboratories feeding experiments
have been under way on that well known laboratory animal, the white rat. The life of the
white rat is relatively short and his nutritional
foibles resemble those of man, so that studies on
these docile rodents offer material of real scientific value, applicable to human conditions.
“We have recently completed a somewhat
extended experiment in which the influence of a
single change in the food supply upon the longevity of rats of identical heredity, maintained
under conditions uniform in all respects, appears
to have been fully demonstrated,” Professor
Sherman reported to the National Academy of
Sciences last November. In this study about
400 rats were kept in about equal numbers on
two different dietaries. One diet, containing a
mixture of one-sixth dried whole milk and fivesixths ground whole wheat, with a little salt, was
considered adequate, for already twenty-one
generations of rats had lived and thrived on it.
The other diet was not only adequate but better,
for it contained one-third whole milk powder and
only two-thirds ground whole wheat. The
(Please turn to page 26, col. 2)


rhe insular Life Assurance Co., Lta.





MANILA, P. I.
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
,oansonreal estatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
FOR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


Call or write for particulars to:
HOME OFFICE
4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 11
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


1


Drama For Manilans
By GLADYS TRAYNOR*


Hopes nurtured by the reports of those returning from the States that the popularity of
the talkies is turning people away from the
legitimate stage were nipped in the bud at the
first showing in Manila. Our own Community
Players as yet need have no fear of the sound
pictures carrying off their laurels as the best
entertainment to be had in the Philippines.
Whether it be because the first pictures shown
here are old ones made in the experimental
stages, or because tropical theatres are not
adapted to the sound reproducing mechanism,
the fact is they remind one of the first screechy,
wheezy phonograph being displayed before a
village audience, gaping with astonishment and
greatly impressed that any kind of noise should
come from a small box, a disc, and a horn. To
see screen figures to whose silence we have long
grown accustomed open their lips, and to hear
sounds which are supposedly related to the action
on the screen, does smack of thaumaturgy.
The art is new to the magician, of course, but
these sounds leave much to the imagination.
Putting her hands to her ears, Thalia turns
hopefully to home talent.
The new director of the Community Players,
George M. Ball, comes to us from the Carmel
Players in California with a background of nearly
fifteen years’ theatrical experience. While the
Board of Directors retains the management of
the organization, under Mr. Ball’s direction I
think we may expect the Players not only to
continue amusing Manila audiences but also
to develop into a worth-while dramatic group
with an artistic conscience. For five years Mr.
Ball worked with Maurice Browne as assistant
stage manager, also playing juvenile leads. Mr.
Browne is the author of Wings Over Europe
and Journey's End, two plays of unusual merit
which won the recognition of both London and
New York critics and discriminating playgoers.
Through this association, Mr. Ball became interested in the Little Theatre movement and
for the last eight years has been identified with
community groups in California.
With the passing of the stock companies, due
to prohibitive costs, movie competition, and
other factors, including radio entertainment,
the professional legitimate stage in the United
States is today practically non-existent except
in a few large cities. Community dramatic
groups have taken its place. Local plavers have
provided such good entertainment for their
audiences that communities are building their
own theatres—as we talk of doing here. While
on the one hand the American theatre in New
York is forging its way into pioneer fields, drama
is also returning to its amateur origins. Both
groups are attempting to eliminate much of the
driftwood accummulated through the centuries
and carried down by stage traditions to be
meted out to us in present-day hocum.
The small theatre may be obliged to start
in the same way as the strolling actors of the
sixteenth century, so far as training, equipment,
and patronage are concerned, but it has the
advantage of the experimental work and thought
of the best minds interested in the drama over a
period in the history of the stage which corresponds to that of the Renaissance in the history
of art.
When groups in numerous small towns with
little cultural background, striving toward an
artistic ideal, gain the support and interest of
their public, it is indeed proof that it is not
always the limited, "hard-boiled” theatrical manager whose unimaginative mind is caught by
glassy farcical facets of caricatured and burlesqued comedy, or by cheap melodrama which
typifies certain characteristics of real life, but
distorts the picture of reality as a whole, who
knows what the public wants. It seems that
small town audiences who choose their own
entertainment, as well as progressive patrons
of metropolitan art theatres prefer plays of
substance. The movies, with their imaginative


Mrs. Traynor’s views on the talkies differ from the
editor’s, but deserve expression just the same.—Ed.


and sentimental thrillers, have not so much
ousted the legitimate drama as they have
provided a hearing for the play with an idea.
The Manila Community Players, if they will
but keep abreast of progressive thought, need
not lag behind similar groups in the States. To
be sure, difficulties confronting them are greater.
They are more out of touch with current criticism; they have not the stimulus of competitive entertainment available in even the smaller
American towns. But they do have the advantage of a full exchequer. Perhaps the advent
of Mr. Ball is an indication that they are preparing to adventure into new fields. Some good
work, not all of it particularly suited to the
diverse tastes of the community, was done last
year. Money was made, and it is altogether
probable that the success of the Community
Players provided the impetus which is launching
the building of the new theatre. If they pleased
many Manilans with their last season’s production, one wonders, in the face of the work
done by small groups at home in towns where
there is less money and more competition, what
may not be the proportions of their success
when they are molded into a more homogeneous group working hard to get across ideas as
well as laughs.
Mr. Ball has expressed the hope that some
time this season the Manila community might
put on an out-door pageant. We heartily
endorse the idea. Surely a most appropriate
setting could be found. Several splendid openair performances have been staged in California,
among them one produced by the Carmel Players, which attracted the attention of the entire
country. There are open-air theatres in Java,
and other oriental places, presenting native
plays, which appeal greatly to globe-trotters.
If the Community Players were to present some
sort of oriental masque in a natural Philippine
mise en scene, they might furnish the inspiration


against contagion is effectually rendered by the use of


?
DEAR DRAND
NATURAL STERILIZED MILK
Unequalled for Purity.
SOLE DISTRIBUTORS
F. E. ZUELLIG, INC.
MANILA
Iloilo
Cebu


now lacking for some one to write a Philippine
pageant or play. It was thus that many other
historical pageants were suggested.
The first offering this season of the Com
munity Players was The Bad Man, which man
enjoyed. We are optimistically awaiting th
next production, You and I, by Philip Barr
which has been popular with Little Theatre
groups in the States. Mr. Barry is one of a
group of modern American playwrights who
found an applauding public soon after graduating from Prof. Baker’s 47 Workshop. You
and I brought him his first public recognition,
critics agreeing that he had been successful in
accomplishing what he had set out to do—“te
set down in terms of comedy, the underlying
serious drama of human life.” This is good
news to Manilans who have been wishing for a
little more substantial fare than the surface
comedies presented to them heretofore.
There is much to be commended in the policy
of selecting actors from the entire community,
but it is also to be hoped that a nucleus of talent
may be brought together and interest sustained,
so that the public may have the advantage of
their experience. At present it seems to me that
there is too much casting for type and not enough
uncovering of real talent. Most of the small
theatres who have achieved something like professional excellence have encouraged discovery
of talent by holding competitive readings; the
one who read a particular part most satisfactorily
would be chosen to play that role. The result
was competition and a conscious effort to ia
prove.


BIG DAYS AT LOS BANOS


One of the main features of the twentietl
anniversary celebration of the College of Agri
culture on October 10 to 12 of this year will ba
the agricultural exposition. Every department of the College will present exhibits showing
the line of activity of each. The members of
the staff of all departments are now fully mobilized for the preparation of these exhibits. Each
department is promising to make the exposition
a real "show," a show that will fully
the progress made by the College since itsi
tion twenty years ago. In other words, there
will be open house where visitors from near and
from afar will see what the College is doing.
Nobody should miss this rare opportunity of
inspecting the work this institution, financed
by taxes paid by the public, has done and is
doing for the agricultural development not only
of the Islands in particular but also of the Far
East in general.


The Port of Manila
I like to see the whitecaps on the bay—
A typhoon blowing up, and storms abroad:
To see the snarling white fangs of the waves
Flashing on stones ribbed in the harbor wall.
For all the time the harbor wall stands firm,
The boats at moorings strain, but nothing more,
With hempen cables holding fore and aft.
Stanch is the wall, stanch was the country’s will
When it conceived this harbor safe and still,
When it said, "Here shall stones be laid,
Here built the wall, and here, the city’s mart.
Unto this point the storm may come—beyond,
Behind the wall and round the piers,
Be safe calm waters for a fleet of ships,
For commerce, and for traffic of the seas.”


Epigrams are terse facts which lesser brevity
would quickly prove fallacious.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


18


  


September, 1929


The Trial of Alamit the Civet


By ALFRED WORM


The animals of the Philippine jungle had
assembled in the white light of the full moon in
front of the entrance to the big cave in the vaulting wall of a limestone cliff on the precipitous
bank of the Alassasin river, island of Luzon.
Saua, the big python, queen of the jungle creatures, had awakened from her monthly sleep; it
had been somewhat prolonged and was induced
by her ingesting the largest meal she had ever
eaten, the biggest wild boar, said Ungoy, head
huntsman of Saua’s faithful pack of monkeys,
the jungle had ever known.
To avoid the fate of wild pigs, the monkeys
had promised Her Majesty to keep her abundantly supplied with such tidbits as boars and
deer, in return for which they enjoyed immunity
from her voracity.
According to age-long custom, this night, the
night of the seventh moon in the seventh year,
was the night of judgment, rewards, and frivolity for the animals of the jungle. The queen
would listen to the oppressed, pronounce sentence and reward the brave. Following this,
the sabbatical festivity would take place. The
main feature of the festivities, this year, was to
be the wedding of Sylva the beautiful daughter
of Usa, the most powerful buck of all the deer
on Luzon. From east and west, north and
south, over trails, by water, and through the air,
came all the animals, birds and reptiles—for
once to assemble in peace and fraternity as their
ancestors did in Eden before Eve ate of the apple
and brought on the destruction of Paradise.
“Kalaw, the hornbill, master of ceremonies at
Saua’s court, hopped clumsily over the ground,
his harsh voice rasping on the tender nerves of
the timid dove tribe the punays, bato-batos and
punaladas. "Koak! Koak! Koakl croaked Kalaw.
Ye dwellers in the jungle, listen to Paniqui,
clerk of Her Majesty’s court, who will take the
names of those wishing to appear before the
Queen to complain or to be rewarded!”
Saua had been wise in choosing Kalaw, with
his deep voice, as master of ceremonies. No
,ither creature in her realm would have been
able to lift its voice to such a pitch as would
penetrate the babel of screams, screeches, cooings, whistles, snorts, hisses, howls and grunts
which filled the air.
Paniqui, the clerk, hung by his hind legs from a
branch head down, for he was a large fruit bat.
le blackeves blinked merrily at the curious
lage, and his sharp ears twitched in all
directions to catch the conversations below.
Paniqui was wise, cautious, and a jolly fellow—
very much liked by all Saua’s subjects, never
harming even the weakest and always being
willing to aid those in trouble. When he flapped
his large wings, signifying that he was ready to
entertain requests, silence reigned at last.
The animals observed certain courtesies,
giving preference to the doves. Punalada, the
bleeding-heart dove, flew to a place in the tree,
beside Paniqui, and told her grievance to him.
"Alamit, the civet,” she spoke with tears in
ther eyes, “has robbed my nest, eaten my children and bitten me in the breast.”
“Her Majesty will punish him,” Paniqui
answered gravely. “Alamit, vou will appear
before the Queen as defendant ... Where is
Alamit?”
Long and short necks of animals and birds
stretched this way and that looking for the civet,
but he could not be seen.
“Guago," ordered Paniqui, "take your squad
and search for Alamit. When you have found
him bring him here to answer the charges made
against him.”
Guago, the large horned owl, was the chief of
police of the jungle, perhaps because his eyes
could penetrate the darkest night as clearly as
though the forest were flooded with sunlight.
At the clerk’s command the chief and his tribe
of owls, large and small, flapped their wings and
flew out over the crowd in search of the cunning
criminal. The last had scarcely disappeared
when two birds flew simultaneously up to the
branch where Paniqui hung.
“See how we look,” they cried, "once we were
snow-white, the pride and envy of all the birds,


but Alamit played a trick on us and now our
feathers are spoiled."
Paniqui smiled at them. "Kuliawan, vou
should not complain. Your new coat of yellow
gold and black is very beautiful."”
The clerk was not ordinarily given to personalities.
Kuliawan, the golden oriole, was flattered.
He began preening himself as he looked superciliously down on the assemblage, which was
expressing approval of the bat’s discriminating
aesthetic sense by twitterings, screechings and
miscellaneous cries creating pandemonium.
“Vou are more beautiful than you were
"Paniqui
before, Kuliawan” they chorused.
is right. You should not complain against
Alamit, but thank him."
Greatly pleased, for he was a vain creature,
eager for more admiration, Kuliawan flew from
the branch to mingle with his relatives and
friends. As he left the tree, Coling, the baldheaded monkbird, who had made his plaint together with Kuliawan, protested: “But what
about me? My coat has become jet-black, and


with this spot on my head, I look like an undertaker.” Cheers, mocking laughter and cries of
Monk, Baldy, and Undertaker greeted his lament,
and poor Coling, with wounded feelings, ruffled
his feathers in anger.
Paniqui called for order and then dismissed
Coling.
"You shall appear before Her Majesty
and te
ll your story ... Who is next to be
heard?”
All eyes turned to a small animal, covered
with blood, who was limping painfully toward
the foot of the tree. It was Musang, the palmroller. “I demand that Alamit be hanged for
frustrated murder,” he cried with tears in his
eyes. It was evident that he was suffering.
“Alamit lured me into a trap where Aso, the
dog of man, almost killed me."
The list of complaints presented to this tribunal was lengthy. Many jungle dwellers came
to bear witness against the mischievous Alamit,
for all the charges were brought against him.
Again and again the clerk called for the defendant, but Alamit was to be seen nowhere. His
cunning instincts had warned him to stay away,
for he knew that Saua was stern in dealing out
justice, and the long list of crimes hgaped upon
his guilty head would surely lead him to the



When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


ORLD
ADE
ARELLSS
RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


9 PLAZA MORAGA


Pones:


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURI


September, 1929


  


19


From the entrance to the cave opposite the
large tree where all had congregated finally came
the sound of sharp hissing. Bayawak, the monster monitor lizard, and captain of Her Majesty’s
bodyguard, was announcing the arrival of the
Queen. At this signal sudden silence descended
on the multitude. The huge lizard slowly


V. But the human character, however it
may be exalted or depressed by a temporary
enthusiasm, will return by degrees to its proper
and natural level, and will resume those passions
that seem the most adapted to its present condition. The primitive Christians were dead to
the business and pleasures of the world; but their
love of action, which could never be entirely
extinguished, soon revived, and found a new
occupation in the government of the church. A
separate society, which attacked the established
religion of the empire, was obliged to adopt some


emerged from the cave, followed by six other
enormous monitor lizards of the Queen’s bodyguard, and then came Saua herself, surrounded
by thousands of smaller lizards, snakes and frogs.
A rearguard of six large, saw-crested, green
iguanas, under the command of their chief,
Ibid, brought up the rear of the procession.
(Please turn to page 22, col. 1)


form of internal policy, and to appoint a sufficient number of ministers, intrusted not only
with the spiritual functions, but even with the
temporal direction of the Christian commonwealth. The safety of that society, its honor,
its aggrandizement, were productive, even in the
most pious minds, of a spirit of patriotism, such
as the first of the Romans had felt for the republic, and sometimes of a similar indifference in
the use of whatever means might probably conduce to so desirable an end. The ambition of
raising themselves or their friends to the honors


and offices of the church was disguised by the
laudable intention of devoting to the public
benefit the power and consideration which, for
that purpose only, it became their duty to solicit.
In the exercise of their functions they were frequently called upon to detect the errors of heresy
or the arts of faction, to oppose the designs of
perfidious brethren, to stigmatize their characters
with deserved infamy, and to expel them from
the bosom of a society whose peace and happiness they had attempted to disturb. The ecclesiastical governors of the Christians were taught
to unite the wisdom of the serpent with the innocence of the dove; but as the former was refined, so the latter was insensibly corrupted, by
the habits of government. In the church as well
as in the world, the persons who were placed in
any public station rendered themselves con siderable by their eloquence and firmness, by their
knowledge of mankind, and by their dexterity in
business; and while they concealed from others,
and perhaps from themselves, the secret motives
of their conduct, they too frequently relapsed
into all the turbulent passions of active life,
which were tinctured with an additional degree
of bitterness and obstinacy from the infusion of
spiritual zeal.
The government of the church has often been
the subject, as well as the prize, of religious contention. The hostile disputants of Rome, of
Paris, of Oxford, and of Geneva, have alike
struggled to reduce the primitive and apostolic
model to the respective standards of their own
policy. The few who have pursued this inquiry
with more candor and impartiality are of opinion
that the apostles declined the office of legislation,
and rather chose to endure some partial scandals
and divisions, than to exclude the Christians of
a future age from the liberty of varying their
forms of ecclesiastical government according to
the changes of times and circumstances. The
scheme of policy which, under their approbation,
was adopted for the use of the first century, may
be discovered from the practice of Jerusalem,
of Ephesus, or of Corinth. The societies which
were instituted in the cities of the Roman empire
were united only by the ties of faith and charity.
Independence and equality formed the basis of
their internal constitution. The want of dicipline and human learning was supplied by the
occasional assistance of the prophefs, who were
called to that function without distinction of age,
of sex, or of natural abilities, and who, as often
as they felt the divine impulse, poured forth the
effusions of the Spirit in the assembly of the
faithful. But these extraordinary gifts were
frequently abused or misapplied by the prophetic teachers. They displayed them at an irr
proper season, presumptuously disturbed the
service of the assembly, and, by their pride or
mistaken zeal, they introduced, particularly into
the apostolic church of Corinth, a long and
melancholy train of disorders. As the institution of prophets became useless, and even pernicious, their powers were withdrawn, and their
office abolished. The public functions of religion were solely intrusted to the established
ministers of the church, the bishops and the
presby ters; two appellations which, in their first
origin, appear to have distinguished the same
office and the same order of persons. The name
of Presbyter was expressive of their age, or rather
of their gravity and wisdom. The title of Bishop denoted their inspection over the faith
and manners of the Christians who were committed to their pastoral care. In proportion to
the respective numbers of the faithful, a larger
or smaller number of these episcopal presby ters
guided each infant congregation with equal
authority and with united counsels.
But the most perfect equality of freedom
requires the directing hand of a superior magistrate: and the order of public deliberations soon
introduces the office of a president, invested at
least with the authority of collecting the sentiments, and of executing the resolutions, of the
assembly. A regard for the public tranquility,
which would so frequently have been interrupted
by annual or by occasional elections, induced the
primitive Christians to constitute an honorable
and perpetual magistracy, and to choose one of
the wisest and most holy among their presbyters
to execute, during his life, the duties of their
ecclesiastical governor. It was under these
circumstances that the lofty title of Bishop


SIIATIAEASPONX
PORrOAOBAAN


NOTICE is hereby given that
beginning September 1, 1929,
the Manila Railroad will accept for billing at all stations
freight, express and C.O.D. shipments consigned to the Port
of Mauban, layabas. Oniy
Express and C.O.D. shipments
for this port may be accepted
for billing at Downtown Office,
517-519 Dasmarinas. During
the month of September, the
M. S. “Alabat" will call at
Mauban on the 10th and 27th


Manila Railroad Company
Manila
943 Azcarraga
Phone 4-98-61


Origins of the Roman Catholic Church
GIBBON—(Continued from August)


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


20


  


September, 1929


began to raise itself above the humble appellation of Presbyter; and while the latter remained
the most natural distinction for the members
of every Christian senate, the former was appropriated to the dignity of its new president. The
advantages of this episcopal form of government, which appears to have been introduced
before the end of the first century, were so obvious and so important for the future greatness,
as well as the present peace, of Christianity, that
it was adopted without delay by all the societies
which were already scattered over the empire,
had acquired in a very early period the sanction
of antiquity, and is still revered by the most
powerful churches, both of the East and of the
West, as a primitive and even as a divine establishment. It is needless to observe that the
pious and humble presbyters who were first
dignified with the episcopal title could not possess, and would probably have rejected, the
power and pomp which now encircles the tiara
of the Roman Pontiff, or the mitre of a German
prelate. But we may define, in a few words,
the narrow limits of their original jurisdiction,


which was chiefly of a spiritual, though in some
instances of a temporal nature. It consisted
in the administration of the sacraments and
discipline of the church, the superintendency of
religious ceremonies, which imperceptibly increased in number and variety, the consecration
of ecclesiastical ministers, to whom the bishop
assigned their respective functions, the management of the public fund, and the determination
of all such differences as the faithful were unwilling to expose before the tribunal of an idolatrous judge. These powers, during a short
period, were exercised according to the advice of
the presbyteral college, and with the consent
and approbation of the assembly of Christians.
The primitive bishops were considered only as
the first of their equals, and the honorable servants of a free people. Whenever the episcopal
chair became vacant by death, a new president
was chosen among the presbyters by the suffrage
of the whole congregation, every membar ej
which supposed himself invested with a sacred
and sacerdotal character.
Such was the mild and equal constitution by


which the Christians were governed more than
a hundred years after the death of the apostles.
Every society formed within itself a separate
and independent republic; and although the
most distant of these little states maintained a
mutual as well as friendly intercourse of letters
and deputations, the Christian world was not yet
connected by any supreme authority or legislative assembly. As the numbers of the faithful
were gradually multiplied, they discovered the
advantages that might result from a closer union
of their interest and designs. Towards the end
of the second century, the churches of Greece
and Asia adopted the useful institutions of provincial synods, and they may justly be supposed
to have borrowed the model of a representative
council from the celebrated examples of their
own country, the Amphictyons, the Achaean
league, or the assemblies of the lonian cities.
It was soon established as a custom and as a
law, that the bishops of the independent churches
should meet in the capital of the province at the
stated periods of spring and autumn. Their
deliberations were assisted by the advice of a
few distinguished presbyters, and moderated
by the presence of a listening multitude. Their
decrees, which were styled Canons, regulated
every important controversy of faith and discipline; and it was natural to believe that a
liberal effusion of the Holy Spirit would be
poured on the united assembly of the delegates
of the Christian people. The institution of
synods was so well suited to private ambition,
and to public interest, that in the spacepng
few years it was received throughout the whole
empire. Aregular correspondence was established between the provincial councils, which
mutually communicated and approved their
respective proceedings; and the catholic church
soon assumed the form, and acquired the
strength, of a great foederative republic.
As the legislative authority of the particular
churches was insensibly superseded by the use of
councils, the bishops obtained by their alliance
a much larger share of executive and arbitrary
power; and as soon as they were connected by
a sense of their common interest, they were
enabled to attack, with united vigor, the original
rights of their clergy and people. The prelates
of the third century imperceptibly changed the
language of exhortation into that of command,
scattered the seeds of future usurpations, and
supplied, by Scripture allegories and declamatory rhetoric, their deficiency of force and of
reason. They exalted the unity and power of
the church, as it was represented in the EPIsCOPAL OFFICE, of which every bishop enjoyed an
equal and undivided portion. Princes and magistrates, it was often repeated, might boast an
earthly claim to a transitory dominion; it was
the episcopal authority alone which was derived
from the Deity, and extended itself over this and
over another world. The bishops were the vicegerents of Christ, the successors of the apostles,
and the mystic substitutes of the high priest of
the Mosaic law. Their exclusive privilege of
conferring the sacerdotal character invaded the
freedom both of cierical and of popular elections;
and if, in the administration of the church, they
still consulted the judgment of the presbyters,
or the inclination of the people, they most carefully inculcated the merit of such a voluntary
condescension. The bishops acknowledged the
supreme authority which resided in the assembly
of their brethren; but in the government of his
peculiar diocese, each of them exacted from his
Hock the same implicit obedience as if that
favorite metaphor had been literally just, and as
is the shepherd had beenof a more exalted nacusg
than that of his sheep. This obedience, however, was not imposed without some efforts on
one side, and some resistance on the other. The
democratical part of the constitution was, in
many places, very warmly supported by the
zealous or interested opposition of the inferior
clergy. But their patriotism received the ignominious epithets of faction and schism; and the
episcopal cause was indebted for its rapid progress to the labors of many active prelates, who,
like Cyprian of Carthage, could reconcile the
arts of the most ambitious statesmen with the
Christian virtues which seem adapted to the
character of a saint and martyr.
The same causes which at first had destroyed
the equality of the presbyters introduced among


The kind that makes
you want to buy them
again and again—and
that gives you
Most Miles Per Peso


teeste
me
P
CURE-DEPPED TIRES


Pacific Commercial Company


Distributor


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


21.


Haphazard Studies in the English Language
The University Dictionary which is sold by the MANILA DAILY BULLETIN at two
pesos the copy, contains an essay on Common Errors in English by Dr. Farquson
Johnson that will Be run in installments in this department, commencing with this
issue. Forit is at once interesting and instructive; indeed, the editor of the JOURNAL,
benefited by it greatly in his own diction, has seen nothing comparable to it anywhere. For this essay alone, he would not part with his own copy of this convenient
English vocabulary at any price—unless he might, for the pittance at which it sells,
obtain another. Dr. Johnson’s pages fairly glow with linguistic erudition, as the
student will observe. But the original was proof-read carelessly, and the errors
which therefore appear in it have here been corrected. Where there are references
to the main vocabulary, etc., any standard English dictionary may be consulted.—Ed.
(Continued)


the bishops a preeminence of rank, and from
thence a superiority of jurisdiction. As often
as in the spring and autumn they met in provincial synod, the difference of personal merit and
reputation was very sensibly felt among the
members of the assembly, and the multitude was
governed by the wisdom and eloquence of the
few. But the order of public proceedings required a more regular and less invidious distinction; the office of perpetual presidents in the
councils of each province was conferred on the
bishops of the principal city; and these aspiring
prelates, who soon acquired the lofty titles of
Metropolitans and Primates, secretly prepared
themselves to usurp over their episcopal brethren
the same authority which the bishops had so
lately assumed above the college of presbyters.
Nor was it long before an emulation of preeminence and power prevailed among the Metropolitans themselves, each of them affecting to display, in the most pompous terms, the temporal
honors and advantages of the city over which he
presided; the numbers and opulence of the Christians who were subject to their pastoral care; the
saints and martyrs who had arisen among them;
and the purity with which they preserved the
tradition of the faith, as it had been transmitted
through a series of orthodox bishops from the
apostle or the apostolic disciple to whom the
foundation of their church was ascribed. Frono
every cause, either of a civil or of an ecclesiastical nature, it was easy to foresee that Rome
must enjoy the respect, and would soon claim
the obedience, of the provinces. The society of
the faithful bore a just proportion to the capital
of the empire; and the Roman church was the
greatest, the most numerous, and, in regard to
the West, the most ancient of all the Christian
establishments, many of which had received their
religion from the pious labors of her missionaries.
Instead of one apostolic founder, the utmost
boast of Antioch, of Ephesus, or of Corinth, the
banks of the Tiber were supposed to have been
honored with the preaching and martyrdom of
the two most eminent among the apostles; and
the bishops of Rome very prudently claimed the
(Continued on page 28)


at auction. In England they say “by auction," but in America we say "at private sale”
and “at auction.” Johnson says," “the verb
auction means to sell by auction," that is,
by offering to the highest bidder. "At an
auction" and "at a private sale” are common
and correct expressions.
at length, at last. The difference in meaning
between these two phrases often escapes all
but the most careful speakers. “At last”
implies difficulties overcome, impediments
causing unforeseen delay, or disappointment
by having had to wait longer for an object
than we expected. "At length” is not necessarily final, but implies long continuance of
effort, mental or physical, for a definite end,
or long continued hope, expectation, suspense
or suffering. “At Iength his wishes were
“At last
realized and he went to Europe.”
he died."
at you. Not "mad at you," but "angry with
you,” will correct two common errors.
attache. Although this is purely a French
word, we have adopted it for want of a better
one. Pronounced a-ta-shay, with the first
two a’s short, and last a long; only slight accent on last syllable.
auxiliary. Pronounced aug-zil'yari, not
auks'il-ary.


avenue. Often mispronounced av'noo or av'enoo; should be av'e-new.
avocation. To be distinguished from vocation, which should be used of a man’s daily
business or calling in life, while his avocation
is his recreative employment, or, it may be,
his hobby. Thus we say correctly, “The law
is his vocation, politics his avocation", "Hrn
vocation is teaching, her avocation pyrography.” As Alfred Avres clearly puts it, "Our
avocations are the things we do for the love
of doing them; our vocations are the things
we do for gain.” The two words are frequently
confounded, but careful speakers will avoid
the error.
awful, awfully. Colloquialisms that grate
upon the ear in such phrases as "awfully
good,”
“an awful headache," and "Thanks
awfully!” Their use, even when regarded as
slang, is always in poor taste, and generally
betokens a limited vocabulary.
The common misuse of such strong words
as "awful" results unfortunately in lessening
their strength and value for legitimate use.
There is surely nothing awe-inspiring about
the ordinary social bore, but he is flippantly
and frequently called "an awful bore,” which
robs the word "awful” of its significance when
properly applied to a truly awe-inspiring spect

Bring your plans to us. Let us counsel
with you about building with APO Cement,
an enduring material lending itself to the
beauties of permanent architecture.


Strive for
Permanence and Beauty
in Building


Consider the Facts of True Economy!
No one has studied the conditions suriounding
real estate in Manila and environs more than
the judges of our courts; and they find the
topography of the city such that, combined
with the peculiar ownership of extensive urban
areas, values are even higher than the growing
population of the city would alone bring about.
It is false economy to build on such land save with the most
permanent material—CONCRETE, A home product—
"APO” Cement


CEDO PORTLAND CEMEINTCOMIANa
MANILA, P. I.
CHINA BANK BUILDING


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


22


  


September, 1929


acle. To speak of an artesian well as "an
awful bore” would be a correct use of the
word, but would cause smiles instead of wonder or admiration, simply because of the widespread misuse of "awful.” Careful speakers
will scrupulously avoid such misuse of awful,
terrible, horrible, and similar words.
aye. Two distinct pronunciations of this word
are sanctioned. When it signifies "yes,” or
a vote in the affirmative, it is pronounced as
long i; when it means "always, ever,” the pronuncia' on is that of long a.
B
bachelor. A very common abbreviation of this
word is bach; not used by good speakers or
writers.
back. Should not be used with “return,”
which includes the sense of back. “He will
return back home” is an example of frequent
misuse.
bacillus. Pronounced ba-sil’us. The plural
of this word, "bacilli,” is often misused for
the singular form.
backward, backwards. The former may be
used as either an adjective or an adverb, the
latter is a variant form of the adverb. We
speak correctly of "a backward pupil," and
we retire either backward or backwards, according to individual preference, both forms
being used by good writers. There is a tendency to drop the final s in all such adverbs.
bad. Misused in such cases as "a bad cold, a
bad wound,” where severe or dangerous is the
proper word. As one writer pertinently asks,
"Inasmuch as colds are never good, why
should we call them bad?”
bade. The a is short, bad; not baid.
badly. “I want to see you badly” should be
"l want to see you very much.” Similarly
with “We miss you badly.” The use of badly
in such cases is undesirable.
baggage. The word is seldom used in speech
in England where "luggage” takes its place.
The best English writers, however, are now
using "baggage,” and it is etymologically the
better word. "Luggage” is perhaps better
suitod to the conditions existing in Europe,
where travelers continue to "lug” their baggage, in the absence of many conveniences of
transportation here.
balance. Frequently and erroneously used for
rest, remainder. Balance is the excess of one
thing over another, that which will make
them balance, and should only be used in this
sense. “The balance of the evening” is not
only wrong but ridiculous, like “The balance
of the guests stayed late.” “Rest" or “remainder” are easily and properly substituted.
“Balance” is correctly used of accounts,
in referring to the difference between the
debits and the credits, or the sum needed to
balance an account.
balm. Pronounced bahm, not bam.
banister, banisters. Used colloquially for
baluster and balustrade, which are preferred
in formal speech and writing, on the ground
of etymological correctness. Banister is simply a corruption of the old word baluster.
Common usage has given it a certain standing
of authority.
(Continued in October)


TRIAL OF ALAMIT....
(From page 19)
Na MMAO PAIMAA MAA MAMA a9
by the appearance of the Court retinue. They
divided into two groups to make room for the
parade, which moved toward the foot of the tree
from which Paniqui hung. As they marched
along they were accompanied by music,—the
booming cries of crocodiles in the nearby river
Buaya, chief of the crocodiles, and cousin to
Saua, awaited the Queen under the tree to deliver
the address of welcome. Saua reached the gigantic old balete tree and stopped. With pleasing
grace she raised the front portion of her body
and bowed her head to her assembled subjects
in acknowledgment of their greetings and renewed vows of allegiance. Slowly the python wrapped herself around the enormous trunk of the
balete, and powerful coils moved spirally upward. Admiringly, with mingled feelings of


amazement and awe, the motley crowd watched
the huge body glide along the tree to a large,
thick branch almost twenty meters above the
ground.
“How beautiful our Queen is!” croaked Uak,
the crow, into his wife’s ear, the while one eye
was winking mischievously. “Lovely enough
to make me want to hug her to my breast.”
“It would be your last hug, you old fool,”
snapped back the jealous Mrs. Uak. "Look at
that pile of bones below the tree, all crushed to
splinters. They are Tao’s, the man from the
barrio who once foolishly matched his strength
with Saua’s."
The smooth, vari-colored scales on the body
of the enormous python glistened in the rays of
the full moon as Saua, Queen of the jungle, lay
coiled around the large limb. Shadows cast by
the leaves above formed fantastic paterns on the
large reptile, and when a gentle breeze swayed
the tree top they moved, becoming grotesque
figures leaping in a mad dance. All the animals
and birds assembled below were fascinated,


staring with fixed eyes at Saua, whose small
black eyes glittered brightly in her gracefully
poised head. Some were superstitious; others saw
in the person of their queen a supernatural being.
Breaking the hypnotic silence, at last Saua
spoke to Paniqui hanging above her. The clerk
raised his right wing in a signal to Kalaw, who
had been watching him. Now the Master of
Ceremonies flew to a high stump and raised his
powerful voice.
"Koak! Koak! Koak!” he shouted. “Her
Majesty, Saua, Queen of the jungle, has consented to listen to those who have been wronged.
All who wish to be heard assemble under the
balete tree.”
Punalada, Coling and Musang came forward
instantly, but Kuliawan who was now proud
of his new plumage, wished to remain behind.
Coling, the monkbird, insisted, however, that he
appear with him as witness against Alamit.
Saua spoke to the bleeding-heart dove first.
“Punalada, how did you get that red spot on
your breast?”


Ino iva-TOnar Colamdid


Model 820
E-Z Payments
₱475
Fourteen Models
Many Sizes


”
LIKe Dife Itsell
“TIKE life itself!” What more
Ecan be said of this marvelous new Columbia achievement,
the Viva-tonal Columbia Phonograph? What more, indeed,
could be said of any musical creation for reproducing recorded
sound?
Close your eyes when you hear
the Viva-tonal Columbia play the
first record. For you the singer is
in the room; for you, the world’s
great orchestras play as if in your
presence.
Prices are ranged to meet every
purse, every taste, and every
space limitation or imposing
requirement.


Try before you buy—convince yourself!
Good Discounts for Cash
Played and Displayed at Our
“COLUMBIA” Branch
136-138 Escolta, Roxas Building
and
BECK'S: ESCOLTA


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


23


“Your Majesty, Alamit, the villain, went to
my nest while l was away in search of food for
my two babies and killed them. When I returned I saw him there licking his bloody lips
and grinning at me. I was so angry and heart
broken I hardly knew what I was doing. I flew
at him, but he bit me in the breast and the blood
stained my white feathers.”
The Queen looked sympathetically at the
beautiful dove with the blood-red spot on her
white breast just above her heart. She spoke
gently: “Alamit shall be punished for this, but
in memory of the cruel deed you shall bear this
red spot on your breast forever, in keeping with
your name, Punalada, which means stabbed with
a dagger."
The crowd became silent and glanced anxiously at one another when Saua looked searchingly around and called for the offender. Guago,
the chief of police, had not yet returned with the
criminal. Suddenly a cry of astonishment was
heard. Everyone followed the eyes of Mrs.
Uak who had spied a small hole in the branch on
which the Queen rested. Saua turned her head
and saw Alamit sticking his head out of his
hiding place. The scoundrel smiled impudently at her and spoke boldly.
“Here I am, Queen Saua, your obedient servant, to defend myself. My wife and children
were hungry, and nothing was left for me. I
was walking through the jungle suffering from
hunger pangs when I came upon the dainty
morsels in Punalada’s nest, and l could not resist
temptation."
“I prohibited you from killing my subjects,
and ordered you to take your food only from
Manoc, the chickens of Tao, the man in the
AYou have
barrio,” hissed the Queen sternly.
disobeyed my command and shall therefore be
punished.”
Turning to the others waiting below, Saua
bade them relate their grievances.
“Your Majesty," began Coling, "Kuliawan
and I were once beautiful in spotless, snow-white
plumage. One day Alamit came to us and
promised to show us the finest mango tree with
the most delicious fruit we had ever tasted,
provided we would race to the sun to see which
one of the two could fly higher. We agreed and
started off. I flew faster than Kuliawan, and,
paying little attention to where I was going,
bumped my head against the fiery sun, burning
the feathers on the top of my head and scorching
all the rest. Now I am bald-headed with a
black suit and the laughing-stock of the forest.
They call me Monk, Undertaker and Baldy.”
His voice was so sad that had he not presented


such a ludicrous aps
pearance everyone
would have wept.
“But how did Kuliawan happen to get his
beautiful coat of golden
E

yellow and black?”
s
smiled the Queen.
Though she was sympathetic, she could not
hide her amusement
at Coling’s tale. “He
was with you."”
“I was far behind
Coling," Kuliawan interposed, proud that
Saua also had noticed
his new coat, "and
when he hit the sun
with his head, golden
sparks scattered everywhere and covered
me. Only the tips of
my wings and top of
my head were scorched;
gold settled over the
rest of my body.”
Turning her atten
tion from the golden
oriole, Saua looked
down on the small
wounded animal sit
ting on the ground
belowthe tree. "What
has happened to you,
Musang?” she asked kindly.
“Alamit came to my home in a hole in a tree
trunk," answered the palmroller, "and told me
that he knew a place full of Manoc, chickens of
Tao, the man, and invited me to go with him
for a feast. When we arrived at the house
Alamit told me to crawl through a small hole in
a box where he said the chickens slept. As soon
as I was inside, Aso, the dog, sprang at me and
almost tore me to pieces. While we were fighting, and when I at last succeeded in escaping and
ran off with Aso after me, Alamit gorged himself
in the chicken coop near the box. He only took
me along to be the goat, so that he might have
his fill undisturbed while I kept off the dog.”
Saua with difficulty suppressed a smile of
amusement as she listened to the clever trick the
crafty civet had played on poor unsuspecting
Musang. The unfortunate palmroller did not
enjoy the unqualified respect of all the Queen’s
subjects, however, and many began to laugh
uproariously in enjoyment of Alamit’s cunning


prank. Often it is that the innocent must suffer
while the guilty one wins the plaudits of the
multitude.
Other animals and birds, even snakes, lizards
and frogs, appeared before the Queen to recount
wrongs they had suffered because of Alamit, until
the list became very long, indeed. Realizing
that he was safe so long as he stayed in his hiding
place, the grinning civet looked amusedly out
from the hole in the branch at the staring throng
below him. His head only was visible, and no
more of him was to be seen in spite of Saua’s
command to come out and face the judges.
At last Her Majesty’s patience was exhausted.
She ordered Ungoy to place two of his monkeys
on guard near Alamit’s hiding place, while preparations for the wedding of the young deer,
Sylva, continued.
Buaya, the big crocodile, shook his head in
disapproval. Monkeys commissioned guards!
From his watery home in the river he had
watched them often and knew what foolish,
untrustworthy creatures they were. While the
other animals were cutting capers and enjoying gay pleasures of the occasion, he worked
his way noiselessly around the foot of the tree,
and unseen by Alamit and the monkey guard,
hid himself in a thick clump of brush just beneath the hole where Alamit was concealing
himself.
Soon dawn would end the festivities. Alamit
was thinking intently of a way to escape. Pronouncing sentence upon the evildoer, Her
Majesty had ordered that the tree be burnt with
the criminal in it as an appropriate climax to the
night’s entertainment. Below, the watching
eyes of Buaya suddenly twinkled in merriment
as he observed Alamit. The tails of the two
monkeys were hanging over the branch on which
they were sitting, one tail on either side. Alamit
reached from his hole, and with his front paws
quickly knotted the two tails together, then
swiftly jumped from his hole, the monkeys
making a dash to follow. He laughed as he saw
them hanging in midair, caught to the branch
by their knotted tails. Alamit had planned very
wittily, but he had reckoned without Buaya’s
vigilance. His dash for liberty had landed him
right in the wide open snout of the large crocodile, who was waiting for him. All the cunning
of the world could not extricate the civet from
this last predicament. His mischievous career
was ended.


THE YOKOHAMA SPECIE BANK
ELTD. a
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
100,000,000.00
Capital (Paid Up) -
Reserve Fund
105,500,000.00
Undivided Profits -
9,346,622.43
MANILA BRANCH
600 DASMARINAS, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager
PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER PHONE! 2-37-58—Export, Current Account, Cashier
12-37-55—Import, Accountant


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


24


  


September, 1929


SHIPPING REVIEW
BY H. M. CAVENDER
(General Agent, The Robert Dollar Company


During August owners found in general the
Philippine berth quiet,
with smaller and fewer
parcels of freight offering
than during the previous month. About the
only real exception to
this was found in the
U. K. and Continental
trade, whereowners were
offered considerable
hemp. Other commodities to the U. K. and
Continent likewise, but
to a lesser degree, held up in comparison to
previous months, which gave vessels on that
berth fairly satisfactory returns. Although
copra cake does not make up a large percentage
of the cargo offering on this berth, during the
month under discussion there was an unusual
amount of this commodity moving. Only
small and occasional sugar parcels were offered
for shipment to the U. S. Eastern Coast. This
was not unexpected, for the reason that only a
few thousand tons are used during this offseason and anything produced over and above
the production can be classified as clean-up
parcels. They are small and only occasional.
The Atlantic berth was extremely quiet and
it is not expected that there will be an early
revival, as the hemp market is somewhat disturbed; prices are low, little offering for early
shipment. Very much like the Atlantic movement cargo transpacific offered only in small
parcels, showing a decided decrease compared


with the past two or three months, coconut oil
in bulk being decidedly off in the market and a
decline in the movement of copra in bulk. About
the only commodities which held their own were
logs and sawn lumber. China and Japan seemed
to take the usual amount of Philippine exports,
primarily made up from hemp, logs and sawn
lumber.
From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines, there were exported from the
Philippines during the month of July, 1929:
To China and Japan ports, 12,740 tons with a
total of 48 sailings, of which 4160 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 15 sailings;
to the Pacific coast for local delivery, 25,813
tons with a total of 14 sailings, of which 24,224
tons were carried in American bottoms with 11
sailings; to the Pacific coast for overland delivery,
714 tons with a total of 8 sailings, of which 452
tons were carried in American bottoms with 6
sailings; to the Pacific coast for intercoastal,
2,435 tons with a total of 10 sailings, of which
2,435 tons were carried in American bottoms
with 10 sailings; to the Atlantic coast, 50,621
tons with a total of 21 sailings, of which 24,805
tons were carried in American bottoms with 6
sailings, to European ports, 21,181 tons with a
total of 23 sailings, of which 228 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 2 sailings; to
Australian ports, 1,900 tons with a total of 10
sailings, of which American bottoms carried
none; a grand total of 115,404 tons with a total
of 84 sailings, of which American bottoms carried 56,304 tons wth 19 sailings.
Passenger traffic during the month of August
fell off considerably; due to U. S. Quarantine
regulations steerage traffic especially was seriously affected, passenger lines being allowed to
carry 25% of the licensed berthing capacity.
(First figure represents first class, second figure
steerage): To China and Japan, 189-273; to
Honolulu, 0-249; to the Pacific coast, 85-199;
to Singapore and Straits Settlements, 16-9;
to Mediterranean Ports, 6-0.


R. Stanlev Dollar, vice-president of the Dollar
Steamship Line, announced in San Francisco
this week award of the contract for the reconditioning of the liner Mongolia to the Newport
News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Co. The
vessel was recently purchased by the Dollar
Line.
The Mongolia is to be dispatched to Newport
News from New York on October 14, which date
will mark the completion of her last voyage in
the intercoastal trade for the Panama Pacific
Line, and at which time she will be formally
turned over to the Dollar Line.
Work on the Mongolia will be virtually the
same as that done on the President Johnson
(ex-Manchuria) which cost approximatelv $500,-
000. Passenger accommodations will be thoroughly overhauled and improved and increased
to more than 200 in first class.
Reconditioning of the Mongolia is to be completed before the end of the year. The vessel
will then be renamed after one of the Presidents
and entered in one of the Dollar Line services.


Important to the Philippines was that part
of the recent Dollar announcement with reference to the reincorporation of a one hundred
million dollar company to be known as Dollar
Steamship Line Ltd., Inc., under the laws of
the State of Delaware and the expansion of the
company’s services to the Philippine interisland
trade by the construction of two fast vessels
specially suited for interisland service.


The passenger-freight steamer Kinau has
been acquired by the Philippine Steam Navigation Co. for operation in the Philippine Coastwise trade. She is an oil burner, 195 ft. long,
33 ft. beam, 16 ft. draft, equipped to carry 56
first class and 50 third class passengers. She
will operate on a fortnightly schedule between
Manila, Cebu, Dumaguete, Zamboanga, Cotabato and Jolo. The management announces
that a schedule will be strictly maintained and
that the vessel will arrive and depart exactly
on time, weather conditions permitting. The
accommodations for first class passengers are on
two decks, all outside, large and well ventilated,
two-berth staterooms, equipped with spring
beds, running water, electric fans, ceiling and
bed lights.
The public rooms consist of a large dining
saloon, social hall and commodious smoking
room, in conjunction with which a well stocked
bar will be open from 8:00 a. m. to midnight
daily. The vessel was refitted in Manila and
electric refrigeration provided to guarantee an
adequate supply of ice, cold water and perishable
food stuffs. Meal service will include both
Spanish and American menus. The vessel is
equipped with twin decks and modern cargo
handling machinery and side ports, making it
possible to load and discharge with a minimun
risk of breakage. The company’s managing
agents are L. Everett, Inc., 228 Pacific Building,
Manila.


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig 8 von Knobelsdorff
Agents
90 Rosario, Manila
Phone 22324


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


E
  


25


It was officially announced during August
that Spencer, Kellogg and Sons, Inc., largest
manufacturers of coconut oil in the Philippines,
acquired by purchase from T. P. Gallagher & Co..
Inc., of New York, the Atlantic Oriental Tank
Line. The fleet consists of five tankers, Cedarhurst, Vaba, Darden, Romulus, and Gladysbe.
The transaction is reported as involving five
million pesos and Spencer, Kellogg will continue
the present monthly service maintained between
the Philippines, New York and New Orleans.


H. M. Hunt, general agent, States Steamship
Co., accompanied by his family, departed for the
United States via Vancouver aboard the ss
Empress of Russia, August 16. Mr. Hunt is
returning to the generaloffice at Portland, Oregon.


Mr. Van Niewenhuyse, general agent for the
Eastern and Bhilippines Shipping Agencies,
Ltd., Manila, motored to San Fernando, La
Union, and Baguio during August in the interest
of tourist trade.


W. L. Applegate, president, Luzon Stevedoring
Co., left Manila for the southern islands July
29 aboard the ss Salvager and returned to Manila
August 18 aboard the ss Tango Maru.


J. O. Foyle, connected with the freight department, The Robert Dollar Co., underwent an
operation for appendicitis at St. Paul’s, August
25. Mr. Foyle’s recovery was rapid and we are
glad to know that he was able to leave the hospital on September 4.


C. C. Black, oriental manager of the Prince
Line, with headquarters in Hongkong, arrived
in Manila August 10 aboard the ss President
Madison for a short business call. Mr. Black
departed for Hongkong August 23.


Jean Cochet, general agent for the Far East,
Compagnie des Messageries Maritimes, with
headquarters at Shanghai, arrived in Manila


August 13 aboard the ss President Wilson and
departed for Hongkong August 17 aboard the
ss President Cleveland. Lucian Lesdos, general
agent for the same company at Hongkong, also
arrived in Manila during August and in company
with Mr. Cochet returned to Hongkong aboard
the ss President Cleveland. Messrs.’ Cochet
and Lesdos were visitors to Manila in the interests of their company.


G. B. Gibson, until recently passenger agent,
shipping department, Smith, Bell & Co., Ltd.,
Manila, was transferred during August to Cebu,
taking charge of the shipping department of the
same firm there.
E. C. W. Drummond, formerly of the export
department of Smith, Bell & Co., Ltd., has been
advanced to the position of passenger agent
with the same house at Manila.


Filipino Women Pharmacists Outnumber Men
By JUAN BARBERA
Of the Botica Boie


At the close of the college year 1928-1929, a
list of the graduates in the various college courses
taught in the islands was published. Once more
it was demonstrated that vear after year in
ever increasing numbers, Filipino women are
qualifying themselves for the profession of pharmacy. The feminine invasioncof our profession
has indeed already reached such proportions in
the Philippines as to have excited alarm, and
raised the cry to heaven that colleges should close
their doors against women who would matriculate in the pharmacy courses.
According to official lists procured from the
secretaries of pharmacy schools in the islands,
in the year referred to, seventy-two men and
two hundred and three women were graduated
in pharmacy; the men were greatly outnumbered,
as they were in the three or four years preceding.
Reference to the data on students who will be
graduated in pharmacy this year shows a similar
disproportion between the sexes, in favor of the
fairer.
Without knowing what may be transpiring
in the United States and Latin America, and in
Spain, relative to woman’s entering the field of
pharmacy, it may be said of the Philippines,
these oceanic islands discovered by Magellan
and El Cano, that already women are the majority of graduates in pharmacy every year, and
soon they will be the majority of those practicing
the profession commercially.
There are six schools of pharmacy in Manila.
Four of them admit students of either sex, and


two admit only women; no school of pharmacy
in the Philippines is exclusively for men, which
is to say that in all the schools of pharmacy in
the islands women are dominant.
The general system of education in the Philippines is similar to that in the United States, and
graduates in the professions are subjected to
formal examinations by examining boards of the
government before being permitted to practice.
And it falls out that for the past several years
women have been the majority of aspirants in
pharmacy. Summing up nine consecutive examinations recently given by the pharmacy examining board, 365 men and 531 women are the
total number examined. Of the men, 248 were
successful, or 64% of the total number of men
examined; and of the women, 412, or 77%, were
successful.
Of the 45 who were highest in their examination ratings, 15 are men and 30 are women; and
only in two of the nine examinations did men
obtain the highest rating, women taking the
honors in the other seven. The average rating
of the two men was 79%, and that of the seven
women was 87%. Men taking up pharmacy in
the Philippines rank in intelligence with men
going in for other courses, and women choosing
pharmacy are not above the average intelligence
of women enrolled in other professional courses.
This feminine avalanche descending upon the
profession of pharmacy in the Philippines evokes
discussion of the future which pharmacy in the islands offers to men. Some conjecture that the


AMERICAIN MAIL EANNE
BOLLAR STEAMSALR LANNE
COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


AILING
SAILING
The "President”' Liners Offer
ONCE A
ONCE A
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
WEEK
WEEK
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


TO SAN FRANCISCO
AND


LOS ANGELES


.
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu


ROUND THE WORLD


President Garfield -
President Polk
President AdamsPresident Harrison -
President Johnson -


Sept. 11
Sept. 25
Oct. 9
Oct. 23
Nov. 6


Sailings every fortnight


VICTORIA
AND


SEATTLE


via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama


SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE FRIDAYS


NEW TRANS-PACIFIC SERVICE
To San Francisco via Hongkong and Honolulu
PRES. HAYES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sept. 29


SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS


24 Calle David


MANILA


Telephone No. 2-24-41


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


26





September, 1929


present tendency will make men reluctant to enter a profession where women outnumber them;
it is said that women will soon be employed as
pharmacists everywhere, in pharmacies, laboratories, hospitals, maternity houses, etc., and
may, more advantageously than men, and upon
smaller net profit, manage drug stores of their
own.
Arguing along this line, those who fear woman’s competition in our profession say that
graduate women pharmacists accept pharmacists’ positions in drug stores and doctors’ offices
at salaries out of the question for men who don’t
renounce the desire to marry and support families. On the contrary, young women who are
pharmacists can accept these positions and hold
them one or two years, living quite decently on
their small salaries until they marry—as they
always do—and the burden of their maintenance falls upon their husbands. If, too, as
is frequently the case, the husband of one of
these young pharmacists is a doctor, when both
keep on with their respective professions the
advantage is still greater.
If in other professions, as that of law, marriage
is an impediment to woman, in pharmacy it is
not. In the Philippines, where Spanish customs
and social conventions are still influential, the
woman, married and perhaps a mother, who
appears as an attorney in one court and another,
defending or prosecuting delinquents, resolving
political disputes and engaging in similar activities pertaining to the life of a lawyer, is not
looked upon with unmitigated favor. On the
contrary, the mother who is a pharmacist may,
it seems, have her children with her in her office,
attend her other domestic duties too, and the
public of the Philippines will think it all quite
correct—even view it with genuine approval.
In rebuttal of all this, others say that if women
who are pharmacists accept positions at low
salaries, men do too, that the whole question is
one of supply and demand, or that it is a result
of the disruption and reorganization of social
classes: both sexes are culpable if salaries are too
low, and not the fair sex alone. “We,” say the
women, "are no obstacle to a strong compact
union for mutual protection concerning salaries
sufficient to a decent livelihood. Our teachers
in the classroom inculcate this principle; we use
the same materials and instruments as men in
the common laboratories, and we are examined
as to fitness to practice pharmacy along with
men, by an examining board which, it goes without saving, is entirely made up of men; and so
we feel we have the same rights as men to use
our abilities in the struggle for existence.”


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


RAw LEAF:—According to the latest information there still remain about 50,000 quintals ex
the 1929 Ysabela crop in the hands of the farmers. Prices in Manila have not gone up in proportion to what was paid in the Ysabela province. The exportation of cheaper Cagayan
grades maintains a satisfactory volume. Comparative figures for August are as follows:


Rawleaf, Stripped Tobacco and Seraps
Kilos
1,352
Australla.......
2,849
China
Czechoslovakia..... 840,318
Hongkong........................
42,913
120
Japal..
dava
2,200
North Africa.................... .
26,234
North Atlantic (Europe)..........
109,661
Spain... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,152,576
Straits Settlements............. ...
615
United States....................
114,273
41,540
Uruguay.........................


2984051
July, 1929................... 3,010,653
August, 1928................. 2,043,652


CIGARS:—Shipments to the United States,
while somewhat larger than in July, still lag
considerably behind the corresponding 1928
period. A great part of these exports leave some


of the manufacturers but a very close margin
of profit.
Statistics of cigars shipped to the United
States compare as follows:


August 1929.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . about 15,060,000
July 1929... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14,848,479
August 1928... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... 18,929,943


Diet and The Duration of Life
(Continued from page 16)
result of doubling the amount of milk was a gain
of exactly 10% in the span of life for both males
and females. The acid test of statistical analvsis indicated that there was not more than one
chance in a hundred for error due to accident.
Translated into human experience, this study
indicates that at least six years could be added
to the span of life by means of proper nutrition.
The fluid in the fountain of youth is pure milk,
and nutrition, in proper combination with other
sanitary and hygienic factors, can actually
promote longevity.


INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBER ETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: "YPIL,” Cebu.


OXYGEN
Compressed
Orygen
99.5% pure


HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hydrogen
99.8% pure


ACETYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes
WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops
BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
. Electric StorA. age Batteries


Phiippine Acetyiene Co.
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the
Manila hemp market
for the month of August
with statistics up to and
including September
2nd, 1929.
U. S. GRADES:—The
market in New York
opened dull with a weak
tendency and shippers
anxious to sell with
buyers holding off. SellES
ing prices were nomin
ally on the basis of:
MUNA
D, 133a cents; E, 120
cents; F, 1134 cents; G, 83a cents; H, 734 cents;
I, 11M4 cents; 41 10a cents; $1 1138 cents;
$2 1034 cents; S3, 93a cents. The market
continued dull and weak with shippers endeavoring to sell even at lower prices, the result being
that by the middle of the month prices had
declined to: D, 13a cents; E, 121e cents; F.
115 cents; G, 836 cents; H, 7)e cents; I, 11)
. cents; J1, 10)% cents; $1, 11)4 cents; $2, 10)4
cents; S3, 926 cents. Sales during the last
half of the month were very few and prices continued to decline; the market ending weak with
sellers of E at 12la cents; F 11M cents; I, 11
cents; $1, 10e cents; $2, 10)a cents; $3, 816
cents; G, 83% cents. There were also sellers
of Davao F at 1114 cents; Davao I, 11/ cents;
Davao J1 106 cents and Davao G at 10 cents.
In Manila the market was quiet on the first
of the month with shippers paying the following
prices: D, Psoso; E, Pesso. F. P2670, ₱1825,
H, ₱i5,I, P25; J1, P22; 81, P25.50; 82, P24;
S3, ₱16.75. Receipts were very much largef
than could possibly be expected during the past
month with the natural result that prices continued to give way and the Manila market
closed depressed with a few buyers at the following nominal prices: D, P28; E, P26; F P24.75;
6 ₱1725, H Pl4'1, P2d: 31, P21.25; Si,
F24, 82, ₱23.50; 83, ₱17.75. These prices
showed a considerable decline from the beginning of the month and most of the houses are
showing very little interest in hemp.
U. K. GRADES:—The U. K. market opened
quiet with buvers holding off and nominal prices
ruling as follows: J2, 238.10; K, 233.5; Ll,
233.5; L2, 230.10; MI, E30.10; M2, 227; DL,
E27; DM, 222. Toward the middle of the
month the market became dull with buyers
rather than sellers at the following quotations:
J2. E38 K. 233; Ll. 233; L2, 230.5; MI, 230.5;
M2, E26.15; DL, E27; DM, 222. The excessively large receipts of hemp had the usual
depressing effect on the London market with
buyers only being interested for their immediate
requirements. The market continued dull and
inactive with a d wnward tendency until at
the end of the month the market was stagnant
and very depressed owing to heavy receipts.
The following were nominal quotations for distant shipment: 32, 236.10; K, 231; Ll, 231;
L2, 228; M1E28, M2, 225.10; DL, 225.10; DM,
221.
In Manila the market for U. K. grades on the
first of the month was quiet with nominal prices
as follows: 32, ₱17.75; K ₱14.75; Li, Pi4.75;
L2, F19z5, Mi. ₱1325, M2, FI0.5; DI.
₱10.75 DX, ₱8.75. Between the first and
the middle of the month there was a slight improvement in local prices but they again eased
off with the following quotations: J2, ₱18:
K, ₱15; Ll, F15- L2, ₱13.50: Ml, ₱13.50;
M2, F1i.25; DL, ₱11.25; DM, 8. The market
continued quiet for a few days but towards the
end of the month became depressed and ended
up very depressed with few buyers at the following prices: J2, ₱16.75; K, ₱14; LI, F14; L2,
₱12.so Mi, P12.50; M2, P10.25; DL, F1025;
DM, F8.
JAPAN:—This market bought a fair quantity
of hemp during the earlier part of the month but
their prices were not attractive and the tendency
of the market has been very weak during the


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


27


entire period under review. With the hemp
market weak in both the U. S. and U. K., it
is hopeless to expect that Japan will show any
interest.
MagueY:—There was very little change in
this market, the ruling price being P13.4 for
Cebu No. 2 and F11.6 for Cebu No. 3. These
prices prevailed until the end of the month when
the prices declined in sympathy with the hemp
market, No. 2 closing at ₱12.75 and No. 3 at
₱11. There has been a very limited demand
during the month for Maguey.
PRODUCTION—As mentioned in our report
last month, there was a decided falling off in the
receipts for July and the balings were onlv
117,458 bales. The receipts during the month
of August were heavier than expected and all
indications are that they will continue heavy.
FRElGHt RATES:—There is no change in rates
on hemp since last report.
STATISTICS:—The figures below are for the
period ending September 2nd, 1929:


1929


1928


Manila Hemp


Bales


Bales


On hand January 1st...


170,301


139,624


Receipts to date.......


.. 1,121,541


917,627


LOI DE


1057251


1929


1928


Shipments to—


Bales


Bales


U. K................


239,532


224,891


Continent...........


121,561


136,169


U. S................


. 397,729


238,827


Japan...............


251,625


217,913


All Others..........


52,451
*


74,620


LODSO


 802.230


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporation


COPRA. —With the
heavy arrivals of copra
during the month of
August, the local market
weakened considerably
after August 15th, after
havingadvancedapproximately 25 centavos per
picul over July’s closing
figures, during the first
davs of August. Local
mills are displaying
much indifference toward heavy contracts
at present levels in
anticipation of still lower prices. However,
with export markets maintained at 25 to 50
centavos over the Manila parity, we cannot see
materially lower prices during the coming month.
Total arrivals at Manila during August were
482,110 bags as compared with 596,005 bags for
the same month of 1928. Latest cable advices
follow:
San Francisco, f.m.m.....$.04—$.04-148
London, Cebu sundried. $22-5-0
F. m. m.......222-0-0
Manila, buen corriente... ₱ 8.50 to P 8.75
Arrival resecada. ₱ 9.75 to ₱10.00
CoconUT OIl.—Trading in coconut oil in the
U.S. market has been comparatively light for the
month under review with buyers displaying
little interest in nearby shipment and quoting
considerably lower prices for futures. While
in the main sellers’ asking prices for late 1929
delivery on the West Coast were maintained at
6le cents, sales of nearby were quoted at 65/1
cents. The Atlantic Coast market was still
reported 63a cents with buyers indicating 636
cents. While coconut oil is comparatively
cheap, as compared with Competing Fats and
Oils, the June 30th carry-over was much above
figures for 1928. This, together with a fair
amount of selling pressure, does not seem to
indicate substantially higher prices for the
balance of the year. Latest cable as follows:


New York...... . . . . $.0634 c.if. Nominal
San Francisco....... $.06)e f.o.b. futures;
$.06"/1e f.o.b. nearby
Manila......... ... . P.31 per kilo in drums


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


While August sales
are considerably larger
than in any year since
1919 excepting 1925 and
1928, there is a decrease
of over a million pesos
between August of this
year and last year’s
August total which was
P2,327,836.


COPRA CAKE.—The Continental market for
copra cake was well maintained during the early
days of August, but during the last half of the
month, there was an appreciable decrease in
buying demand with heavy selling pressure on
the part of resellers. From an August high of
E8-i8-0 c.i-f. Hamburg, bids dropped to 2s-10-0
September-October shipment but were later
increased to Es-13-9 at which figure business


Sales City of Manila
July 1929 Aug. 1929


Sta. Cruz.........


....₱ 249,923


₱ 342,518


Binondo.........


16,500



84,618


San Nicolas......


406,278



56,000


Tondo...........


21,720



293,658


Sampaloc........


88,033
*


61,580


Quiapo...........


10,500
ME


Intramuros.......


16,000



35,000


Ermita...........


121,500



68,068


Malate...........


142,381



101,347


Paco.................


23,047


159,822


Sta. Ana.........


20,001



33,436


Pandacan..........


1,809


2,220


Sta. Mesa.......





19,010


San Miguel......





1,000


TIIIO


₱125827


O M MA A  
month has not been heavy as local mills have
been withholding sales in anticipation of higher
prices. Latest quotations as follows:
Hamburg, E8-13-9; San Francisco, No quotation; Manila, P62.00 to P63.00 per metric ton
ex go-down buyers.
Manila, P. I., September 5, 1929.


Travel
East
via the
661
North
Coast
Limited"


NTOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between the
IN
North Pacific Coast and
Chicago! Leaves Seattle at
11:00 A. M. for all the principal
cities of the United States. Two
days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel
is its diner service.
The luxurious, new Observation-Club car with its deep, restful lounge—cushioned chairslibrary—writing corner—club
rooms—showers—and maid and
valet service—affords many
hours of pleasure.
New-type Pullmans and powerful, new locomotives.


Stop off at
Yellowstone Park
Seasom June 15-Sept. 20
Without exception this is the most unique
outdoor playground in all the world—3,500
square miles of geysers in eruption—hot colofed poois—boling lakes—the deep, brilliant
gulf of the Grand Canyon—and big, friendly
Bears to amuse you.


You will find unusual travel comfort and courteous, personal service aboard this fine
train. The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos. Cook &: Son,
Shanghai Commercial & Savings Bank or any trans-Pacific steamship company, will
gladly furnish additional information.


Oswald Crawford, G. A.
Sol Granville Street
Vancouver, B. e.t


R. J. Tozer, A. G. P. A.
200 L. C. Smith Bldg.
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.


E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
9i2 Government Street
Victoria, B. C.


Northern Pacific Railway
(308)


IN RETONDING TO ADVERTISEMENIS FLEASE MENVHON THE AMERICAN CRAMEER OF COMMERCE JOURNA


28


  


September, 1929


AUGUST SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


NEW YORK MARKkET:
—Contrary to expectations, the circulation in
New York of the news
regarding Cuba’s "single seller" arrangement
was followed by a decline in sugar values
and during the latter
part of the week ending August 2, business
was at a standstill with
a quotation for Cubas
at 2-1/16 cents c. and
f., equivalent to 3.83
cents I. t. Holders’ anxieties to dispose of their
stocks before the 31st of the month, on which
the single selling agency was rumored to take
effect, materially contributed to the decline in
prices. Cuban holders however were reluctant
sellers at prices below 2-1/16 cents c. and f. and
there were no pressure from that quarter.
Two clouds appeared in the horizon of the
New York market, namely the proposal to introduce a sliding scale of sugar duties in the U. S.
Tariff, and the opposition of certain New York
bankers interested in the Cuban sugar industry
to the proposed central sales' control. Although
there were no sellers of Cuban sugar at less than
2-1/16 cents c. and f. 3.83 cents I. t.) Porto
Ricans reduced their prices to 3.77 cents I. t.
On the other hand, September shipment Philippine sugars were nominally worth 3.90 cents I. t.
In the third week, the market became firmer
and on the 15th there were buyers of Cubas at
2-1/16 cents c. and f.
The abandonment of the sliding scale proposal
was officially announced and the Finance Committee recommended to the Senate a full duty
rate of 2.75 cents per pound, or 2.20 cents per
pound for Cuban 96". The market in the fourth
weekopened and closed at 2-1/16 centsc.and f.
(3.83 cents l. t.), intervening prices being 2.00
cents c. and f. without fluctuations.
In the last week, the market, being overshadowed by the imminent prospect of the
Cuban single selling agency coming into force,
was unsettled and irregular. At the opening of
the week, present shipment Porto Ricos were
sold at 3.77 cents I. t. Sales to refiners of Cubas
for late September and October shipments were
effected at 2-1/16 cents c. and f. (3.83 cents I. t.)
The visible stocks in the U. K., U. S., Cuba
and European statistical countries are 3,407,000
tons as compared with 3,136,000 tons at the
same time last year and 2,926,000 tons at the
same time in 1927.
Futures. Quotations on the New York Exchange during August fluctuated as follows:
High Low Latest
1929—September...... 2.17 1.97 2.06
December...... 2.25 2.09 2.17
1930—January........ 2.26 2.13 2.18
March......... 2.30 2.20 2.23
May........... 2.36 2.27 2.29
July........... 2.42 2.34 2.36
Philippine Sales. During the month of August, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the At¬-
lantic Coast—afloats,— amounted to 5,500 tons
at a price of 3.77 cents l. t. as compared with
sales amounting to 10,000 tons at prices ranging
from 4.05 cents to 4.27 cents I. t.
LOCAL MARKET:—Small transactions in centrifugals were effected at P9.50 in the second
week. Exporters were quoting P9.00 to P9.35,
at which prices, holders were indisposed to sell
their small present-crop stock. In the last week,
exporters’ quotations ranged from P9.00 to
F6.25, at which they were unable to attract any
of the small stocks of sugar, as Chinese dealers
would pay P9.35. There were little or no transactions in the muscovado market during the
month.
Crop Prospects. According to the reports of
the Research Bureau of the Philippine Sugar
Association, prospects for next year’s crop are
not as bright as last year’s due to the unfavorable weather conditions during the month under
review both on Luzon and Negros.


In all parts of Negros, rainfall was excessive in
August, the rains not only being rather continuous but on some days torrential. As an example, in one period of 24 hours Bacolod received
9.6 inches of rain and on the same day HawaiianPhilippine received 7. 4 inches of rain. TalisaySilay on one day received 8.5 inches, while La
Carlota received 7.00 inches of rain. This was
greatly in contrast to last year when many
planters were complaining of drouth. Unless
very fine weather prevails in September, October
and November, it is considered probable that the
crop on Negros will be considerably below that
of last year. Itishoped, however, that this may be
partially compensated for by an improvement in
weather conditions between now and harvesting.
The cane in the Laguna-Batangas districts is


rieres how to
get Manilas!


Genuine
Manila
Hand Made
Long Filler
Cigars are
obtainable
in your city
or nearby!
List of
Distributors
furnished
upon
request
to—
C. A. BOND
Philippine Tobacco
Agent:
15 Williams St.
New York City


Collector of Internal Revenue
Manila, P. I.


Manilas will
satisfy your taste!


somewhat behind thistimefrom that of a year ago,
so that there is a slight decrease in estimates as
compared with last year’s production. Up
north, in Bulacan, Pampanga and Tarlac the
stand of cane is uniform and looks as good as
last year’s. The superiority of the newly introduced varieties, particularly B-147, N. G. 24A
and M-1900, over the native varieties, is noticeable in the stand of the foreign cane which is
far advanced. In places where the native cane
is very much affected by rust, it can be seen that
the foreign varieties standing side by side with
the native, have remained free from the disease.
Philippine Exports. Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for 1928-1929 crop, from November 1, 1928, to August 31, 1929, amounted
to 639,937 tons, segregated as follows:
Metric Tons


Centrifugals.. 609,752
Muscovados.............. 22,945
7,240
Refined.............. . . . . . 


Total................. 639,037


JAVA MARKET:—The Javan market was reported as steady at more or less unchanged quotations which were as follows:
Per P. I. picul
f. o. b.
Superiors—Spot..........Gs. 12-548— P6.83
12-314—
September.....
6.89
Oct.-Nov.-Dec......... “ 13-18— 7.09
Jan.-Feb.-March. ...... “ 13-172— 7.28


Origins of the Roman Catholic Church
(GIBBON—Continued from page 21)
inheritance of whatsoever prerogatives were
attributed either to the person or to the office of
St. Peter. The bishops of Italy and of the provinces were disposed to allow them a primacy of
order and association (such was their very accurate expression) in the Christian aristocracy.
But the power of a monarch was rejected with
abhorrence, and the aspiring genius of Rome
experienced from the nations of Asia and Africa
a more vigorous resistance to her spiritual, than
she had formerly done to her temporal, dominion.
The patriotic Cyprian, who ruled with the most
absolute sway the church of Carthage and the
provincial synods, opposed with resolution and
success the ambition of the Roman Pontiff,
artfully connected his own cause with that of
the eastern bishops, and, like Hannibal, sought
out new allies in the heart of Asia. If this
Punic war was carried on without any effusion
of blood, it was owing much less to the moderation than to the weakness of the contending
prelates. Invectives and excommunications
were their only weapons; and these, during the
progress of the whole controversy, they hurled
against each other with equal fury and devotion.
(Continued in October)


The
Phiippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
SURETYSHIPS
DOCUMENTS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance


ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
Eoans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest


Call or write for particulars


Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


September, 1929


  


29


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
BY RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


The market has been
stagnant but the U.S.S.
TT selling rate has been
firmly maintained at the
level of 1)o premium
because of the inability
A
of the Banks to secure
 export exchange in any
but limited amounts to
cover their gold positions. Competition was
keen for any bills offering at Mo premium
lfor O/D and 167% discount for 60 d/s Credits.
Nearly all Banks were buyers of U.S.s TI at
3o ready and forward to the end of October.
"The following purchases of telegraphic transfers have been made from the Insular Treasurer
since last report:
Week ending—
July 27th........ 81,452,000
August 3rd...... 200,000
August 10th...... 400,000
250,000
August 17th......
Sterling rates have shown practically no
fluctuation, with sellers of TT at 2,- 7,16 and
buyers at 2/- 9416.
July closed with the New York London crossrate quoted at 485 5716. The highest point
reached during August was 485 5,16 on the 2nd
of that month. The rate gradually weakened
until on August 30th and 31st it touched the
low point for the month, 484 11/16.
On July 31st London Bar Silver quotations
stood at 24la ready and 243% forward. Rates
rose to a high of 241s ready and 241s forward
on August 22nd and had dropped to 24fe ready
and 24is forward at the month end.
New York Bar Silver was quoted at 5226 on
July 31st, was high for August on the 22nd at
526, was low at 52)a on the 7th, and closed
at 523% on the last day of the month.
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on August 31st:
Paris, 12.40; Madrid, 151; Singapore, 114;
Japan, 95; Shanghai, 8436; Hongkong, 9814:
India, 136; Java, 122)e.
THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija.
Director, Rice Producers' Association


Prices for both rice
and palay are substantially the same as in
last review with steady
demandandwithahigher
tendency, Imports
during the past month
have been considerable,
but prices of rice in
overseas export countries promise to stiffen
 during the next three
months. Palay prices
S
per cavan at buying
terminals are from
₱4.10to P4.30andrice at consuming centers from
₱9.15 to P10.30 according to grade which is some
P2.00 more than for the same period last vear.
The transplanting of the new crop has been
delayed some three weeks, due to lack of timely
rains, but is about finished. This late planting
will have an adverse effect on the volume of the
next crop. Due to the idea of domestic protection in rice-consuming countries the following
import duties obtain in countries to which any
surplus produced by the Philippines might be
exported. Our own protective tariff is approximately Pl.72 per sack of 57l4 kilos. Australia has a tariff of approximately P1.85 per
sack; Japan, Pl per sack, and China expects to
levy a certain tariff on rice imports in the near


future. As for exporting any rice to the United
States this is out of the question; as she herself
exports her surplus, she is no outlet for any
possible surplus produced here.
Inreference toany expansionof ourrice area, this
seems to have reached its limit at present writing
except in Nueva Ecija, which has this vear about
210,000 hectares under cultivation. Concentration must therefore lie squarely on the following
factors: (a) Lowering of production costs including transplanting, threshing and transportation; (b) increase of yields by irrigation, fertilization and proper seed selection, as those
lands vielding less than 35 cavans per hectare
should be eliminated; (c) focus milling demands
on specific varieties which give the greatest
milling recovery and discard those of thick hulls,
small grain and fancy tastes; (d) an accurate
crop-estimate service is necessary for co-ordination.
Imports of rice into the islands for 1928 show
that Cebu imports were almost double those
shipped direct to Manila from overseas.
E
lake the NEW


NTER America at Seattle via
O the short Trans-Pacific route
—or at San Francisco. Thentravel
east from Portland or Seattle to
Chicago on the de luxe New Empire
Builder or its companion train,
the OrientalLimited, inolM hours.
Enjoy the kind of service you'd
expect only of a fine hotel—yet pay
no extra fare! Enjoy 1200 miles of
clean, cinderless, scenic travel behind either oil-burning or electric
locomotives—60 daylight miles of


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By L. ARCADIO
Acting Traffic Manager, Manila
Railroad Company.


The following commodities were received
in Manila July 26, 1929, to August 25, 1929, both
inclusive, via Manila Railroad:
1929


July


August


Rice, cavans...........


121,937


131,562


Sugar, piculs...........


2,464


1,344


Tobacco, bales .........


36,120


34,140


Copra, piculs...........


221,100


291,500


Coconuts...............


3,226,300


870,100


Lumber, B. F..........


734,400


12,420


Dessiccated coconuts,
caseS................


12,177


19,926


it along Glacier National Park.
Enroute see the electrified New
Cascade Tunnel, longest tunnel in
the Western Hemisphere—8 miles
through the Cascade Mountains
—shortening the distance across
America on the Great Northern
Railway. And at Chicago make
connections withfast de luxe trains
for Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburgh,
Philadelphia, New York, Boston,
Washington. D. C., and other
American Cities.


CLEAN. CINDERLESS, LUXURIOUS, SCENIC ROUTE


Apply to Tourist Agencies orTrans-Pacific
Steamship Lines or write
J. Wesley Young, Gen’l Agent, Pass’r Dept., 1400 4th Ave., Seattle, Wash.
A. H. Hebb, Agent, 916 Government St., Victoria, B. C.
Edw. A. Dye, Gen'l Agent, 607 Hastings St. Vancouver, B. C.
C. A. Gerken, Gen'l Agent, 679 Markef St., San Francisco, Cal.
M. J. Costello, West. Traf. Mgr., Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hillrail


A Dependable Railway


EIRAR BUREMER
Companion train to the
APRRRRAD
EANAAAERN
Across America


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


30


  
September, 1929
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR WEEK ENDING AUGUST 24, 1929


Luzon Stevedoring
Co., Anc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Port Arca
Phone 2-16-61


iitioieiitiiibiiiiiribiiioioioiooi


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of McCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.
MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


BANK REPORT


August 24


August 17


1.


Total Loans, Discounts and Over

draftS................ . . . . . . . .


₱125,089.771


₱123,375,601


2. "


Total Investments...............


17,972,698


18,320,940


3.


Total due from banks, agencies and


branches in Philippine Islands...


20,215,218


20,821,507


4.


Total due from head office and


branches which supply working


capital to foreign banks doing
business in the Philippine Islands.


8,467,298


8,020,356


5."


Total due from other banks......


47,661,213


47,001,923


6.


Total cash on hand:


(a) Treasury Certificates.........


13,631,070


15,375,145


(b) Other cash available forreserve


1,796,196


1,788,227


(c) Bank Notes.................


479,464


582,361


(q) OtHer cash..................


372,764


458,644


TOTAL........ . . . . . . . . . .


16,279,494


18,204,377


7.


Total resources (Not a total of


above items)..................


245,976,815


247,055,347


8.


Total Demand Deposits..........


63,550,933


64,312,013


9.


Total Time Deposits.............


62,564,651


62,571,867


10.


Total due to Head Office or other


offices, representing working
capital of foreign branch banks
doing business in the Philippine
Islands...............
 .  .


38,637,984


39,302,997


11.


Total due to banks, agencies and


branches in the Philippine Islands


11,177,125


11,304,426


12.


Total due to other banks.........


1,500,345


1,678,532


13.


Total exchange bought by banks


since last report—spot........


2,590,943


3,681,531


14.


Total exchange sold by banks since


last report—spot......... .. ..


5,007,861


4,066,149


15.


Total exchange bought by banks


since last report—future........


2,498,235


2,204,379


16.


Total exchange sold by banks since


last report—future...... .... ...


1,460,788


1,537,430


17.


Total debits to individual accounts


since last report...............


29,170,128


28,037,694


GOVERNMENT


REPORT


Exchange:


1.


Total exchange sold by Treasurer


on New York—demand.......


9,936.00


2.


Total exchange sold by Treasurer


on New York—telegraphic..


1,400,000.00


3.


Total exchange sold by Treasurer,


New York on Manila—telegraphic........... . . . . . . . . . . .


Circulation:


4.


. Government—
(a) Philippine Coins............


21,751,123.15


21,745,273.03


(b) Treasury Certificates........
(c) Available in Treasury for Cir

98,188,630.00


98,607,347.00


culation............I....


(19,450,397.00)


(17,599,815.00)


5.


Bank Notes............ . . . . . . . .


20,960,790.50


21,035,290.50


TOTAL CIRCULATION........


140,900,543.65


141,387,910.53


Government Reserves:


6.


. Gold Standard Fund—Treasury,


Manila............. . . . . . . .


11,233,123.99


10,812,449.69


7.


Gold Standard Fund—New York.


17,873.012.32


18,282,949.10


8.


Trea sur y Certificate Fund—


Treasury, Manila.............


21,701,281.00


21,701,281.00


9.


Trea sur y Certificate Fund—


New York............ . . . . . . .


84,125,107.00


84,125,107.00


TOTAL Reserves...........


134,932,524.31


134,921,786.79


(Signed) BEn F. WRIGHT,


Insular Auditor.


CHARTERED BANK OF INDIA. AUSTRALIA
AND CHINA


Capital and Reserve Fund. ...... ...... 27,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor......... 3,000,000


MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in
every important town throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits
Settiements, Federated Malay States, French Indo-China, Siam,
and Borneo, also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVER
5
EMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


31


THE ALERICAN CHAMBER OF COMME. SE JOURNAL
-eptember, 1929


PRINCIPAL—EXPORTS


Commodities


June, 1929


June, 1928


Monthly average for 12 months
ending June, 1929


Quantity


Value


20


Quantity


Value


25


Quantity


Value


77


Sugar....
m
........
.4
.


86,807,589
...........


TANO


39.2


53,762,236


₱ 9,033,707


34.5


51,415,145


₱ 8,490,569


30


Hemi

.....

...............


15,975,019
* ..........


4,962,068


15.1


14,829,126


1,337,814


16.5


15,781,144


4,673,061


Coconut Oil..


2,611,413



,016,84
7,


21.4


9,446,439


04,54


14,940,751


4,841,34


Copra.....
...... .......


11,286,066
.........


1,948,62


9.9


19,880,497


3,922,419


14


19,040,037


,792,985


13.4


Cigars (Number)..
*.........................



13,218,221
* ..........


36,37


1.6


19,635,546


866,543


17,656,083


'51,31


Embroider
........................



........


975,603


2.8


680,596


3.u


Maguey
*.........................
* .............


1,403,142
* ..........


275,812


0.8


,288,788


260,335


1,308,352


Leaf Tob


co......


2,581,441
*..........


849,580


2.6


71,


624,727


2.2


1,710,627


.0


Desiccated and Shredded Coconut...............


1,215,672
..


397,643


.2


2,360,733


861,688


3.


1,830,56.


A


Hats (Number)...
.............................
* ..


2,969
..........


0,41


o.


105,233


486,56



133


659,388


Lumber (Cubic Meter).................


1,899
........


93,916


2.4


11,443


448,7


13,888


488,


Copra Meal..........


8,354,65
........


6,063,443


407,


i


8,490,569


ordage.


513,541
........


14,608


2209


0.9


i76,026


S


Knotted Abac



69,330
* .........


268,804


S.8


25,245


50,181


2
O.


54,354


184,68


Pearl Buttons (Gross).......................


45,395
.......


48,778


0.2


65,543


64,420


0.3


60,405


66,205


Canton (low grade cordage fiber) ........................


635,162
*.........


143,781


).4


843,519


156,766


O.4


595,951


107,24


All Other Producta.....


*.........


865,475


2.6


915,047


3.4


632,379


2.3


Total Domestic Products................................





P32,843,954


99. 5


P26,385,793


99.3


₱27,835,130


99.4


United States Products................................


*...........


13,667


74,26


0.2


2,993


O.:


Foreign Products......................................


.........


30,137


0.1


133,478


0. 5


40,695


O.1


Grand Iot





P32,987,758


100.0


P26,593,539


100.0


₱28,019,140


100.0


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


Articles


June, 1929


Monthly average for
June, 1928 12 months ending
June, 1929.


Value


77


Value


75


Value


25


Cotton Cloths..........


₱ 3,306,915


12.2 ₱ 3,448,078


19.3


₱ 3,720,723


15.6


Other Cotton Goods.....


1,743,659


6.4


1,194,20


6.8


206,347


5.1


iron and Steel, Except
Machinery..........


2,079,483


7.6


1,617,38


9.I


1,984,938


8.4


Rice..



780,903


2.8


10
8,317


O.


703,191


2.0


Wheat Flour...........


1,141,190


745,837


883,122


3


Machinery and Parts of..


2,


641
09


1,458,90


Dairy Products.........


25,25


5,220


Gasoline...............


1.4


2


3.


Silk Goods.............


890,44


03,33


4.0


3.2


utomobiles...........


1,072,499


184,154


17,7


0.6


getable Fiber Goods...


620,563


239,031


.5


446,86


Meat Products.........


79,096


1.a


38
359,58


2.1


00,101


2


Illuminating Oil.......


566,056


2


105


O.t


333,4


ish and Fish Products..


97,028


sa383


2.9


426,08.


E


Crude Oil.............


5,143


0.2


2,908


Coal.......


501,223


1.8


394,988


2.3


450,962


2.0


Chemicals, Dyes, Drugs,
Etc.............


477,492


1.7


402,785


2.4


418,107


1.7


Fertilizers..............


81,655


0.2


137,442


D.S


361,095


1.5


Vegetables.............


355,580


3.9


311,984


2.0


390,578


1.6


Paper Goods, Except
Books...........


448,671


1.6


456,857


2.7


434,259


1.8


Tobacco and Manufactures of.......
*


595,516


2.1


451,784


2.7


558,169


2.3


Electrical Machin
*


2,041


2


405,06


2.5


409,82


l.7


Books and Other Printed


72,014


1.3


380,984


2.3


235,761


1.0


Matters..............
Cars and Carriages....


87,226


0.3


166,651


1.1


227,27


O.


Automobile Tires.......


273,029


9
O.


137,12.


.9


295,682


1.


Fruits and Nuts........


248,620


42,98


O


305,929


1.3
O.


Woolen Goods..........


244,594


i


113,


.8


118,618


Leather Goods.......


388,62


36,313


250,281


15


Shoes and Other Footware


22,872


139,203


0.9


134,210


D.5
O.7


Coffee ......


221,820


0.9


146,145


1.0


167,102


Breadstuff, Except
Wheat Flour..........


211,1


169,087


193,913


0.8


Eggs.



139,939


65


192,741


12


211,987


0.9


erfumery and Other
Toilet Goods........


167,235


).6


137,626


0.9


145,293


0.6


Lubricating Oil.......


62,066


0.3


93,460


0.6


199,884


0.6


Cacao Manufactures, Except Candy..........


111,480


216,36


144,188


0.9


Glass and Glassware...


184,704


84


185,357


13


179,009


0.6


Paints, Pigments, Varnish, Etc............


163,565


131,091


151,083


o.7


Oils not separately listed.


122,608


28


150,190


58


147,985


0.6


Earthern Stones and
Chinaware..........


171,047


99,683


O. C


134,922


0.6


Automobile Accessories..


163,097


0.6


93,926


0.6


170,383


0.6


Diamond and Other Precious Stones Unset....


134,525


0.5


168,472


1.0


129,898


O.7


Wood, Reed, Bamboo,
Rattan..............


178,473


0.7


72,18


O.


123,413


0.5


India Rubber Goods....


153,578


0.6


131,,


1.


121,34


0.5


Soap.....


139,733


241,191


191,723


0.5


Matches...............


115,046


o.7


g


8


Cattle.....


2


,547


2


O


Explosive
S


83,496


0. 3


38,84


0.3


42,28:


O. 1


Cement...
 ...


146,102


. 6


20,66


89,135


O.2


Sugar and Molasses.....


38,766


o.


51,015


31
20


).4


Motion Picture Films....


23,626


0.1


41,78


O.


O. 1


Other Imports..........


2,250,763


8.4


1,521,679


8.5


2,473,308


10. 3


Total..........


₱26,797,897


100.0


₱18,499,727


OO.S


P23,858,687


100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for
12 months ending
June, 1928
June, 1929
Ports
June, 1929.


Value
Value
Value
75
7
3


Manila................ ₱40,619,248 67.8 P26,898,418 60.0 P35,041,815 67.5
6,928,734 13.4
,780,542 19.6
10,144,819 16.9
Hoilo.
10.9
12.7
7,139,186 16.0
6,541,597
Cabu..
6,549,506
Zamboanga............
594,379 11.1
03,830 11.1
1.0
!
20
,966
98,183
dolo.
0.5
2
22
2.6
1,353,557
09,11
1,626,930
Davao.........
0. 3
751,375 1.8
Legaspl............
1,318,810 2.5
168,356


Total.. ₱99,785,655 100. 0 ₱45,093,266 100.0 P51,877,075 100. 0


CARRYING TRADE


IMPORTS


Monthly average for
June, 1928 12 months ending
Nationality of Vessels
June, 1929
June, 1929.


Value
Value 6
Value
7
7


American.............. ₱11,605,920 43.1 ₱ 7,141,177 38.0 ₱10,338,342 43.2
1,110,215 37.8
7,709,311 32.
23.1
6,206,806
British.................
1,043,03
1,068,787
5.9
1,716,291 6.5
Japanese...............
649,523
4.0
696,412
1,074,386 4.1
Dutch........
L.737,769 6.6
1,652,44
7.9
1,435,331
German....
4.
1,0
11.3
1,176,545
3,041,51
Norwegian.............
O.
148,257
100,683
1.
22,05
0.4
Philippine..............
1..
166,2
161,733 1.2
0.3
77,06
Spanish................
0.4
87,932
44,808 0.2
11,164
hinese.......
o.1
8,883
9,427
Swedish................
0.9
209,369
508,424 1.9
Dannish.......
0.2
56,277
French................


By Freight............. P26,153,099 97.6 ₱17,774,098 95.9 P23,191,775 97.2
666,908 2.8
644,798 2.4 725,629 4.1
By Mail...............


-P26,797,897 100.0 ₱18,499,727 100.0 P23,858,685 100.0
Total.......


EXPORTS


Monthly average for
12 months ending
June, 1928
Nationality of Vessels June, 1929
June, 1929


Value
Value
Value
75
26
25


46.0
₱11,343,269 42.2 ₱12,927,46
 41.
American.............. ₱13,516,00
36.6
1,527,870 26.
,830,304
,822,589 26.7
British.................
6
1.2
3,194,95
13.0
14.5
474,02
3,459,696
Japanese...............
948,332
837,181
97,237
2
2.5
German...............
97,412 0.5
1,586,871 4.8
95,07
Norwegian.............
Spanish...............
260,683 1.2
744,64
722,556 2.2
Dutch.....
0.1
1,000
169,082
33,296 0.3
Philippine..............
..I
0.4
125,865
Chinese............
"E,
352
42,203 0.1
2.8
Swedish...............
4,880
French................
774,971
1,876,054 5.7
Dannish......


₱32,314,414 98.0 P25,721,897 96.6 P26,909,045 96.0
By Freight.............
673,344 2.0 871,642 3.4 1,109,261 4.0
By Mail...............


Total P32,987,758 100.0 P26,593,539 100.0 P28,018,306 100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for


Countries


June, 1929


June, 1928


12 months ending


June, 1929.


Value 0


Value 0


Value
3


United States.........


.P43,889,294


73.2


P30,680,875


68.2


P35,077,31:


67.5


United Kingdom......


2,518,373


2,350,00


5.


2,146,796


Japan....


55,021

3.


3,099,94


,336,46


China.........



820,87



1,882,55


803,48


French East Indies...


76,3
.


1.2


1o2,77


705,219


Germany ............


1,532,738
* 4


2


1,089.71


2.4


1,302,34


Spain................


1,106,310



1.8


1
1,083,4


1.094,62


Australia..............


382,831


0.6


d


58,8


British East Indi
S....


876,160


1.


12.6.


731,084


Dutch East Indies....


984,005



1.6


0.3


25,3


Trance........


637,188


1


09,08


.4


Netherlands....


352,697


6


1,508


taly.


321,420


ELE


2,3


Hongkong............


92,78


62


248,926


37,745


Belgium..............


354,004


0. 6


528,66


9,58


Switzerland...........


253,579


356,861


292,651
41,936


Japanese-China......
Siam...............


146,633


0.3


161,500





10,62


21,084


0.1


Mge


Sweden...............


86,18.


0.2


2,415


2


Canada..............


79,37


O.2


1
7,00


O.


110,146


0.2


Norway...........
Austria....


36,335
* *


O.1


29
"gio


94,674


3,26
.


13,477


O.1


Denmark..............


o.
23


Other Countries......


328,010



0.5


298,470


0.6 1,609,481


3.


o75
₱45,093,2
₱59,785,655 100
Total.


THE AMERAL AN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE RIORNAL


Sep

BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
E
“SILVER FLEET
Express Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigerated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


 RRP
CHINA BANKING CORPOBATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18
BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


THOMAS BRESLIN
MINING ENGINEER
Qualified Private Surveyor
Room 6, Borromeo Building
157 Calle Norte America, Cebu
Residence: Mabolo, Cebu
Tel. 372-L


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


6Y
LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
P. O. Box 1423
Manila, P. I


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: “SALEFIBER”


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


RLLP


E


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
P26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE


110 P. Faura


Tel. 5-69-44


Telephone 22070
P. O. Box 1394
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Collections
Investments
Income Tax
Manila, P. I.
121 Real, Intramuros


REMEMBER
The JOURNAL is a mighty good
publication to send to someone in
the United States whom you wish
to keep informed regarding the
Philippines!
P4 Yearly Does It
Send name and address to
The
American Chamber of Commerce
Journal: P. O. Box 1638,
Manila, P. I.


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONBING TO ANVERTSEMENIS TLEASE MENION THE AMERICAN CRANEER OF COMMERCE JOURO


TRUNKS


COLTA-623
RIU HERMANG


Manila Wine Merchants
Limited
174 Juan Luna Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


Recommended By Leading Doctors


Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake


"
1L. 5.73-06


Nature's Best Mineral Water


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in subscriptions for
your friends in the United
States—men who are (or
ought to bel) personally
concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


SHALL YOUR EXECUTOR BE A BANK!
You make a Will so that the needs of your dependents may be
adequately provided for. You make it now because you know the
uncertainties of human life.
These reasons argue forcibly for the appointment of a corporate
Executor under your Will. A bank does not become ill, die, or move
away. It does not go to the United States or to Europe on an
extended vacation. Its facilities do not become impaired by time or
accident and its decisions are the result of collective judgment.
This Bank makes a business of managing estates. Its fees are
the same as would be paid any other executor.


INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION
TRUST DEPARTMENT


ELS O IMIMANO MEN MANIA TA MANON MANA Sa CAAANL MIA


EVEN FINER
than the name implies
Thousands of motorists are buying the new
Dodge Brothers Six on the sole recommendation of its name. To them, the new Dodge
Brothers Six means far more than any detailed recital of its many advanced engineering features and style attractions.


But, confident as these buyers are, not until
they experience the performance of this
splendid new car do they fully appreciate its
comfort, its ease of control, its smooth, eager
 P
power and the roominess of its newly designed

body. The new Dodge Brothers Six offers the
world a new conception of motor car value.
NE'
W
AUN
JODUEBRUTHERS SIX


RYSLER


MOTORS PRODUCT





SOLE AGENTS:


ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, INC.
536-568 GANDARA
ILOILO
MANILA


CEl


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURI


Governor Davis’s Mindanao Trip.—How
Newspapers Began in Manila.—Cashew
Nuts, a Suggested Crop Diversification:
E. M. Gross.—Diverting Ourselves with
Diversification: Percy A. Hill.—A Close-Up
of a Talkie Film.—Farther with Franciscans in Samar: More of the Mission Trail.-
General Dorey Leaves: “Last of the
Mohicans”.—Two More Philippine Poems
by Gilbert S. Perez.—Bridge: Henry Philip
Broad.—Governor Davis’s Sugar-Meeting
Talk.—The Founding of Mehan Gardens.-
An Historic Account of the Ayuntamiento,
Our Town Hall.—The New Mentality:
President Rafael Palma.—Usual Reviews
by Expert Authorities on Our Commerce
and Industry.
For Students of English:
Fourth Installment of Farquson Johnson
on the Language and How to Use It.


ULY A MAGAZINE  PREEMINENTIN "THE PHILIPPINES


PHE EXPERIENCED
1 Smoker of Manila cigars
knows the quality of
AABACLMRA
Made from the finest selected
Isabela leaf tobacco, properly
aged and cured to bring out
the best characteristios.


THE STORY OF THE GOODRICH AIR CONTAINER


When a nail punctures the Air
Container it is tightly gripped by
the compression member. When
the nail is withdrawn compression
instantly closes the opening.
The tread surface of the tire,
down to this point on either side,
is reinforced by a pliable bridge
of compressed rubber similar to
an arched bow of sprung steel.
During inflation the stretch in an
Air Container is confined to that
part supporting the lower side
walls of the tire and extending
down around the beads and flap.
Another Success by
the Producers of


Strong compression is created by
building the compression member
upon the OUTSIDE of the tube,
and then turning the tube INSIDE OUT before splicing.
Side wall blows delivered at either
edge of the compression member
are resisted, just as the sprung
bow resists further bending; and
side wall breakdown is retarded.
All inflation stretch in the Air
Container is at an approximate
right angle to the compression
member, keeping it "live” with
every flex of the tire while in
service.


SILVERTOWN TIRES


THE GOODRICH INTERNATIONAL RUBBER COMPANY, INC.


MANILA, P. I.


DERHAM BUILDING, PORT AREA, PHONES 5-69-42 AND 5-69-43
L. A. COOPER, Branch Manager


P. O. BOX 1482


LO LEENG G ANADSANO TANO MATIN TG SUNOAN CUNDA G CUNEO TOE


October, 1929


  


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM
can be solved readily by some type of


WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE


The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.


Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Islands


The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


2
ANIS


Interior Street-Car Advertising
Small in Cost—Large in Results


For Rates and Particulars—Call Up
Telephone 2-19-11


Manila Electric Company
A. B. TIGH
Advertising Manager
134 San Marcelino
Manila, P. I.


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


14-16 CALLE DAVID


S
CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPA
MANILA, P. I.


THE WHITE EMPRESS OF THE PACIFIC


E ES O NANNENN EN TANE TE NNN ANN O EAAO IO


  


October, 1929


STAMP IT
Saves time; eliminates disputes; eliminates mistakes.
TIME STAMPS
DATE STAMPS
SIGNATURE STAMPS
FIRM STAMPS


or for any other purpose where a rubber or
metal stamp can take the place of writing it
in by hand or machine.
Tell us what you need
and let us suggest a “cure”
Philippine Education Co., Inc.
MANILA
101-103 Escolta


Has your Wife seen the
"New Yorker”
ELECTOLUX
GAS REFRIGERATOR
A Splendid
New Model
No Motor—No Noise
Only P390.00
Or On Convenient Monthly Terms
Manila Gas Corporation
Showroom:
5 Calle David
Tel. 2-16-43


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ESPECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigarete Mfg. Co.
31 Tayuman
Manila, P. I.


IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLED!


N MEEE G AETEMREG AEAL METEE TO EENNN O CRE RSA


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
The American Chamber of Commerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.
Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann VicePresident
John L. Headington, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
C. Rockwell
Kenneth B. Day
Alf Welhaven


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Frank W. Butler
Wm. H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender
H. L. Heath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Cari Hess.
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
. A. Meyer, Chairman
Alf Welhaven
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wilson


COMMITTEES


FINANCE
W. H. Rennolds, Chairman
E. M. Gross
O. M. Schuman


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
L. L. Spellman
M. M. Salceby


PUBLICATIONS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Bennett
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, Chairmay
W. J. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, Chairman
F. W. Butler
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
, Chairman
S L VION
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
G. P. Bradford
L. E. Nantz
INVESTMENTS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender


Davis Goes A-Voyaging, Etc.!
While legislation was on the crane and simmering only slowly, Governor Davis went south on the Apo on his first extended provincial inspection.
With him were his friend from St. Louis, George S. Johns, editor of the St.
Louis Post Dispatch, his daughter Miss Davis, his niece Miss Alita Davis,
staff members—Brigadier General Halstead Dorey, among others, the
general bidding good-bye to Moroland and Moro friends—and Wilkins of
the Manila Daily Bulletin, who was surrogate of the newspapers and the
press services, and took pictures. Wherever Davis may go and smile, and
Miss Davis and Miss Alita Davis may go and smile, there will be a Davis
triumph; and whither the going may be matters not.
The southern trip was a triumph, of course; these islands may be said
to have placed themselves in fee to some amiable and distinguished official
folk by name of Davis.
But some real work was done by His Excellency. The smile may
have changed momentarily to a frown at Iloilo, where the river is dammed
to facilitate the work on the marginal wharf and some of the citizens complain that their property is flooded and being ruined by engineering which
more expertness would improve. Davis saw and heard, but said nothing.
Maybe he has said it since he came back to Manila; the trip began at midnight August 23 and ended at sundown September 5.
From Iloilo the course was set to Isabela de Basilan, where the islands”
two rubber plantations past the development stage were visited and executiveinterest in expanding the rubber industry was evidenced; but little
was said of ways and means, this waiting upon the maturity of judgment
and the gathering of further information.
At Zamboanga, naturally, there was the question of San Ramon penal
colony: whether to sell the plantation and move the prisoners or keep on
doing business at the same old stand. Judgment reserved.
At Jolo, the big crowd was all for the retention in office of Governor
James R. Fugate, but a few standard-bearers toted placards to the contrary; and there’s a pretty tale. Fugate’s economies have gone so far as
to deprive some officials of free automobiles and gasoline—heresy, as every
taxpaver knows, in a bureaucracy, where every man’s importance is measured by his perquisites—and Fugate has restored to the Mohammedan
mullahs their privilege to judge the Sulu fallaheens in religious and tribal
matters, levy and collect fees therefor, as in instances of marriage and
divorce, and thereby to live in the manner to which they have become accustomed—by exaction of tribute. The other side of this quaint picture is
that it seems these restive recruits of the Crescent, the Sulu fallaheens, will
take up the peaceful practices of husbandry wherever roads are built, giving
them access to constabulary protection, and schools established. Besides
them, there is the Christian minority in Sulu. A tangled situation, and
again—judgment reserved.
The Apo lazily journeyed on to Cotabato, Port Baras and Malabang,
sluggish harbors of southern Mindanao, and, leaving its party ashore to
hitch-hike along the old military wagon road to Ganasi and Lanao lake,
steamed round to Iligan to pick them up again. On this hike the Maria
Cristina falls were viewed, and seemingly limitless areas of Mindanao wilderness surrounding what would be a source of hydroelectric power, the cascading river, were the wilderness changed into an inhabited industrious


PE PHALTON
P1.900.66 CASH
V. Nrnta Lodega)


There Is Nothing Quite Like The New
Ford Anywhere In Design,
Quality And Price
Come in and let us give you a demonstration
Very Easy Terms May Be Arranged
“After We Sell, We Serve”
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY COMPANY
MANILA
BACOLOD
ILOILO
CEBU


IN


ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


4


  


October, 1929


region. This seems to have beenIthe locale,
lending itself to quiet depths of thought, where
the executive mind mulled over the idea of
settling with the inhabitants of Mindanao by
settling them upon allotments. Later, in
Manila, La Vanguardia nearly endorsed the
proposal of Director Hidrosollo of the nonchristian bureau, and an anonymous colleague of
his, as memory momentarily runs, to carry out
Governor Davis’s suggestion by creating a
reservation of 3,500 hectares.
When it is recalled that the Mohammedans
alone in Mindanao number about 500,000,
marrying young and often, readily submitting
to vaccination and sometimes taking quinine,
the reader may calculate for himself how very
generous the proposal is. The Mohammedans
in their colorful tribal costumes are picturesque;
they submitted their petitions, mostly for schools
and public improvements, made their obeisances and bestowed their presents, and, at
Iligan, bowed proudly out of the picture. The
Mohammedan problem—judgment reserved. Not
much was seen of the nineteen or twenty other
peoples of Mindanao, their innings await another
journey; they, too, have grievances, and once
had the impression they possessed some of the
lands over which their forefathers were tribal
lords.
The lugubrious aspect of pedestrian delegations, down barefoot from the hills, excites but
fleeting perturbation—the Apo’s halts at ports
are short and she is off and beyond the horizon
before the chattering ashore has hardly subsided.
Nevertheless, Governor Davis learns of the
prevailing long delays in the granting of homestead patents; speed in this and road-building,
he surmises, would do much good. He calls
for data; they are available to everyone in the
Lands (bureau) Courier and show that during
the period since 1904, when the lands bureau was
organized, something more than 32,000 homestead applications have been approved and that
100,000 are now pending. Discouraging—judgment reserved.
Homeward from Iligan is old Cebu, port,
province and island—striated with roads and
knit into a busy community of a million people
bent upon wresting their livelihood from the
stingy mountainous soil and the commerce
commanded by the harbor, where the new improvements are progressing satisfactorily. Ships
of the seven seas lay here, unburdening themselves of cargoes of manufactures and reburdening themselves with bales of Manila hemp
and sisal, bags of copra and tanks of coconut
oil. Entertainment was lavish, and the little
Apo lay to sagaciously until the typhoon at
Manila—presaging the sugar convention, perhaps—blew over and the high seas were once
more venturable.
Sure enough, the sugar convention was waiting, and, when care had been taken to keep calm
about the storm, but to send relief where it was
needed (a duty involving a morning’s airplane
flight across the mountains to the Infanta coast
on the Pacific), Davis delivered his address
purporting to announce his major economic
policy—the reason for the appearance of the
address elsewhere in these pages
Some suspect that the address took tone from


the fact that Congress is in special session over
the tariff; however that may be, Davis did
advocate limiting the further progress of our
sugar industry as a piece of practical sense and
practical politics. The convention thereafter
adopted a resolution against undue expansion;
Osmena announced that unless expansion is
curtailed he will have the law on the industry;
and bless you, he will!
Strange transformation: only a short while
ago, he who would plant sugar and pledge his
property for the building of a sugar mill was
lauded as a citizen of enterprising virtue—he had
credit at the bank; and now the man who would
follow that chap’s example is threatened with
the law and blacklisted at the loans window!


Research on this occult situation turned up
the story of George Wilcox, of Kauai, T. H.
Back on Kauai, T. H., some 40 years or so ago,
George Wilcox produced a crop of sugar which
he had to sell in New York at about 2.09 cents
a pound. Wilcox was then about fifty years
old, and things looked so black to him that he
went out and bought more fallow fields and
tripled his acreage of sugar. "If sugar is going
to be cheap, a man’s got to have a lot of it to
make any money,” said Wilcox, in explanation
to his astounded neighbors. And forth he went
about the seeding of new fields; that is, about
his business.


Being impractical in one thing, he was impractical in all. He spoiled his labor, then
German and Japanese, by paving more than
the standard wage, building better than the
standard cottages, and allotting to each cottage
a half-acre garden which he irrigated free; and
if any family wanted more than a half-acre,
Wilcox provided it. Dr. Townsend, who teaches
philosophy at the U. P., tells smilingly of a time
when he visited Wilcox and found the great
plantation proprietor busy in his carpenter
shop devising a contrivance that Townsend
couldn’t fathom the use of. Next morning the
two rode out to the plantation villages together,
Wilcox inquiring here about a sick child, there
about a fever case—whether or not the doctor


had come and his orders were being followed—
all very impractical.
They came to the Germans’ cottages.
“We’ll go in here," said Wilcox, pointing out
a cottage with an anxious mother at the door;
and he carried along with him the mysterious
contrivance he had fashioned in the carpenter
shop. In that household was a lad with a club
foot, and the doctor had said he could probably
cure it if he had just the right cast to fit it into.
The plantation owner, old-fogy George Wilcox—
past fifty and tripling his sugar fields with sugar
at 2 cents a pound!—had made it his personal
concern to provide the cast the doctor needed


The Davises in a Basilan Rubber Grove


For Every Ty pe
of Motor Driven
Vehicle or Machine


OOL








“Look for the blue tin"
STANDARD OIL COMPANY OF NEW


YO


RUE P VIRNL


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OF CO.


October, 1929


E
  OF COMMERCE


to correct that tow-headed kid’s deformity!
And who in h— is a club-footed, tow-headed
kid on a sugar plantation anyway? Just a lot
of bother!
George Wilcox failed, of course: he was so
profoundly and incurably impractical. But
failure that he was, he is still living, though up
in his nineties and disinclined to work. In fact,
Wilcox always was such a perverse fellow that he
never would work unless he could see something
in it—not even putter aimlessly in his carpenter
shop. Now, he doesn’t even know what his
income is, it’s so immaterial to him; and he has
to tell the publicans they have on Kauai to go
over his books and figure it out for themselves,
setting down what they think he should pay.
“What there is of it is there,” he says.
The assessor has an awful time with him too,
for Wilcox doesn’t know the value of his own
lands! But they’re still in sugar, though only
worth the paltry sum of $32,000,000, sugar being
so confounded cheap and costing much more to
produce in T. H. than in the P. I., what with
3
“I
Fall in with
By E. M
Diversification of crops is the present Philippine slogan; so, falling in line with the numerous
requests of my genial friend the editor, I write
this, the first of a series of short articles, founded
on personal experiments and studies, as to the
commercial possibilities of other than major
crops, which can yield financial returns to those
who wish to attempt their cultivation. I have
chosen the cashew nut for the first of the series
because it. is admirably adapted to the small
farmer’s requirements, and also because the tree
will grow anywhere, is insect, parasite and pest
resistant, and commences bearing after three
years of life.
The cashew-nut tree, for which the botanical
name is Anacardium Occidentale, in Tagalog is
called casuy. It is a small garbled tree found
all over the Islands in a wild state, never having
flowers in the month of March and fruits from
the latter part of April until early in June. The
fruit is a lemon colored, pear-shaped, spongy
body, of a strongly astringent sweetish taste,
repugnant to most people; for edible purposes
this fruit so far does not hold out any promise.
It can, however, easily be fermented and distilcashew nuts, and about half a million rupees"
led off into alcohol. The part of the fruit that
chiefly concerns us is the small kidney-shaped cashew nuts are the “Salters”. The Indian
nut attached to the lower end of the fruit, weighing from 9 to 10 grammes. Its shell is an elastic
spongy mass, containing a black viscous veshe must bring back in shelled nuts, in return
icatory oil analogous to carbolic acid, known as
cardol otl. This oil makes the nut difficult to
handle. When the outer covering or “shell” burning is done in the open air, but this is obis removed we find a small cream-colored nut
which is probably the most delicious nut found
most other edible nuts, nor has it laxative or process by which a considerable quantity of
satiating properties. The edible portion of the crystal carbolic acid can be recovered as a bycashew nut represents about 45% of the total product.
weight of the whole nut; 55% is shell; recovery


the higher wages and all. Filipinos long ago
took the places of Wilcox’s Japanese and German
families, and are housed in his better-thanstandard cottages and diligently working his
unprofitable fields! The fate of men such as
George Wilcox is, is sad indeed; they just plod
on to failure—seem never to care to get ahead.
But after all, sugar conventions are lively
affairs: evervone talks and no one really gets
hurt. The final decision will probably be the
one which is politically and economically wise.
The industry is very powerful, able as it was
to evoke from Governor Davis the utterances
he made.
By the way, Davis’s state, Missouri, once had
a sugar industry, and was to be ruined if certain
things occurred and it lost it. The things occurred, about on schedule time, Missouri switched from sugar to mules; she was still doing
fairly well at last reports. What was to ruin
Missouri by ruining her sugar industry is not
precisely recalled—maybe it was abolition.
It got the old clay-bank commonwealth all
Cashew Nuts
. GROSS
of cardol oil from the shell is about 10%-
Many efforts have been made in the past to
shell these nuts by machine, but the elastic,
spongy nature of the shell, irregularity of size,
and the caustic character of the oil it contains,
have thus far been insurmountable obstacles
to the success of mechanical devices. Hence
the process resorted to in shelling is to place the
nuts on corrugated sheet iron under which a
quick fire is burning; the cardol oil oozes out
into special receptacles placed to receive it,
the charred shell then cracked with a piece of
wood, and the edible nut recovered. Some
dexterity is required to recover the nut whole,
as they command a much higher price intact,-
about forty cents gold per lb.,—than when they
are broken; pieces are worth only about one
half as much. It is advisable to desiccate the
been cultivated up to the present time. It nuts before packing in order that they may keep
longer.
According to last American consular reports,
India is at present the only country cultivating
and shipping these nuts to the United States.
During the past year Calcutta exported to
the States over four million rupees’ worth of
worth of cardol oil The principal buyers of
practice is to give the coolie a sack of nuts in the
shell, forty per cent of the weight of which
for a stipulated price. The coolies keep the
charred shell which they use for fuel. The
jectionable as the burning process gives off a
very acrid smoke, irritating to the eyes and
in the world to-day. It is not astringent as are throat. The writer uses a fuming chamber
In Indian practice the nuts are not desic

5


het up under the collar, but there were enough
George Wilcoxes there to save the day. There
always are enough of 'em; there are enough in
these islands, if they'll wake up to their chances.


Footnote: That smile Governor Davis flashes
about so genially seems to robe in velvet some
mighty stern pertinacity. See how the probes
keep digging into the government graft, and
some of the grafters. How much is His Excellency smilingly having his way about things?
It’s just possible, you know, that he commences
to dominate the council table. It’s just possible that he occasionally says in Harvard English, slightly Missouri-worn, “Well, after all,
I guess this matter had better be handled this
way. Yes, I really believe it had; so, if there
is no objection.... None? Fine! (with the
smile out in full regalia), we’ll have it done that
way, then. Thank you, gentlemen (more, and
more persistent, smiling), and I guess that will
be all for today.” Yes, it is surely a possibility;
and interesting, eh what?


cated, but when shelled are heaped in piles in
the various go-downs prior to shipment. As a
result, many of the nuts become worm eaten.
These are not a complete loss, however, for
buyers allow a 10% worm eaten product. During
desiccation about 4% of water is taken out,
and naturally results in that much loss of weight
in the finished product, but this loss is compensated for by a superior finished article, worm
resisting more crisp in taste; in other words, a
"nutty tasting nut.” Recently India tried
shipping the nuts in cold storage to arrest worm
destruction, but if they are desiccated, this
becomes unnecessary. The nuts are packed
in clean petroleum cans.
Planting should be done during the month of
May-June, spot planting being cheapest. Each
tree should be given 50 square meters of space,
or about 200 trees per hectare. After about one
year the trees need little, if any care. They
commence bearing in small quantities after
three vears, gradually increasing every year
until about eight years' old, when the yield will
be about 500 fruits per tree, or a total of about
five kilos of nuts, or two of the shelled product,
which is equal to four and one half pounds. In
the shelling process, even with care, only about
75% of whole nuts can be recovered; we can,
therefore, sum up the yield of an eight year old
tree per vear, as follows: three pounds’ whole
nuts at $0.40 equal $1.20; one and one half
pounds of pieces at $0.22 per pound equal $0.33;
total $1.53; harvesting and preparing, $0.53;
balance $1.00 per tree, or $200 per hectare, not
considering the value of cardol oil, the alcohol
which may be recovered from the fruit, or the
gummy exhudation from the tree, which can be
made up into the best book-varnish obtainable.
Cardol oil is used for the preservation of fish
seines, as a wood preserver, and can also be used
as the base material for the manufacture of a
hair-dye (Alpha and Beta Anacardic Acid with
Ammonia), which does not stain the scalp nor
the hands. The sap of the cashew-nut tree
makes the finest of indelible inks. The natives


Retail
pine American Dr,
Importers
PVP
 Ca
BOTICABOrE


Wholesale
Agents


MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
We have been selling drugs for 98 years


tEs?


TO ADVERTISEMENS FUEASE


TRE AMTM*


R OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


6


  


October, 1929


use the tree for wooden heels or wooden shoes,
as it is a very light and hard wood. For this
purpose many trees are destroyed. Local use
for the cashew nuts is either to eat them roasted
or to mix them with cacao beans in the making
of chocolate, for which it is very highly appreciated. The largest number of trees at


One right which does not find universal sanction among Latin nations (but is esteemed by
Latins individually as highly as it is by other
peoples) is that of free speech and a free press.
This right, naturally, was not enjoved in the
Philippines prior to the advent here of American
power—when it instantly sorang into activity.
Even now it is not widely functioning in either
Latin republics or Latin monarchies: Mexico
and several South American republics now have
the press under censorship, as Mussolini has it in
Italy, a monarchy, and Rivera has it in Spain,
another monarchy; so it seems that whether
ruling in a monarchy or in a pseudo-republic,
the Latin governing element looks askance upon
the freedom of the press and never hesitates to
humble the fourth estate at the knees of its
elders. This is comment, not criticism; any
view on the subject is empirical, since it takes a
millenium or more of time to prove anything
right or wrong in this world; the fact is, stating
it without decrying it, that freedom of the press
has never been firmly established in any Latin
country now called to mind, and it seems, among
such countries, to be buttressed by no constitutional provisions.
France will be thought of by the reader, and
truly the French press has been great since
Voltaire’s time. But that press, written by the
people who write the world’s best prose, the
French people, is largerly a subsidized press; and
such a press is a press voluntarily censored by
those who subsidize it.
This limitation, in another form, is affecting
the modern press elsewhere—as in America and
Great Britain—but the government in those
countries at least keeps its hands off. (What
is meant is, that newspaper blocs are known in
both countries mentioned which reflect in all the
papers of the bloc the opinions, predilections and
policies of the owner, while the absolute independence of other papers is modified in some
instances by the fact that any great newspaper
is primarily a great business, and in business it
happens often enough that business considerations must prevail. Items and editorials sometimes appear in newspapers because the business
office wishes them to, and other items and comment are kept out for like reasons.)
During the Spanish regime, then, in the
Philippines, newspapers operated under a strict
secular and ecclesiastical censorship when they
operated at all. Those who were devoted to
their letters endured the humiliations inevitably
appertaining to the ownership and operation of a
property under a superior authority in whose
wishes one must acquiesce, and Filipinos had


present is found in the hills of Antipolo and
Bataan province, where the nuts are collected annually and brought to the Manila market. The
collectors ask twenty centavos per hundred nuts.
A few of the fruits come into the market and are
sold for edible purposes, but most of them are
left to rot under the trees.


There was, in Spanish times, no Filipino press;
that, now very flourishing, has been a growth
under the United States. But somehow some
of the old Spanish editors held on, perhaps by
patriotism and hope, or perhaps because there was


no alternative, and, under the new regime, one
of these at least became a distinguished editor.
He was Romero Salas, of the Spanish paper
El Mercantil. The Philippines appear to have
captivated his Iberian imagination and impulsive nature; he sang many paeans to their glory,
remained in Manila, reared his family here, and
left Manila only for his deathbed in Spain, one
year ago.


The career of Romero Salas as an editor in
Manila bridges the gap between old times and
new.
But though there were no Filipino newspapers
under Spain in the islands, they began quickly
enough under the Stars and Stripes, which give
a free press, of course, constitutional protection
save in time of war; and even then a good deal
of leeway. Retana (quoted by Carson Taylor
in his brochure History of the Philippine Press)
credits the first Filipino newspaper to Isabelo de
los Reyes, the cultured Ilokano who, aside from
being a fiery politician and sectarian crusader, has
contributed much to the cause of Philippine
learning. His newspaper was El Ilokano, and
may have antedated somewhat the American
occupation of Manila. Taylor omits a date for
it. The next Filipino newspaper was La Inde

pendencia, born September 3, 1898, just three
weeks after the occupation, in the printshop
of the Augustinian home for orphans at Malabon,
a ship-building village in the environs of Manila.
This is the place, therefore, to record the fact
that the friars and the Jesuits introduced the art
of printing in the Philippines very early. There
are records indicating that the Augustinians
imported the first type and printing presses


Your Newspaper: How It Came Here
II
nothing to do with them except as employes.


New Chicago Daily News and Chicago Daily Journal Building in Chicago. The circulation of this newspaper
runs about 450,000 papers daily.


AIOORKAATLS
ASSOCIATED GASOLINE and CICOL MOTOR OIL
Their Sustained Quality Assures
—more “life" in
your motor
-more "life” from
your motor
ASSOCIATED
CEBU
MANILA


Associated Gasoline starts easily, responds to
your throttle at all speeds, and gives long mileage. It is a clean fuel, refined to minimize
carbon formation and crankcase dilution.
No motor oil deposits less carbon than Cycol.
It has amazing stability, and maximum lubrication value. Cycol lasts longer; it assures
an unbroken, protecting film of oil where heat,
pressure and friction are greatest.
OIL COMPANY
LEGASPI
ILOILO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


To
THE AMERICA
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


7


before the close of the 16th century: for a long
time, when their asylum was at Guadalupe, they
taught the art of printing there, and only removed the shop to Malabon when the new orphanage was built at that place. The oldest
Filipino printer remembered was Tomas Pinpin
taught by the Dominicans; the Jesuits, too, had
very early printshops. A text by Pinpin printed in 1605 is extant.
The printers, good ones, available among the
craftsmen of Manila when Americans and Filipinos began establishing newspapers, must have
been taught by the friars; the revolutionists
who printed La Independencia (which may have
been preceded by La Libertad, a paper suppressed
by Aguinaldo and succeeded by El Heraldo, as
Taylor quotes Epifanio de los Santos as believing), made much of the fact that they were
using the orphanage press, upon which many an
argument against their cause had been printed.
The first American paper published in the
Philippines was The Bounding Billow, Taylor
says, published by two sailors on the Olympia
and, with an illustrated account of the Battle
of Manila Bay, selling to several editions for a
quarter a copy—50 centavos. It was followed
September 10, 1898, by the first American
newspaper, The American Soldier, by a group of
the 13th Minnesota Volunteers. Itfound a place,
broadened in scope, and became The Soldier’s
Letter. W W “Mayor” Brown, destined tobe
a familiar figure in Manila for 30 years thereafter, financed this paper. Others were started,
but The Manila Times, now out with its 31st
anniversary number, is the only one which has
survived. It began publication October 11,
1898, and has had a grist of editors and publishers
averaging second to none in the islands. Martin
Egan, “Bill” Lewis, L. H. Thibault, and R.
MeCullough Dick loom brilliantly among Times
editors. Walter Wilgus, when George H.
Fairchild was the publisher, had full play for his
gift as a natural wit—with little fondness for
politicians.
When Fairchild laid down the dictum Govern
or Go, as a norm of policy for the United States
in the Philippines, that, for a man who kept
the vitriol handy on his desk, as Wilgus did,
was sanction enough for some of the most biting
comment Philippine readers have ever enjoyed;
it was spontaneous and it kept up daily, until
the Times changed hands. It compared in
dare-deviltry with the newspapers of the empire
days, chiefly bought by soldiers and saying
whatever they pleased. If there are files extant
(since the lamentable Cosmopolitan-building


A Close-up of a Talkie
By JACK CASEY'
Hollywood, Cal., July 28.—They work eight
hours a day.
If they get five minutes' worth of results they
are satisfied.
That’s the talkies.
Mechanics of the "new” (in reality very old)
medium have caused what the producers love
to call an art to become as mechanical as a
barber’s electrically driven clippers. There’s a
human guiding hand necessary to get a decent
picture or a John Gilbert haircut. But turn the
clippers loose or turn on the juice of talkie-recording instruments and you’ll still get something—in the barber shop probably a painful nip
on the scalp, but in pictures more than likely a
classic, the human guiding hand having ruined
more pictures than anything else.
 * *
And the talkies—how are they made? On a
set, in a hot, sound-proof stage. Broadway
players—stage players—do just what they would
do in a play behind the footlights. Only they
do it under much brighter lights and in a sickish
looking brown makeup, before from three to sin
cameras. The cameras have lenses of various


fire, which left the Times with its name alone,
though its files had been rich in antiquities
of the early days), that period of American
editorship in Manila deserves the attention
of a genius.
Editors and staff were hardboiled, recruited
from the ranks of the volunteers whose enlistments had expired, and the acrimonies of the
barracks flowered in their unpent diction: what
hey thought, they said—in a way to be understood. And they mostly thought contrary to
the government. Among all their palladiums
upon the preservation of which the fate of this
modern Troy was to depend—but somehow
didn't—space is available for but one, The
Manila Freedom. Taylor remarks it as one
among 24 newspapers started in 1899, and possibly some others which are not recorded. Taylor
thinks it was the successor of The' Soldier’s
Letter. C. W. Musser fathered it. F. C. Fisher
and C. A. MeDermot soon bought it, Eddie
O'Brien became the editor and George Fuller
the business manager; then Fisher and McDermot sold it to Fred L. Dorr, an early-days American who had lived in Manila prior to the occupation and had been a friend of Rizal’s, and
Dorr and O'Brien were associated in the paper
together until a criminal libel action landed them
in Bilibid and made some constitutional history.
Their offense was against Benito Legarda
appointed to the Philippine Commission, and in
this day would excite no resentment from the
government; but at that time the government,
daily set upon by the little lions of the press, as
Taft styled them, was more sensitive of its
honor. Anyway, Taft had his opening and
took it. O'Brien and Dorr demanded jury
trial! Frederick Garfield Waite, one of the town’s
best lawyers, was their counsel; he carried the
case to the Federal supreme court and was one
of the last to learn that the Constitution does
not follow the Flag except as the Federal court
may hold that it does; in other words, to learn
that in the cases of Porto Rico and the Philippines, judge-made law will be decreed at the
high court’s discretion. Fuller bought the
Freedom, which died about 1906; O'Brien has
long been editing The Times of Cuba in Havana,
Dorr lived out many another adventure and
died in Manila about 1914.
Some of the antecedents of the new spapers now
being published in Manila will be reviewed next
month
"'By the end of 1899 the orgy of journalistic


sizes and are covered with hoods or are in portable booths. From a microphone near the players
wires run into the sound or "mixing” room.
There two machines record the spoken voice in
a tiny zigzag thread (depending upon the voice
or sound vibrations as to loudness or softness).
On the film this is known as the film track and is
transferred to one side of the film being "shot”
in the cameras when the picture is matched up
in the laboratories.
Voices of the players are released in the sound
room via a loud speaker—the same as by radio—
and the man in charge, by twirling a dial, just as
in radio, does what is known as the "mixing’
He makes the voices either louder or softer—to
nake them sound right in the theater—as his
experience and judgment dictate. The recording machines get the sound on the film track
through tiny mirrors which catch and reflect the
sound vibrations on the sensitized celluloid. The
same medium is used to get it back from the film
n theater-projecting machines and released
through loud speakers to the audience.
Buzzers are used as signals, and the numbers
for the various “takes” (scenes shot) are talked
into the microphone as well as photographed for
identification on the film (silent) which photographs the scenes. In other words, synchronization has to be perfect. Otherwise the film reels
—one sound, one silent—would not match up


freedom," says Taylor, "as indicated by the large
number of new papers started in 1898 and 1899
appears to have subsided. The majority of
those who ventured into the field either lost
their capital, if they had any, or were unable to
gather sufficient revenue to pay the printers.
It may be noted here that in those days it was
comparatively easy to start a newspaper, especially of a political nature. There were plenty
of writers who were willing to give the anxious
world the benefit of their wisdom for the pleasure
t afforded themselves and without cost to the
publisher. Filipino printers received from P0.20
to P0.80 per day and if the ‘ghost didn’t walk’
on Saturday they lived just the same.
In newspaperdom, the ghost walks when payday comes. Is the ghost gonna walk today? is an
anxious query unless the business office has the
envelopes ready early.


NEW SCHOOLS OF ENGLISH


To our readers who may be interested in
movie theaters in the provinces—watch the
talkies. Don’t be caught napping. The talkies
in Manila are already turning out to be the
schools of English one’s first observations predicted they would be. The initiatory difficulties
at the Radio, for instance, where they were first
installed in Manila, have been overcome. New
equipment is going into the Lyric. The Rialto
has been fortunate from the start. The Ideal
goes talkie this month. While there is nothing
to add to September’s comment, and nothing to
modify, we urge theater-owners in the provinces
the importance of installing talkies at once and
getting the right kind of apparatus. There
are two systems, one synchronizing the phonograph with the actors' lips, the other photographing the sound on one edge of the film and scientifically turning it back into sound from the
microphones. Theaters with poor acoustics can
be improved in this detail by use of heavy hangings on the walls and across the ceiling and at the
doors. The Radio has been so improved, until
it is now easy to hear from any seat in it. Even
a town which has been indifferent to movies will
respond to talkies; and teachers will soon notice
how the talkies help them in the teaching of
English diction and pronunciation. Don’t overlook the fact that the talkies are a new form of
drama. Be first in your field with them. They
annihilate movies overnight.—Ed.


to the sound track or talkie.
* *
In the old days a director would say “cut” i
somebody blundered. Now he says "N. G."
and a buzzer halts the recording machines in the
sound booth.
The shooting schedule following a week of
rehearsals on such a drama as "Paris Bound"¬
on which set, at Pathe, we spent an afternoon—
is fifteen days. The work is scheduled to go on
for eight hours a day. The picture will run,
when released, an hour and fifteen minutes. So
Ned Griffith, directing, had to get five minutes"
perfect results each day of the fifteen—which he
did. In fact, he did so well that we can safely
recommend "Paris Bound" to you.
Ann Harding, very blond and very nice
stopped New York cold with her performance of
the stage “Mary Dugan," and does as well in
this, her first film. However, we’re no press
agent. Frankly, we enjoyed a private preview
of this Griffith opus far more than we did seeing
it made.
Talkies are tiresome, arduous and mechanical.
And a voice that is charming on the set gets a
mechanical veneer in being recorded. Until
that is eliminated the producers never will make
he so-called "new medium” much of a threat to
the speaking stage.
*The Chicago Daily News, July 31, 1929.


8


F
  


October, 1929


Diverting Ourselves with Diversification


By PERCY A. HILL*


There are many words which can be parsed
from different angles, with varied results. We
have that fine old word crisis, for example, which
can mean anything from an empty pocket-book
to a bureau impasse; that splendid word, cooperation, which hops all over the dictionary as
well as the horizon and still remains—a word;
and now we have that bright evangel word
diversification, as a panacea for all our Philippine
troubles. Used by a non-producer, it may mean
something or nothing; used by a business man
it may merely be a reiterated formula to take the
place of thought; used by a politician it comes
through his hat, but employed by a statesman,
it becomes a noble expression, like conservation,
trust-busting or what have you. But just how
does this word strike the thirteen millions busied
with their happy production, and far removed
from the frolicsome rigodon, the mutual admiration banquet and the merry word that does for
the deed?
The producer is sternly told he is making a
mistake if he does not diversify. This is all
right for a nation of farmers but not for a nation
of planters. Even in the United States, the
farmer-nation par-excellence, farmers have
long ceased merely growing a variety of
produce for actual consumption. Farming
itself has moved upward from the subsistence
occupations and has become a cash-crop occupation. Let us look at Philippine conditions, not
from the viewpoint of the idealist, the optimist,
or the "politicastro,” but as they actually are.
We will find the following factors:
The farmer or planter who faces the hardest
problem is the one who diversifies or grows a
variety of crops. He must start anew with some
of these and learn new principles, as it were; he
must fit his land to the crops and not the crop
to the land; he must ignore climatic and physical
conditions, which, sad to say, were here first;
he cannot afford the latest equipment for each
of his several major crops nor can he hope for low
production costs,—a matter of time, concentration and experience. There is also his immobile
labor question to be taken into account. Everpresent problems are magnified when he is unable
to concentrate on the crop that yields the greatest returns.
Where diversification of crops has taken place
in the United States, it has only been a matter of
time when requirement turned in the direction
of the crop most suited to the physical, climatic
and labor conditions of the producer, factors
with which he was actually faced. There is a
vast difference between a nation of farmers and
one of planters. The former, as a world force,
is being relegated to the background. If we had
a nation of purely diversified farmers we might
find out that our export crops, upon which we
depend for material existence, would be neglected
for those of vital requirement for the field worker,
as in Russia.
Our four principal export crops, sugar, copra,
hemp and tobacco, which, together with our
principal domestic commodity, rice, are located in regions over which the clever word has no
control, for they are bound rigidly by climatic
and physical conditions. As a matter of fact,
we need more concentration than diversification
to bring these crops up to what they should be,
for in the last analysis they supply the wherewithal the country requires in the way of favorable balances of trade.
It y ould be interesting to have our experts,
who are not faced with the actual conditions of
the proa icer, recommend a paying crop that
could substitute rice in the clay lands of the
Central Luzon plain bound by monsoons, or one
that might enrich the poverty-stricken Ilocano
Coast, or the typhoon racked provinces of Isabela and Cagayan, not to speak of the Batanes.
Have we any agricultural or political Messiah
who can discover that hemp can be produced
north of a line running from Zambales to Baler.
copra in Nueva Ecija, or vast quantities of cacao
in Abra, rice in Davao or Cebu? The climatic


conditions facing the planter from Basco to
Jolo have thus far baffled all but the most optimistic theorists.
If our agriculturists by proxy and exponents
of the nebulous theory of diversification applied
to Philippine crops mean that each region should
diversify with the crops of the others, in other
words, that each should grow a small area devoted to sugar, rice, copra, hemp, etc., so that they


WHAT A ROAD DOES
Henry Becker, of Aparri, tells on his frequent visits to Manila of the stimulation the
road into the Cagayan valley has been to industry in that region particularly to agriculture. Formerly the valley imported rice,
now it exports some 125,000 bags a month.
More than 100 small rice mills have been
installed, most of them in villages which never
had heard of such conveniences before the
road gave machinery salesmen a means of
reaching the valley. Sugar-cane planting is
being extended, and the commerce-and-industry bureau reports a sugar-mill company
organized; for several years, however, the
output of this mill will be consumed in the
valley. Less tobacco is being grown, Becker
says, farmers are turning to rice and corn
as better crops. This is partly a response
to circulars printed in the local dialect and
widely distributed among the farmers two
years ago, Becker, Judge Cata lino Sevilla
and more than 20 other influential men having been associated in the preparation of
the circular.
Lumber and logs are among the valley’s
exports which are increasing in volume and
value. The road across the mountains from
Bangui to Aparri, giving access to the llokos
region without the necessity of the present
long, expensive detour, is greatly needed.


will not put their eggs all into one basket (a
homely phrase that has ruined many a farmer)
we cannot see how this ruinous policy would
favorably affect Philippine conditions. If they
advocate the production of new crops such as
chinchona, pepper, camphor, or oil-nuts, they
will have to resort to other methods than the
blah-blah before they get producers to abandon


a good egg for one that might be addled, or divert
their energy and capital from the known to the
unknown. If they mean the growing of crops
such as cotton, cacao, coffee, kapok, etc., they
should be aware that these do grow here but they
are grown unprofitably or there would long ago
have been a rush to engage in such industries."
If they mean the diversification of crops to be
put into pigs, cattle, poultry, this is also being
done but we see no millionaires in any of those
diversified industries. They should also note
that the price of Philippine coffee produced in
Batangas, when the industry there was at its
zenith cannot compete with the flood of Brazilian, Columbian and Central American coffee at
present prices. There are quite a few angles
to this diversification, it must be admitted."
The whole problem comes back to its original
status of many vears ago. Only those entities
of large capital desiring security, and willing to
embark in new industries can solve the problems
of introducing a new crop into the Isles of Philip.
This modus operandi is paralyzed under present
conditions and heeds not the siren song now sung
by the co-oppers, who retain their former reservations, mental and what-not. This may be
the result of our hot climate,—quien sabe,—as it
is not in line with the aspirations of the impractical; but it exists—like a sore thumb.
Again the production or diversification, as you
prefer, of cotton, coffee, cacao, brings us in direct
competition with these same commodities produced in the United States, South America and
Africa,—another problem. To advocate for the
Philippines what is good in other countries needs
more gray matter than that prompting a mere
cursory exclamation. Diversity might lie in the
cutting down of imports like pork andbeef produets, eggs, fish, spices, pepper, etc. Who is the
Moses who wants to invest money in these industries? If they were profitable they would be
flourishing adjuncts instead of adverse facts.
Why ask the cattle raisers to diversify when they
are blocked by law? Why ask the sugar-grower
to turn to pepper, the rice producer to grow camphor or abandon a good egg for a doubtful henfruit? No producer with his nose to the grindstone can be a patriot, nor does he welcome the
idea of grafting the egg-plant with the milkweek to produce a vegetable custard.
To date we have no Utopian idea that will aid
us in producing more wealth except by concentration rather than diversification owing to our
unspeakable status. Faced with the dilemma of
lowered prices for tropical products expansion
is out of the question, for many of the prices


"From the Manila Daily Bulletin.


Atiantie dula ant ratinie Co.


OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


CANN
ERLE AN

HANA
IA
TTI!
PEE
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL
AMERICAN
HE


offered are less than the cost of production. If
diversification means new crops, who is to be the
John D. or Edison who will lead the way—at a
price? If it means diversification of known crops,
it leads back to doing each other’s washing.
What we need is a Society of Amigos de Paisanos
and not Amigos del Pais. All these things were
tried, weighed in the balances and found wanting,
asany one can ascertain if he cares to read history.
For four long centuries we have found out what
crops can be produced here under our peculiar
climatic limitations. It now remains to be seen
what new ones can be introduced under our
peculiar political limitations. We are inclined
to believe from past performances that Juan
will let some George do it, for he has only a few
eggs in his basket which he knows are good eggs.


Farther with Franciscans in Samar

For two months we left the Franciscans laboring in Samar, at the many missions taken over
by them from the founders, the Jesuits, upon
the latter’s expulsion from the Philippines in
1768. Other matters have claimed space, and
our friend, the companion of the vicar of Santa
Clara convent, has been making a vain fight
against cancer of the throat. Samar was a
familiar book to him, he was a parish priest
there for so many years. He was short, stout,
and sunny-natured. He knew how to suffer
excruciating pain and die of it—with philosophic


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management -. WALTER E. ANTRIM


For the others he has neither capital, time nor
inclination in the face of existing conditions.
The proof of the feasibility of introducing new
crops here lies in the melancholy fact of sums
aggregating into the, millions spent here by those
who tried and were beaten. And the crops were
many from peanuts to pineapples, kapok to camphor, castor-oil-beans to champacas, and a score
of other efforts in agricultural pioneering. Tired
of the fruitless struggle and saddened by the loss
of their capital they have long since disappeared
from the scene. The introduction of new crops
is the work of efficient experimental stations
carried on by entities that can afford to lose at
first if there is ultimate hope in prospect. These
again would be organizations of some magnitude
which desire to invest in a stable country with
the hope of a continuity of existence.


Sulat, meaning Writing. At the edge of a
beautiful and fertile plain on the east coast of
Samar, on the right bank of the Sulat river and
on the shore of secure cove. “The church,
dedicated to St. Ignatius Loyola, is of stone,
built by the Jesuits and repaired by Fr. Enrique
de Barcelona in 1844, who at the same time
built a bell tower of stone (no doubt serving as a
fortress against the Moros too), a beautiful
baptismal chapel and a cemetery surrounded by
a stone wall, outside the town and well situated.
The comvento is also of stone, strong and spacious.


uncomplaining thoughts, merry-smiling lips
even when the voice was but a whisper and
faith that all is ordered for the best. Oh, an
old formula enough; but a formula that made of
our friend a very fine man to know.
If anyone would make fine acquaintances, let
him insinuate himself into the friendship of some
of the friars in the walled city whom he thinks
he should like to know; and let him go and visit
with them and they with him. He shall better
his Spanish, revise his views perhaps, and fill
his memory with quaint reminiscences out of
which good tales may be made. The friars”
geniality is spontaneous and unfailing. They
may think little enough of many present-day
institutions, but they always think well of their
fellow man. Some want Spanish teachers.
Why not a friar friend?
We could wish that the old priest from Samar
had not had to succumb to cancer, but he seemed
to mind it little enough. Faith was his nursemaid, submission his physician. When we
occasionally took groups of children to the
convent and went up into the vicarage, he gave
each one some religious token—a picture of one
of the saints in a plush or silken frame the nuns
had made for it. He gave our daughter the
Nazarene, which has become a cherished symbol
to her; and on his hand, when he gave it, was
the palsy of death, but on his lips and in his
merry eyes gleamed a smile that knew not that
mysterious halting, or unexplained shifting of
course which men call death—wanting a better
word.
Many another friar living out his days among
us, but with so very few of us, is a character who
will bear acquaintance. If our traditions come
to be as eloquent as theirs, taken with all their
faults, but with their virtues too, great indeed
will be our annals in these islands. Father
Julian, God rest him. Now let us see some more
of the Franciscans’ work in Samar:


There is a wooden town hall and a primary
school supported by the community fund, the
building being by Father Barcelona; the other
buildings, excepting about ten wooden ones, are
of nipa and in the usual style of the country.”
When Father Huerta wrote, in 1865, he also
mentioned the chapel in the visita of Catalaban,
on the island of that name at the mouth of the
cove. San Antonio de Padua, always good
to the poor in their afflictions, is the patron of
this chapel; San Isidro Labrador, who encour

ages thrifty husbandry and blesses the crops,
is the patron of the ermita at Meytigbao.
Of course, if their intercessions are unsuccessful, man is at fault—never the kindly saints.
Ah, that man should sin: he should ever heed
the homilies from the parish pulpit and properly
behave himself.
The friars’ recipe for a good life was simple,
and, perhaps in part for the reasons about to be
stated, not very difficult to folow: “The boundaries of this town extend five leagues north
and south and on the west are not marked at all.
The mountains abound in fine woods suitable
for building and for cabinet-work; there is a
diversity of palms, rattans, edible plants, resins,
gums and wild game of every variety.... Excellent sea fish abound in the coastal waters.
Cultivated lands yield rice enough for all requirements, especially a black rice known as
mumus, which ordinarily is given to the sick.
Coconuts, Manila hemp, taro and yams are also
abundantly produced. The people are devoted
to agriculture, the stripping of Manila hemp,
the making of coconut oil, hunting and fishing,
the women to weaving; and all the surplus
products are exported in the people’s own boats
to the provincial capital and Manila.... This
parish is served by Fr. Jose Mata, minister,
27 years old.”
In such pastoral isolation and plenitude simple
virtues were not of course exceptional; all authority being in the parish priest, they were the
rule.
Borongan. “The name of this pueblo signifies Cloudy Place, from the fogs from two rivers
between whose opposite banks the pueblo is
situated.” As was the case with the other towns
of Samar which were early established, the
Franc'scans took over Borongan from the Jesuits
in 1768, when there were 751 tributos in the
town and a population of 4,999. Fr. Juan de
Mora was the first Franciscan sent there as a
parish priest. The church is under the advocation of Our Lady of the Nativity. Burned down
in 1773, Fr. Roque de San Jose rebuilt it in
1781- Fr. Juan Navarrete gave it a new roof
of tile in 1843 and defrayed from his personal
funds the expense of a fine tower in 1853. Navarrete, erected other buildings in the town.
The church in one of the barrios, Meydolong,
"was built by the infidels converted by the
zealou Fr. Vicente Merida about the year
1820, who began paying tribute in 1844"; another village, converted to Christianity by Navarrete "began paying tribute in 1849.”
That was the process, then: first, teaching the
seminomadic animists the Catholic faith and
respect for established government, then settling the neophytes in a village round a church


(Please turn to page 11)


UEIDAET
C. MANILA.
90-94 ESCOLIA
MASONIC TEMPLE


COlNsECrORE
Sto whether or not you need glasses
Ais unsafe and you are courting
trouble if you indulge in it.
There is only one way to make sure,
and if there is the slightest doubt in your
mind about your eyes, settle it now by
having our experienced Optometrists give
them a scientific examination and learn
the facts about the condition of your vision.
Always the best in quality
but never higher in price


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


10


  


Dctober, 1929


Building and Loan Associations


This brief discussion will first take up certain
obvious advantages of Manila as a building and
loan center.
The paramount advantage is the absence of
booms and business depressions of devastating
intensity; Manila grows rationally, constantly,
increment upon real estate is assured. This
growth, it is clear upon even the most cursory
examination of the reasons for it, will persist
indefinitely—until the city has a population of
several millions. There will be bad times and
good times, but not annihilating crises. Manila
is the outlet of half the hinterland of the Philippines, upon which, engaged in productive occupations, is half the islands’ population. These
4-12 or 5 million people may be tenfold that
number before Luzon shall be overcrowded.
Their activities are most varied, even in agriculture, and, at their prevailing standards of living,
they never produce anything which does not
yield them an instant and material profit. It is
sometimes complained that commodity prices
are low, and times are said to be bad; but even
at such times there is a profit for the farmer, who
in the Philippines is not given to going beyond
his means—the sugar farmer excepted.
Even if the future should bring times of personal peril to the provinces of Luzon, Manila,
a place of consular residence entitled to international protection, would be a refuge for the pursued and would suffer nothing from the disturbances. An expert, surely, called upon to
pass upon Manila as a place for real estate investments, could not fail of rendering a most
favorable report. Building and loan associations are authorized for the purpose of providing
the poor with means of taking advantage of such
conditions and utilizing their savings as a means
of relieving themselves from poverty.
Building and loan associations are incorporated associations of men and women authorized to
charge high interest and exempted from income
taxation for the mutual benefit of their members,
who are of two classes—those who borrow and
those who lend, both acting through the association. As the profits are, when the law’s intent
is followed, periodically distributed to all, the
high interest is merely a compulsion to more
rapid saving. The objective is the building of
homes for the members who borrow, and the
augmentation of the savings of those who lend.
At the same time a borrower is a debtor to his
association, he is, to the extent he meets his
payments, equally a creditor.
Building and loan associations accumulate the
pittances of their members. Those who are
merely saving, can save only a little each month,
perhaps no more than a peso or two; and they
are, even though they may have saved a sum of
several thousand pesos, unable of themselves to
effect a secure real estate mortgage. Besides,
all the time they should be engaged in getting
such a sum together, they could have from it no
more than the prevailing savings-bank rates.
By pooling, in building and loan associations
with others who are saving by pittances each
month, they immediately have the advantage of
the higher rate charged by the association for
loans; that is, 3,000 or 5,000 saving members
paying a peso each into the association each
month, make it possible for the association im
mediately to effect a sound real estate loan, the
association attending to all the details, legal and
administrative.
When such members wish to withdraw, it is
easy for the association to square off their account with the current collections from other


members and new ones coming into the association: under the Dayton plan, in wide vogue in
America, members pay in whatever they can at
any time, and withdraw whatever they wish,
even all that is due them, at any time. Our
rules are somewhat more regulatory, but the
investment is always safe.
Incidentally, few building and loan associations whose operations are localized in a single
community where the natural interest of everyone will keep them under due surveillance, ever
have failed; practically it is impossible for conservative associations to fail, even in cities where
real estate is subject to material fluctuations of
value. The loans are made upon appraised
values, the mortgages, as soon as made, begin
to be paid; and they are all bulked together in
the assets of the association holding them, so
that any loss suffered on some is made up from
profits gained from others. This illustrates the


This article on building and loan
associations is prompted by the
proposals from Earl B. Schwulst,
banking-bureau director, to amend
certain paragraphs of the corporation law in the division of it pertaining to such associations. The
zeal of Mr. Schwulst is commendable, his motives unquestioned.
But it would be more important
to impress the fact upon the public
of these islands, particularly the
residents of Manila, Iloilo. Cebu,
Baguio and many provincial centers where the people would be
greatly benefited by building and
loan associations, that the Philippines now have one of the best
laws governing building and loan
associations to be foun anywhere.
Our law on this subject was drafted
by Luke E. Wright and Henry C.
Ide, who came here as Commissioners and left as Governors, and
were both adept in the drafting
of good laws and erudite in knowledge of the law. Most defects of
fundamental character probably
lie elsewhere than in our building
and loan law.—Ed.


peculiar security offered the creditors, many
mortgages instead of a few or only one; and besides that, the constant employment of the
money, putting it into new loans as fast as old
ones are paid up.
Those who save through the medium of a
building and loan association are only able to
save in pittances, from their periodical incomes—
salaries, or wages. A goal of several thousand
pesos, enough for a mortgage loan, would be too
far off for them, it would be a fatal strain upon
their frugality and they should never reach it;
but a few pesos each month placed with the association is not beyond them, and they soon realize
the advantages of living within their means and
putting something aside regularly for the future.


Their passbooks or stock certificates become
sources of pride to them, and marks of their
prestige among their fellows. (By the way, the
passbook would be better than the stock certificate, as it would be more convenient to the
bookkeeper and the stockholder).
As with the saving member, a goal of a sum
sufficient to secure a piece of ground and build
a house on it is too far off to attract the borrowing member, who can never hope to have more
than a small fraction of the required sum at any
one time. Hisincome, salary or wages, is periodically received and must go for the most part to
square up current family expenses. He can,
however, manage to put aside a few pesos each
month, and his loan is so arranged that such pittances amortize, in a given period, the principal
of the loan, the legal interest on it, and the other
charge by way of premium. He is credited
withinterest upon all that he pays into the association; after a time, when he faithfully keeps up
his payments, he is able to go to a real estate
mortgage company and effect a loan (paying off
the balance due the association) at a much lower
rate. He now has some acquaintance with the
business of saving, and may be said to be well
launched toward acquiring an unencumbered
title to his home.
He always has the option, of course, of keeping
on with the association until his pittances pay
him out of its debt, at which time his stock and
its earnings cancel his loan. But he should
always have the privilege of paying up and withdrawing, particularly to secure better terms, at
any time. The association, of course, has the
advantage of foreclosure upon delinquent borrowers without the usual formal foreclosure proceedings in court, in which case the delinquent
borrower must be credited with all that is due
him as a creditor of the association. (The proposed amendments to our law would not be as
liberal to borrowers as some laws in successful
operation in the United States. There, indeed,
it has been found that fines for delinquency are
a nuisance; other lessons taught by experience
have made the associations in most states more
liberal toward debtor members than the law
requires).
Amendments to a good building and loan law
ought to be undertaken cautiously, perhaps in
the light of more experience than the Philippines
have had with the few associations now operating
here. The law often says the associations may
do thus and so, not requiring that they must.
It defines their maximum powers, and our law
defines the associations as home-building organizations. By extension, however, and no doubt
in view of even greater abuses extant in these
islands, even large loans of building and loan
associations upon farms and plantations have
not been corrected by our courts. The association’s viewpoint on such a matter is one thing,
the borrower’s wisdom another. Everyone
knows, of course, that only two classes of farmers in the Philippines have regular periodical
incomes with which to meet the obligations of a
loan from a building and loan association; for
such loans are payable periodically, in the same
manner as the capital is accumulated by the
saving members and utilized by borrowing members for building homes for themselves. The
two classes of farmers referred to are the hemp
planters and coconut growers, whose crops are
continually ripening. Any other farmer, becoming indebted to a building and loan association and being compelled to meet very material
payments monthly—or, being delinquent, to
have fines charged against him, increasing even
the high interest he has agreed to pay—runs
a peculiar risk with his land (which is his capital),
which may be peremptorily seized by the association and, in the same manner, sold to satisfy
the obligation. By the time this has happened,
whatever the planter-debtor has coming to him
on his stock by way of interest is offset by the
fines and proceedings charges. Building and
loan associations are not designed to meet the
needs of planters for money; their field is the
urban community; and in such a community
any debtor of theirs, being hard-pressed, can
usually make shift, among all the agencies available, at least to save all that he has put into the
association—that is, all his payments together
with his accrued earnings as a creditor.
(Please turn to page 16, col. 3)


October, 1929


  


11


Farther with Franciscans in Samar
(Continued from page 9)
and plaza, then levying and collecting taxes for
the carrying on of local government and the
support of the crown government in Manila.
Father Huerta describes Borongan as surrounded
by fertile lands; Fr. Juan Navarrete introduced
there the cultivation of Manila hemp, “all the
products of this pueblo were doubled and tripled
under the zealous direction of the oft-mentioned
Navarrete."
Paranas. This pueblo when taken over by
the Franciscans from the Jesuits in 1768 had
310 tributos and a population of 985. The stone
church which the Jesuits had built, under the
advocacy of St. Peter and St. Paul, burned
down, and a second built by the Franciscans
met the same fate in 1835, but Fr. Leon de
Tembleque built a third one which is no doubt
that still in use. The terrain is fertile, the
bordering mountains on the one side and the sea
on the other abounding in products more than
sufficient for the community.
Laoang. “The first founders of this pueblo,
about the vear 1680, were three principales,
headmen, of the pueblo of Palapat, Kahundik,


Surahan and Anodanod, who kept the pueblo
in subjection to Palapat until 1768, at which
time and as soon as we received the administration of Samar from the Jesuits, the town was
separated from Palapat and Fr. Antonio de
Toledo was assigned there as the first parish
priest.” The archangel St. Michael is the
patron saint; the church, stone and timber, was
built during the period from 1848 to 1852 by
Fr. Sebastian de Almonacid, "who at the same
time directed the construction of a town hall,
tribunal, of stone and timber, and another building of the same sort where a primary school
supported by the community fund is established... The lands cultivated, fertilized by a
multitude of small streams, produces much rice,
tobacco, Manila hemp, coconuts and palms.
The people are devoted to farming, producing
hemp, coconut oil and nipa-palm wine, this
palm abounding in the vicinity. Cattle raising
and fishing are other industries.” The women,
in Father Huerta’s time, were diligent weavers
of native cloths which they sold in Catbalogan,
while the rice not needed at home was sold in
Albay.
Calviga is the next Samar town in the Franciscan list. Our next journey commences
there.


General Dorey Leaves—Last of Mohicans!


Brigadier General Halstead Dorey, U.S.A.
left Manila, September 20, to return to the United
States and assume command of the army division which has its headquarters at San Antonio,
Texas. Some of the newspapers honored his
departure with stories on his army career; the
JOUrNAL will not repeat the data recorded in
Who's Who in America, but will endeavor to
furnish its readers with some of the more salient
facts involved in America’s administration of
Mohammedans in the Philippines—this being
the work to which Dorey was devoted when first
associated with Leonard Wood in Mindanao
and Sulu in 1904 and thereafter for some vears,
and later, from 1925 to the time of Wood’s
departure from Manila in the spring of 1927,
when Wood was governor of the Philippines
and Dorey was his chief adviser, handling
Mohammedan affairs particularly.
Dorey was absent from the islands during
most of the time Vice Governor Eugene A. Gilmore was acting governor, but returned to Manila
to hold the same post under Stimson (and for
three months under Davis) that he held under
General Wood. His departure from Manila
in Septemberleaves no old-timer at Malacanang
whose experience carries back through the
whole period of America’s sovereignty over the
Mohammedans of the Philippines. No capable
lieutenant is left behind: Dorey, in Mohammedan
affairs, is the last of the Mohicans, to overstrain
a familiar allusion; and he is probably not to
return to the Philippines.
Governor Davis’s direct reliance will be,
it would seem, Ludovico Hidrosollo, director
of the nonchristian-tribes bureau created by provision of the islands’ organic act of 1916, the
Jones law. This young man, first of the young
Fili, nos Taft pensioned to America for college
trainig, is naturally very ambitious for continued success in his career, guided heretofore
in measurable part by the counsel of American
friends, Dorey being the last, who had firsthand knowledge of our Mohammedan wards
and, in most cases, a decided sympathy with
them. Hidrosollo’s task is not an easy one,
since it involves, by policy of the government,
eventual abandonment of Mohammedan customary law and its entire substitution by the civil
and criminal codes of the Philippines.
In other words, it is the aim of the government to leave the Mohammedans alone only
in their religion; and even in the field of faith
the proselyter will of course pursue his missionarv
labors under the protection of the law. This
is no new thing, it began when the American
regime began; the government feels that with
the education of Mohammedans up to the point
where they can scrawl their names upon notesof-hand and bills-of-sale, and the names of candidates upon election ballots, transition from tribal
practices to the formal legal instruments of
Christian civilization will be the next and quite
a natural step. And, rather unfortunately,
sometimes, the Mohammedan has much the


same feeling—that he is being led on to commitments of whose consequences he is not fully
aware.
This is not to suggest insincerity, the government seems very sincere in what it does; and it
may be granted that it always has been. Some
criticism adhered to the speed with which Frank
W. Carpenter, succeeding Pershing in 1914 as
Mindanao-Sulu governor, hurried the process
along; but the record indicates only a difference


Bulletin Photo
Halstead Dorey


of degree in what he did and what the others did
before him—Bates, Wood, Pershing. However
much any of these governors wished to respect
the Mohammedan people’s laws and customs, it
must have been very hard to follow that which
they did not know; the tendency was, and is,
to follow what is known—our own laws.
Nevertheless, Dorey witnessed a tremendous
change during the 25 years he knew our Mohammedans. When he went to join Wood, first
Mindanao-Sulu governor, at Zamboanga in
1904, the Philippine Commission had just created
that province and provided a legislative council
Wood at the head of it, to enact laws conforming
as nearly as possible to the lawful customs of such
pcoples and leaving the chiefs the same authority
over their people as they now exercise. The
organic law even provided that the customarv
laws be codified, printed in dialect and Arabic
as well as in English, and made applicable to all
civil and criminal cases involving Mohammedan
litigants only. There were five districts, each
under an American governor, and the governors


settled disputes between chiefs and had the
power of enforcing their decisions upon such
differences.
Some remnant of this remains, justices of the
peace are expected to have recourse to the
customary law where its application is plainly
indicated and would not conflict with what we
have from Justinian.
The original arrangement seems to have been
very liberal, as is said, but it was in fact a drawing
away from the Bates treaty (with the Sultan of
Sulu) and really looked toward what has follow-¬
ed. The Mohammedans had not kept public
order as the treaty pledged them to do, Congress
had balked at slavery and had never ratified
the treaty, and the President was considered
absolved from executive observance of the treaty
because the other party had failed of compliance.
The treaty recognized the sultan’s civil and
religious sovereignty over his people, and we see
that the Mindanao-Sulu act placed civil power
in the new government it created and aggrandized local chiefs.
Wood had everything to organize, of course,
in 1904.
Taft had a solid foundation upon which to
erect modern administration in the other parts
of the archipelago. It is not intended as a
reflection upon what Taft did to say that Wood
made his own foundations and patiently built
upon them, gaining the confidence of the
Mohammedans as Taft did that of the Christians;
and it was upon Wood’s reports that the Philippine Commission depended in drafting the
organic law for Mindanao-Sulu, the Mohammedan province. These are proud memories
for Dorey, devoted as he is to Leonard Wood’s
patriotic achievements. For he was there
helping his general, such being his invariable
allusion to the comrade in civil and military
duties whom he loved, as a son might love a
father, and admired as a hero.
Few men have ever endured more inconsolable
grief than Dorey still endures over the death of
Leonard Wood. But however benevolent the
paternal government of the Mohammedans
Wood advised, it long ago succumbed to the
nationalism that pervades the land, and, therefore,
to the policy, as already intimated, which made
provision for it as an expedient. One of the
most rational devices was the tribal wards,
with ward courts on which the peers of the litigants sat as assessors and authorities on the
customary law. The wards have since become
municipal districts, and the tribunals courts
of justices of the peace—mostly Christian immigrants.
The five districts are now provinces, Davao,
Cotabato, Lanao, Sulu, and Zamboanga; four
of them enjoy all the paraphernalia of democracy, they are organized under the general
provincial-government act. Only Sulu has an
appointed American governor, the one now in
office, pending confirmation of his appointment
by the Philippine senate, being James R. Fugate,
a Dorey selection, of whom reports are good.
The Mohammedans were disarmed in 1911,
by Pershing; the outlawry prevalent theretofore
has since abated perceptibly, but is not entirely
a thing of the past and heavy detachments of
the Philippine constabulary are always on duty
in Mindanao-Sulu. In Zamboanga, at Petit
Barracks, a memento of old times, there is a
garrison of Federal scouts, Filipino soldiers.
The commander, Colonel Fletcher, is at this
writing gravely ill in Sternberg hospital in
Manila. On his sick bed Dorey had to bid him
good-bye.
The old order changes.
‘The Philippine government,”" says one of
Hidrosollo’s reports, "as well as the Filipino
people is greatly indebted to the work of pacification undertaken by the (American) military
authorities with no less great sacrifice of life.
This pacification which immediately followed
the general disarmament (in 1911) undoubtedly
paved the way for the implantation of civil
government.” Lanao and Sulu were the most
recalcitrant provinces; in Lanao the Mohammedansarefrugal, conservative, illiterate farmers,
and in Sulu they are the immediate descendants
of pirates and tribute-demanding headmen.
With the abolition of the department has come
a change in fiscal arrangements. The department used to have all the local revenue and the


12


ENN
E
  


October, 1929


disposition of it, including the port collections.
It was very little, but wonders were done with
it. The prison building on San Ramon penal
reservation, outside Zamboanga, was built of
reinforced concrete for P153,405.10; municipal
markets were built for P6,000 each in most
cases, either of concrete or hardwood. Now,
for their major appropriations, the provinces
take their chances in the general insular budget.
Hence the current discussion concerning a
Mindanao program; some legislators would be
liberal in making the jungle accessible to settlers,
others say the settlers should be there before
the roads are built—to justify the expense.
There is indecision, as in all things deliberated
over by unwieldy bodies of men, but Mindanao
and Sulu progress in the material sense anywayon the stimulus of their commerce overseas.
Procrastination may retard but cannot wholly
stop Mindanao-Sulu progress. Out of the
schools which Wood inaugurated has come the
best system of rural schools, perhaps, in all the
Philippines; there appear to be about 100 farm
and settlement schools where peasant boys ply
the hoe in the corn row part of the day and bend


over the three r’s the remainder, these schools
producing crops which help maintain them.
Davao teems with industry, because of the
American pioneers Wood encouraged to settle
there and take up plantations on the slopes of
Bud Apo, skirting the gulf. They have been
followed by Japanese, who have imitated them
in the cultivation of Manila hemp and coconuts.
Now a modern experiment is being tried, an
American corporation is turning a tract of nine
square miles into a business unit as a hemp farm,
building roads, providing drainage, choosing
and cultivating the hemp carefully, and finally
stripping, drying and baling it by machinery for
overseas shipment. The Japanese have another
economical unit devoted to hemp and coconuts,
and word comes to Manila that they are installing a paper mill depending upon the waste hemp
for its raw material.
A kutch factory and a coconut factory operate
at Zamboanga, lumbering enterprises are many,
rubber is the prime crop on Basilan island.
Dorey wonders about his oldtime friends, the
Mohammedans. But they clamor for more
schools, roads and bridges and if these are forth

coming the chances are that they will reconcile
themselves, even to such things as law codes
and justices of the peace, and become diligent
husbandmen. For a long time, though, it will
be contended by some that the Mohammedans
are one with the Christian reople of the Philippines, and by others, who are not zealots
of a cause, that they are a people culturally
distinct from the rest.
In March, 1915, Carpenter got the sultan to
renounce in writing, duly witnessed, his pretensions to temporal sovereignty, and to recognize
that of the United States. During Dorey’s
last year here there were occasions when Mohammedans came to him murmuring, even threatening to take matters into their own hands, alleging
mistreatment. “But Leonard Wood would not
want you to do that,” Dorey would say, "it
would displease him.” And with their belief
in the undying soul that beholds the conduct
of the living, something they do not have from
Mohammedanism, but from Buddhism perhaps,
this would quiet them and off they would go—
back to Mindanao to face it out.


Two More Philippine Poems by Gilbert S. Perez


Pokeresque
Moonlight off Corregidor,
And in the distance
The towering heights
Of Mariveles.
On the holystoned table
A lone pack of
Crimson angel-backs
And a saucer
Of pearl white beans:
Beans
At a penny apiece.
Morning off the Romblon coast,
And the creaking
Of chairs on deck;
The glare of the sunlit
Sea;


Close eyes that are
Sleepless and weary:
Beans
At five for a peso.
Evening off the barren hills
Of old Cebu;
Cigarettes in ash laden
Saucers,
And the steady shuffle
Of card on card:
Beans
At a peso apiece.
Dawn off the coast
Of Mindanao,
And rows of cots
On deck;


The slow steady grind
Of the engine;
A lone light,
Red eyes,
Grim, drawn faces:
No beans—
And the sky the limit.
—Gilbert S. Perez.


OVEE


40


YEARS


tire building experience is behind
every


tire you buy
DUNLOP quality is built on this
unrivaled experience, and today,
Dunlop research ensures constant
progress. Every possible improvement is embodied in Dunlop Tires.
Make them your choice always.


Old-timer
Huddled about his aching feet lie the lotus years
Yellow and sear like autumn leaves in the forest;
His weather-worn face—so old and so furrowed
With the grim interlacings of pitiless time—
Smiles at the touch of little saffron hands,
Baby fingers and tiny petaled hands
That clasp his own in the thickening tropica
twilight.
I’m tired, grandpa, let's go home.
—Gilbert S. Perez.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


THE AMERICEN CHANTE


Bridge
By HENRY PHILIP BROAD


Margaret White, rolling out to the Country
Club in her car, fervently hoped that her hostess
would place her with the better bridge players.
One always learned something from them; and
Margaret well knew that her game was not
above need of improvement.
She was, as a look at her watch informed her,
a little late. When the car came to a stop in
front of the low, whitewashed club-house, she
realized the woeful inappropriateness of the
word little. Already eight tables on the cool,
rambling verandah had become green-topped
foci of interest from which radiated well-dressed
women in various stages of silent engrossment.
From one of them Mrs. Stanley, the hostess, rose
and with a frigidly polite smile on her carmined
lips, met the late arrival.
"Tm so sorry, Mrs. Stanley, I...”
“It’s all right, Mrs. White. I took your
hand... You play here.”
Margaret, a little nervous, observed that she
was to play with some of the town’s sharks.
They greeted her with a subdued eagerness from
which blame and curiosity were not altogether
absent. They are nice about my being so late,
Margaret thought, but she had not the courage
to explain the reason for her tardiness. They
seemed not in the least interested in it. With
well-concealed trepidation Margaret faced her
partner, Miss Martin, whose reputation at
bridge was unsurpassed. They were to play
against Mrs. Seeley, an army officer’s wife, who
had but recently arrived from the States, and
Mrs. Blake, reputed to be the wealthiest woman
south of Manila.
It was Mrs. Seeley’s brittle voice which called
out a disdainful I pass in sharp staccato. Again
Margaret felt the distinct shock once before
experienced on a similar occasion: Could this
decidedly unfriendly tone come from the charming woman that she knew Mrs. Seeley to be?
Why, bridge changed her. That rapped-out
I pass so refiected itself in her pale face that she
suddenly looked a wizened sprite instead of a


handsome woman with a parted, blue-black bob.
Strange!
Three hearts, sang out Miss Martin Margaret’s
partner. Her faded, but cleverly done-up face
glowed with a sudden rich warmth; she must have
a peach of a hand, Margaret thought, and how
delighted she was on account of it! Funny, how
Miss Martin was lucky at cards! Uncanny almost,
the way she held the tops! Fate’s own way,
no doubt, of doling out the poor thing some
compensations... From the standpoint of a
happily married woman she found Miss Martin’s
lot a particularly hard one...
Now it was Mrs. Blake’s turn to speak. The
grey-haired woman, said to be the wealthiest
south of Manila, and who always gave
exactly the opposite impression, bent her head.
All knew that the cogitation would not be a short
one; perhaps Mrs. Seeley, a new comer did not
know that Mrs. Blake would calculate all her
chances, evaluating to the minutest possibilities
the strength of her hand. A mathematician,
bent upon the solution of an abstruse problem,
would take the same posture and probably the
same attitude as Mary Blake. Poor Mary
Blake, Margaret thought. Poor, yes, in spite
of her unquestioned wealth. Who would not be
wealthy if she consented to live the way Mary
Blake had done all these years? Who would
live in so small a house, with such restricted
comforts? And who, oh Lord, who would wear
such clothes? Glancing at the wind-blown hat,
the crumpled dress, Margaret White, smart in a
beige sport suit, felt all other emotions swamped
by an all-pervading pity. How dearly Mary
Blake had paid for her wealth! With her youth
and the precious glamor of her femininity she
had paid!
Mrs. Blake raised her angular face from the
cards, and slowly took in the countenances of
the other women. Miss Martin still smiled.
Mrs. Seeley nervously fidgeted on her chair.
Margaret White sat tensely silent. “Nice little
woman, this army girl,” mused Mrs. Blake,


“but irritating at times with her crisp, curt
way.” What was that? A clearly provocative
little cough from her partner? Did the snip mean
to hurry her on? Did she want her to ruin her
chances by a hasty bid? Well, she’d show her...
and she delayed the drawn-out conclusion a bit
longer. Her eye fell on the still beaming Miss
Martin, elegant in pale pink chiffon. Again
a new dress and hat to match! Surely from that
exorbitant Yvonne store in Manila! Where in all
the world did the woman get the money to doll
up like that? She must be making a lot as a
bookkeeper at the export firm... Mary Blake
shook her head in disapproval. She had the
deepest contempt for a person who spent a
great part of her earnings on clothes. And
contempt, too, though tempered by memories of
the happy associations of earlier vears, she had
for Margaret White. Silly old Margaret!
Always sporting the latest styles. Had she not
yet come to see that money alone counted, and
not pretty clothes?
Another cough from Mrs. Seeley, slightly less
discreet; and Mary Blake, after another glance
at her cards, came to a conclusion at last. Witl
a quick motion of her wrist, she shoved the cards
together: I double three hearts. She sat up
straight in her chain and immediately forgot all
about the game. Her eyesroamed over the beautiful bamboo-crested hills. How lovely they
looked under the slowly gathering rain-clouds!
Those hills, seeming so near and that were so far,
far away! For years she had longed to go into the
hills, but had never found time. But she would
go some day and invite her soul to its festival,
some day when Ralph was less busy with the new
sawmill or when he could find a good man to
take care of the Lamitan plantation that was
coming into wonderful bearing, or when they
had disposed of the new hemp land out San
Ramon way... Some day, yes! Then she would
go into the hills, Keats in one hand and the
other in Ralph’s...
It was Margaret’s turn to speak. Always
less captivated by the game than by the emotions
it bared, she had watched Mary Blake until
Mrs. Seeley, a suspicion of anger in her pale


The.


EE
SIOE


Iliiioiotioiotiooiooiooiooiooioiioooo


Built by Filipino


Craftsmen


Commercial Printing is a silent but


POMFORT through every
Ominute of a busy day, with
good looks and long service to
make them full value.


powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.


There is a size
to fit your foot
at any HIKE
store.


Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of MCCullough Service, and our repu

tation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.


HAE SHUE FACIURI


MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
(A Division of Philippine Education Co., Inc.)
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


STYLE CREATORS


286 San Marcelino
MANILA


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


TERHERICEIC.


-F COMMIN .CE JOURNAL


October, 1929


cheeks, reminded her that they were waiting for
her. Margaret at once felt uncommonly nervous.
Her partner had bid three hearts and the opponents had doubled. What did it all mean?
Did she ... was she expected to take out her
partner? Or not? She had played bridge for more
years than she was ready to admit, and now she
did not know what to do. Tingling with indecision she looked at her hand. A trick or two,
no more. She would never play bridge well...
She always forgot what this and that signal
stood for... Hopeless case... How seriously
the others took bridge! She raised her cards
to her face, flushed crimson with embarrassment.
At her side sat Mrs. Seeley, tensely mute.
Margaret’s anxiety increased threefold. But
she could not make up her mind.
“My partner doubles the three-heart bid.”
Mrs. Seeley suddenly lashed the brooding silence
with the whip of her sharo voice. “What do
you say?” And Margaret, flustered and utterly
unable to think, stammered out I pass, breathed
a sigh of relief and recovered her peace of mind.


That she had not thought of it before! I pass
commits you to nothing, takes all responsibility
from you. Safety first! She breathed another
sigh.
Helen Seeley knew, with one glance of her
black eyes, what her cards promised. Not for
her the nerve-racking hesitation. She did not
hold much of value, but her partner had doubled
and the fussy White woman had passed. That
Mrs. White! How could anyone come too late
to a bridge-party? To her bridge was a serious
and most exacting affair and she threw herself
into with all the fervor of her vibrant nature.
With an astounding fidelity of memory she
could recall interesting hands held long ago.
could dissect in detail card contests that all
other participants had long since forgotten.
Fresh from the States, and absolutely sure of her
impeccability she could not but harbor toward
the other three women a feeling of aggressive
toleration whichat times verged on unmistakable
impatience. She rapped out: Three spades,
and turned to Miss Martin. “It’s your turn."


Miss Martin still smiled, but it was no longer
a delighted smile; it had taken a grim quality
not often seen in her once fine features. These
married women, she thought! Always treating
her with that barely concealed patronizing air
that got on her nerves! That partner of hers who
was ever so strangely kind to her... That Army
woman, too! The way she crackled out that
Three spades... It's your turn! The way she
looked at you, fiercely, searingly... Mrs.
Blake, after all, pleased her most. Always
enough absorbed by her own devices to leave
others to theirs. .. Those others considered her
a misfit from the point of vantage of their own
well-regulated worlds! A smile of contempt
curled her lips. Would they confine their
sympathies to their wonderful selves! What a
sweetly encouraging look from that pudgy
White woman! Did she think, prototype of the
happy-though-married woman that she was,
that the world held no other felicity? Miss
Martin snorted, but not audibly; Mrs. Seeley
coughed, but very audibly indeed; and Miss
Martin said: Four hearts.
The wealthiest woman again took her own
time for reflection; finally she doubled the fourheart bid. And Margaret, weak with excitement, her freshly regained assurance ebbing
away under the falcon eyes of the army woman,
passed as did her opponent. Miss Martin murmured a subdued Content and the game began.
Margaret’s partner played with deliberate
hesitation. Let them take the lead from her!
Let them wait her own good time! Mrs. Blake
with evident regret had to part with the two
top-cards of her hand. Across the table her
partner shot daggers at her. What was the
matter with the woman? She had nothing and
yet she had doubled the initial bid. What was
the great idea? She’d ask her after the game.
When it came to bridge Helen Seeley stood on
no ceremony.
The game ended with a smashing victory for
Miss Martin and Margaret. No one spokean angry flush settled on Mrs. Seeley’s pale
face as she wrote down the score with rapid
strokes of her small hand. Fifty for contraci
threw in Miss Martin, timidly yet exultingly.
Without a word Mrs. Seeley pointed to a neat
50 above the line; a smile of infinite depreciation
stood on her lips. That she should have been
beaten by such rotten players! No use reproving
her partner for her foolish doubling; she would
not grasp it anyway. Her hands picked up
newly dealt cards. It hurt her pride to be beaten
by inferiors. Well, this was not yet the end.
Win she would, if she put her mind to it. . . She did
put her mind to it and won. It was to her that
the hostess handed the tissue-wrapped prize.
At the conclusion of the game, tea was served.
It tasted extraordinarily good to the relaxed
participants. Outside dusk had fallen, enveloping the lacy bamboo, swaying coconut trees,
and shivering oleanders with a sheet of consuming darkness. Increasing coolness heralded the
advent of the night.
“Wasn’t it a nice game?” Helen Seeley asked,
tea-cup in hand. The cards lay stacked in their
green-and-gilt cases. They all enthusiastically
agreed. The excitement of the struggle had
given place to the contented sensation of an
afternoon well-spent. Conventional smiles again
masked their faces. Miss Martin spoke to
Margaret: "What a perfectly lovely dress, Mrs.
White! You did not get it here?”
“Mother sent it to me from Los Angeles,” she
answered, flattered. Miss Martin’s taste was
not be disregarded.
“Clothes are a problem in this small Philippine town,” said Helen Seeley, leaning forward.
Margaret, to her bewildered satisfaction, beheld
again the charming, handsome woman where
shortly before she had detected the sprite.
The sharp staccato manner that had so changed
her had completely vanished.
“Im afraid I’ll turn into a frump some day,”
she added, in a voice singularly warm and appealing.
“You could not if vou tried Mrs. Seeley,”
Miss Martin’s tone was frankly admiring. Those
eyes and that creamy skin could never change
much. Margaret said nothing. For the first
time during the afternoon she felt really at ease.
Her gaze wandered about the three women, so


Try Competitive Brands
Of—
Automobile Engine Lubricants
So that you may all the more appreciate the difference in
quality between our NEW MOBILOIL and the “JUST
AS GOOD AS MOBILOIL" brands offered by competitors at a lower price, we respectfully suggest
to you that you try any competitive brand
of automobile engine oil—regardless
of price—you may fancy.
You may think it queer of us to suggest to you
that you give your money to competitors instead
of giving it to us. There is nothing at all queer
because we really desire that you should know
that there is all the justification in the world for
the price we ask for our NEW MOBILOIL and the
only way is for you to draw a comparison by
actual test.
Drain the crankcase of your engine while the
engine is hot, and refill with your choice of competitive brands.


Make the chart your guida


VACUUM UIL COMIANI
NEW YORK, U.S. A.
MANILA
CEBU
ILOILO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


  UF CUMITERCE JUURIVEE


Governor Davis’s Sugar-Meeting
Talk
The sugar industry is one of the most important in the Islands. Thirty
per cent of our exports consist of sugar. The total value of sugar exported
in the year ending June 30, 1929, was P100,428,198, of which ₱98,430.210
went to the United States. The prosperity of approximately a million
people in the Islands is directly dependent on the conditions of the sugar
trade, while indirectly everyone is effected by it. If the industry is prosperous, that prosperity is shared by every other business here. Any act
which crippled the sugar industry would seriously injure every man, woman
and child in the Islands. The destruction of the industry would ruin
thousands of our people and would set back the prosperity, progress and
development of the Islands for many long years of hardship and suffering.
If then we consider the importance of the sugar industry to these
Islands and if we realize that over 98 per cent of our sugar exports go to the
United States due to the favorable tariff situation, we begin to get a slight
conception of the vital necessity to the Philippine Islands of maintaining
friendly trade relations with the United States.
Recently it was proposed in Congress to limit the free entry of Philippine sugar into the United States. The able Philippine commission worked
hard and faithfully to defeat the proposal. Influential friends of the Philippine Islands, both in and out of Congress, effectively fought against
it. The press of the United States supported the fight by strong
editorials. Finally the first battle was won; the tariff bill was re(Please turn to paqe 17)
aRnan namaang adcalkaisoahia ma ang marana ag l. 
deniable affinities which she saw shape themselves into being. They chatted animatedly between sips of tea. Miss Martin was telling an amusing
story, her tapable hands planted on the hand-embroidered tea-cloth. “This
friend of mine . .. she went home via Suez, it’s just two years ago... and
she fell in love with a man... They parted in Boston ... and she came
back to the Islands. And who do you think stood at the pier in Manila?
The very same man! He had come to meet his wife . .. Here she had
been traveling with her all these four weeks ... I. .. She, my friend I
mean, she laughed...
All were very still now. All three of them sensed here a tragedy that
in their married security they had lost the fear of. Miss Martin laughed,
a deliberately provoking laugh that spontaneously forbade compassion.
Then Mrs. Blake spoke. She had sat still most of the time, taking no part
in the conversation. But she had not lost the significance of that laugh.
“There are all kinds of cads in this world,” she said and became aware
of the apparent irrelevance of the remark. Pointing into the void of invading night, she added: “Look! Isn’t it lovely?”
One could distinguish the hazy outlines of the hills by the fires of the hill-dwellers.
Helen Seeley gazed into the inky blackness splashed with spots of
flame. It was lovely . . . as lovely as that feeling of security in a place one
loved, that attachment... But with her there never was time to become
attached ... one never stayed anywhere long enough to become attached ... One feared it because it hurt so to part... She sat still and
very quiet. Her life had been spent roving from one military reservation
to another...
Margaret White, stroking the silken pleatedness of her lap, pondered.
How charming, how humanly warm were these women! How much kindness, how much friendship and understanding there was between them!
With a sudden shock it came to her, as Mary Blake rose and put her arm
around her, that always women were kind to one another, always . . . except
at bridge.


Roll Call On Independence
(By UNITED PRESS)
Washington, D. C., Oct. 9.—The following senators voted in favor of
the King measure for Philippine independence:
Senator King, Henry F. Ashurst, Democract of Arizona; Alben W.
Barkley, Democrat of Kentucky; Hugo L. Black, Democrat of Alabama;
John J. Blaine, Republican of Wisconsin; Coleman L. Blease, Democrat
of North Carolina; Sam G. Bratton, Democrat of New Mexico; Senator
Brock, Democrat of Tennessee; Smith W. Brookhart, Republican of Iowa;
Tom Connally, Democrat of Texas; Clarence C. Dill; Democrat of Washington; Duncan U. Fletcher, Democrat of Florida; Walter F. Gcorge,
Democrat of Georgia; Harry B. Hawes, Democrat of Missouri; Carl Hay!
den, Democrat of Arizona; J. Thomas Heflin, Democrat of Alabama;
Robert M. LaFollette, Jr., Republican of Wisconsin; Kenneth MCKellar,
Democrat of Tennessce; William H. MeMaster, Republican of South
Dakota; George W. Norris, Republican of Nebraska; Gerald P. Nye,
Republican of North Dakota; Lee S. Overman, Democrat of North Carolina; W. B. Pine, Republican of Oklahoma; Joseph T. Robinson, Democrat
of. Arkansas; Morris Sheppard, Democrat of Texas; Ellison D. Smith,
Democrat of South Carolina; Daniel F. Steck, Democrat of lowa; Hubert
D. Stenhens, Democrat of Mississippi; Thomas of Oklahoma; Park Trammell, Democrat of Florida; Robert F. Wagner, Democrat of New York;
Thomas J. Walsh, Democrat of Montana; David I. Walsh, Democrat of
Massachusetts and Burton K. Wheeler, Democrat of Montana.
The tabloids over here (in San Francisco) have described the typhoon
over in Manila as being about the worst catastrophe that was ever visited
upon that fair city. Hundreds killed and still more dving, twisted and
mangled beyond recognition. Families torn apart, and little babies left
without their mothers, to slowly die, their feeble little cries unheeded by
the terror-stricken populace rushing wildly hither and yon, secking shelter
from the infuriated elements.


IANEAARONAL
TAOCS


Have you seen the
6-SPEED SPECIAL?


This extraordinary new number
of the INTERNATIONAL line has
created a sensation among transportation men and all others who
have need for motor transportation.
Its ability to out-pull, out-climb and outperform any other truck of the same rated
capacity under FULL load has made the
motor world sit up and take notice. Six
speeds, with a TWO-SPEED axle, makes
available a reserve of power which makes it
practically impossible to “stall” it if there is
traction for the wheels.
Speedy, safe, dependable, and most economical to operate, this new SIX SPEED SPECIAL
is worth your while to look over.
See it at our showroom.
Macleod and Company
Manila, P. I.
154 M. de Comillas
BRANCHES IN
Iloilo Cebu Davao Legaspi Vigan


IN RESTONDING TO ADVERTISEMENVIS FLEASE MENTON THE AMERICAN CRAMEER OF GOMNENGE JGUN


E AMERT
  


October, 1929


What 100 Insurance Cards Show


The reading of Middletown would suggest to
ly Manilan the interesting possibilities in the
untless things still unknown about this city,
nd about the Philippines, which it would be
iore than worth while to find out. The book
; a scientific social survey of a typical middleest American industrial city built out of an
Idtime county-seat and drawing its new populaion directly from the surrounding farms. How
1e30,000 people of the new city get their living,
ature, mate and spend their leisure hours is
ld about with scientific preciseness and dechment.
If such a survey should be attempted in Malla, it would show this town to be better off in
me respects than Middletown. Work, for one
ting, is probably steadier here. For in Middleun the laying off of thousands of men at the
ictories may occur at any time and does occur
requently. Wives of the men were questioned
about their anxieties over this condition (and
all others affecting their lives), and it came out
hat as poverty approaches the families of workmen life insurance is, with most of them, about
the last thing given up. This is a severe test
f insurance, a practical one. It would be ineresting to learn how such things go in Manila.
The wives of Middletown workmen cling to the
ope of educating their children in order that
ay shall have things easter than their parents,
aid-up insurance is a means of doing this.
course there are some Middletown families
1o will keep the family automobile and let the
urance lapse, but they are a minority. In
nila there is at least one large employer who
I discharge an employe who tries to keep a car
en his earnings are not enough for him to do
but he doesn’t discipline them for taking out
urance—a means of protection and of saving
mey instead of an expensive pastime.
II
The first 100 cards in the files of a leading
anila life-insurance agency were gone over,
th the following results:
The 100 cards pertained to the insurance of
persons, 89 men and 15 women.
Of the women, 11 are independently insured
14 are jointly insured with their husbands.
se four insured with their husbands are
sewives. The eleven independently insured
de a child of 6, a child of 10, one of 13 and
of 14; the average age of the 11 is 19-1/11
and that of the 4 insured with their husis 29-172 vears. The children are of
e insured with a view to their education;
f the best ways of utilizing life insurance is,
it on the life of a child, to mature at the


age for college and provide a periodical income
during that period.
Of the 89 men in the list, 12 are merchants,
13 are teachers, 6 are landlords, 15 are clerks, 5
are students, 8 are farmers, 3 are officials, 1 is
a chemist, 1 is a soldier, 3 are sailors, 1 is a photographer, 1 is a treasurer, 2 are telegraphers, 1 is
a musician, 1 is an accountant, 1 is a checker,
1 is a priest, 1 is a stenographer, 1 is a mechanic,
1 is an editor, two are telegraphers, 4 are chauffeurs, two are foremen, 1 is a banker, 1 is an
electrician, and 1 is a shoemaker.


₱1,500 each, 40 of P1,000 each, 39 of P2,000
each, 9 of ₱3,000 each, 8 of P5,000 each, 1 of
₱4.000 and 1 of Pio,000.
All ages are as of the date when the insurance
was taken out. The average age of the men
especially, indicates that life insurance does not
make an early appeal in the Philippines; or, if
it does, thought of saving for it is put off for
some reason, either because youth wishes to
spend or because young men wait until their
families are well started, or for something else.
One man was insured at 54, for P2,000. The
lowest age is 17, that of a student insured for
₱1,000. Most of the cards, of course, pertain to
Filipinos. Doesit take so long for young Filipino


The Insular Life Assurance Co., Ltd.
MANILA, P. I.





ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans onrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
low interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
FOR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


Call or write for particulars to:
HOME OFFICE
4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 11
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


Tng Maang a a ina Ma D Ing ma a
years. They include no boys; the 100 cards
disclosed no boy whose education is guaranteed
by insurance, which may indicate, as several
girls are insured, more parental anxiety in behalf
of girls than of boys.
The insurance in force on the 104 lives listed
in the 100 cards totals P202,000 and therefore
averages slightly below P2,000 per person.
Embracing, as it does, 100 policies, four of them
being ioint policies it includes 2 policies of


MAIA LO La MANS  EAIEAINA Ia
cially as the age at which they seem to take out
life insurance would indicate? The taking out
of any insurance whatever seems to be postponed for other things, and the policies finally
taken seem to be small in nearly every case. Insurance has had a remarkable growthin the Philippines, but it is obviously just well begun in a
field that it will take a long time to exploit as thoroughly as sound social organization demands.
BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS
(Continued from page 10)


he West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
hilippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
edler Building
Manila, P. I.
Telephone 2-36-74


The planter usually has no such recourse.
Competition is a corrective influence upon the
profligate practices of associations, those which
are frugally conducted being soon able to pay
the saving members higher earnings on their
investments and to offer the borrowing members
real estate loans at less heavy rates. Little
reserve is necessary for a frugal association to
maintain. This comes of the excellent credit
such associations enjoy, because their loans,
conservatively made originally, daily increase
in value in two ways: (1) from the payments
of the borrowing members, reducing the principal at stake, and (2) from the increment on
the real estate security. It is the law’s intention that the profits of the associations be periodically distributed, less a very nominal amount,
to the saving and the borrowing members by
whose efforts in conserving pittances from their
salaries and wages it has been made. The life
of these associations is limited to fifty vears, and
in winding them up there should be little more
than the capital and current earnings to distribute—the net earnings of previous years
having been frugally utilized when in the treasury and periodically distributed to the members
whom the law intends shall have them.
The field for building and loan associations
in the Philippines, and even in Manila, is by
no means fully occupied, and a better popular
understanding of the manner in which these
associations operate, according to law, is highly
desirable. They do cities infinite good.—W. R.


SPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


E"

  


Governor Davis’s Sugar-Meeting Talk
(Continued from page 15)


ported by the committee without the limitation
feature.
We must not deceive ourselves, however,
into believing that the campaign has been finally
won merely because we have been victorious in
the first battle. That battle was especially
important because it aligned on our side many
high-minded, unselfish groups who put principle above privilege. But undoubtedly the
campaign will be continued and new more
deceptive, more subtle methods adopted. The
underlying purpose, so obvious in the first fight.
will be kept under cover. Other interests and
other arguments will be pushed into the foreground. Promises, baits and lures will be
dangled before our eyes. Already in the second
skirmish we are being tempted by the offer of
additional governmental revenues through the
return of taxes which it is proposed to collect
on Philippine imports. The insular government, sorely as it needs more revenues, will not
sacrifice the welfare of the Filipino people to
obtain them. I am opposed to this proposal
as strongly as I was opposed to the limitation
proposal.
But other offensives will be launched, other
baits offered, other methods tried. It will be
well for us to remember the old warning of
Cassandra which, if it had been heeded, would
have saved Troy from destruction. “Timeo
Danaos et dona ferentes”. “I fear the Greeks
bearing gifts”. Eternal vigilance is needed.
Our forces must always be ready. We must
ever be on our guard. Our fight is based on
principle, a principle which applies not only to
sugar, but to every other Philippine product
imported into the United States. On that high
plane the first battle was won. On that high
plane the campaign must be continued.
How best can we meet these attacks? In my
opinion there are several measures of defense
which can be adopted. The first of these is
publicity. The American people react quickly
and unselfishly to issues based on moral principles. If they understand the fundamental
issue, they will give generous support to our
cause. Your Association might well give serious
thought to the best method of carrying on a
continuous campaign of publicity.
A second potent weapon is education, both
in the United States and in the Philippines.
In the United States the sugar interests should
be reassured that the American market in the
future will not be swamped by Philippine sugar.
If they can be convinced of this fact, much of the
opposition would disappear, as they are fairminded men, seeking only to protect their own
interests.
This puts a serious responsibility on the Philippine, sugar interests and others interested in
the prosperity of the country, to oppose in every
way an undue increase in the production of
sugar. The promotion of unnecessary new
centrals should be discouraged. Planters should
be taught the importance of diversifying their
crops. The growing of tropical products for
which there is a constantly increasing demand
and a world underproduction should be encouraged, while the increased production of
products in which there is already a world overproduction should be discouraged.
This is not only wise policy but it is sound
economics. The Philippine Islands, with its
wide range of climatic and soil conditions, should
produce a much larger proportion of the food
consumed in the country than is being produced
at the present time. The annual importation
of more than twenty-seven million pesos worth
of foodstuffs, including nearly five million pesos
worth of rice, of thirteen million pesos worth of
meat and dairy products, and of relatively large
quantities of such products as cacao, coffee
peanuts," ppical fruits and vegetables, and eggs
—all of wnich can be easily and cheaply produced
in the Islands—constitutes a serious and an
unnecessary drain on our resources. If there
should unhappily be a war in the Far East at
any time, the fact that we are dependent on
outside sources for such a large amount of food

stuffs would very seriously affect the Islands
and particularly the poorer people. Efforts
to prevent an undue increase in the production
of sugar would show good faith, as well as good
sense, and would minimize, if not end, the
opposition.
Finally, we should cultivate the closest possible
trade and other relations with as many different
American groups and interests as possible.
American farmers and other business men should
be induced to think of the Philippine Islands
as good customers for their products rather than
thinking of them as competitors. For example,
in the last twenty years the importation of dairy
products from the United States has increased
from P210,000 to more than P6,000,000, wheat
flour from P1,000,000 to over P5,000,000,
cotton goods from P1,300,000 to P30,800,000,
iron and steel products from P1,600,000 to
P31,600,000, paper and its manufactures
₱445,000 to P5,600,000, mineral oils from
₱1,300,000 to P14,200,000, and the total imports have increased from P10,200,000 to
₱168,700,000.
Recently a suggestion was made by a group of
Filipinos studying the tariff question that articles
which could be supplied to the Islands both by
the United States and by foreign countries
should be subjected to sufficiently high duties
to give reasonable protection to Philippine and
American goods, but not so high as to establish
monopolies. While I am not prepared to endorse
specifically this proposal at the present time,
it is an example of a friendly measure which
would be an expression of appreciation for the
tremendous advantage which the protection
policy of the United States gives to the products
of the Philippine Islands. Such evidences of
friendship promote friendiy measures in return.
As was said in an editorial in one of the Manila
papers yesterday, "If we want preferential rights
in the United States, then we must also grant
them.”
In the same way the labor organizations in the
United States should be convinced that with
the development of the Islands, labor emigration
will decline and will not become in any sense a
menace to American labor. Every effort should
be made to keep Philippine laborers from leaving
the Islands. They should be offered inducements to remain here. They are and will increasingly be needed to develop our local industries. They can look forward to prospects of a
more favorable future here than in the United
States, and their presence in large numbers on
the West Coast adds another element of difficulty
to our problem.
Finally, the effect of political speeches,
methods and policies in promoting or repelling
friendly relationships might well be considered,
but this is neither the time nor the place for such
a discussion.
To sum up, the welfare of the sugar industry
is vital to the future prosperity of the Philippine
Islands. That welfare is largely dependent upon
the continuance of the present free trade relationship with the United States. We must,
therefore, make every effort to insure the maintenance of that relationship by peaceful arguments if possible, and by fighting any hostile
proposals in Congress if necessary. It is better
to win by peaceful means if possible. To do
so it is important to convince certain powerful
groups in the United States that Philippine
products and labor are not a menace to their
interests. To show our good faith in urging this
argument it is necessary that we do our part
here in the Islands. We should discourage an
undue increase in sugar production. We should
discourage the emigration of Philippine labor.
We should encourage wherever possible friendly
relationship with the United States in business,
professional and official circles.
This may seem like practical politics. Perhaps
it is, but it is sound economics as well. Diversification of agricultural products is a wise policy
from the standpoint of the farmer and it is so
recognized the world over. To give but one
example of many which might be given, take rice


and sugar. The price of rice is higher than
has been for five years, while the price of sug
is low. We export sugar and import rice. The.
is a world over-production of sugar but appa
ently no such condition exists in regard to ric
Good rice land usually makes poor sugar lano
It is economically unsound for the farmer t
convert good rice land into poor sugar land, thu
adding to an already depressed sugar situation
It is also extremely harmful to the future inter
ests of the whole Islands.
In the same way an economic developmer
which will provide profitable employment for th
laborer is also advantageous to the Islands as
whole. It is better for the country to off
inducements for our labor to stay here and th
increase our own resources than to emigrate an
build up the resources of other countries.
And, finally, to cultivate cordial relationshi
with a powerful friend who offers us unusu
advantages is only the part of wisdom, enlightened self-interest, and good economic policy.
So in saying this word of welcome I believe
it necessary also to make it a word of warning,
and to call your attention to the heavy resoonsibility which rests especially upon all those
interested in the sugar industry. We cannot
in good faith argue in the United States that
Philippine sugar and Philippine labor will not b
harmful to American interests unless in goo
faith we try to carry out the promises und
lying those arguments. Good faith and soun
business judgment alike demand intelligen
action. Upon you, therefore, rests not only th
future welfare of the sugar industry but in larg
part the future progress and prosperity of th
Philippine Islands. Our campaign to make tha
future possible is based on high principles.
we can win by sound peaceful arguments, we
and good; but if we must fight, let us go into tha
battle with clean hands.


Paris is making women’s dresses longer. W
this change really kneeded?


The Tribune says the Philippines unders
the spirit and genius of democracy. Tha
they are apt in stategraft.


While Topacio, posts director, was junke
the postoffice administration seems to have k
junked.


Three several airplane companies are stri
for place in the Philippine field. But none
them has made a flying start.


They are running an egg-laying contest
aggie college. Does anyone know of an
liable old hens?


So many Billingsgate affairs occur a
University that someone suggests maki
college subject of the primary course in ma
and right conduct.


We’d have more faith in the originality
officialdom’s new ideas if they didnt so c
sistently follow quiet conferences at Malacana


The United States Senate voted 36 to 45
ridding the United States of the Philipp
Islands (five to four against independeno
The vote came not directly as a considerat
of the Philippines but as side-issue in connect
with the American tariff. Therein lies an
ement of discouragement.
The Philippine question certainly me
a better consideration than can be given it w
it is subordinated to plans for protecting cott
seed oil, beet and cane sugar and dproducts.—Bullelin.


  


Octon.


Haphazard Studies in the English Language
(Continued from September)


LULON
SIEPEDURANG
COMA ANI,
ANL.


Lightering
Marine Contractors
Towboats
Launches
Waterboats
Shipbuilders
and
Provisions


IMMIE& CRIK
PHONE 2-16-61
PORT AREA


baptism. Pronounced as two syllables, bap”
tizm; not three, bap’tiz-um, nor two, bab’tizm.
be. To be grammatically correct, the case of an
apposite personal pronoun following the verb
“to be” should agree with its subject. We
should always say, “It is I, you are he," not
“It is me, you are him.” Colloquial exceptions are frequent, but the rule is plain and
should be strictly observed.
beastly. An English colloquialism occasionally
heard in America. “Beastly weather” is a
single example of phrases used by people of all
classes in England, but regarded in the United
States as coarse. “Beastly drunk” is said by
some writers to be defensible, while by others
it is regarded as a libel on the beasts.


beat. Do not use this word for the more expressive word “defeat.”
be back. “I’ll be here again,” “I’ll return,”
or “Ill come back again," are all preferable
to “Ill come back again," are all preferable to
to "Ell be back,” a common colloquialism
which should be avoided.
been to. Pronounce been, bin, short i. The
“to” is superfluous in “where have you been
“Been to home” should be “Been at
to?”
home.”
begin, commence. The preference should
always be given to the former, though the two
words have the same meaning. “Begin” is
of Anglo-Saxon origin and is the better word.
The use of “commence” is often evidence of
affectation.


We will share
all our profits
with you!
Beck’s begins a new era. Commencing October Ist, premium-plan profit-sharing coupons go
with every purchase at our store. Free catalogs
of the premiums the coupons will get will be
distributed to customers.
The catalogs list hundreds of items. Study
them. Decide upon what you want, then save
up coupons from your purchases with which
to get it free!
Coupons are equivalent to 10% discount, and
our prices positively remain unchanged. You
truly share in all our profits by saving your
coupons and getting premiums free with them.
Articles in our store priced as low as P0.25 may
be obtained with coupons, and other articles
worth hundreds of pesos. Refurnish your home,
or any special room, with articles the coupons
We redeem our coupons
at any time
When you give us one peso, we give you back ten centavos
—a one-peso coupon—with which to get a nice premium
when you want it. Soon your coupons are equal to
one or two pesos—five, ten, twenty, a hundred—and all
just as good at our store as any money in the wide world.
BECK'S-ESCOLTA
We always have what you want


Concentrate
your shopping
Buy it at our
store and save
money
Children learn
thrift by saving
coupons!
Coupons withall
cash and all
provincial
C. O. D. orders! obtain.


ESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


19


E
ALAP
E
  


“the same persons,” says Godfrey Turner,
“who habitually discard the word 'many’
when they have a chance of gloryfying in
"numerous’ have concurred in giving the cold
shoulder to 'begin.'... "Directly I commence
to speak, every one commences to look at me,"
said a mincing miss at a suburban 'at home'.
There are mincing misses of the male sex in
authorship who are always ‘commencing to."
Female authors are seldom caught at this
feminine weakness of phrase."
"In the beginning” God made heaven and
earth. Note the weakness of a change to
“In the commencement.”
According to Crabb, "begin" is opposed to
end, “commence” to complete. A person
begins a thing with a view of ending it; he
commences a thing with a view of completing
it. Begin is used for either things or persons,
commence for persons only. A word begins
with a particular letter, a man commences his
career.
beginner. It is incorrect and displays ignorance to speak of "a new beginner.” A beginner cannot be anything but new to his work.
Omit the "new.”
being. Many writers have labored strenuously


to prove the illegitimacy of the expression
is being,” as in “The house is being built,”
but it is now well established, and appears to
have filled a void.
“Is being” first appeared as an English
passive, corresponding to the progressive
form in the active voice, late in the 18th or
early in the 19th century, and gained currency
chiefly through the newspaper press. Its
opponents, who were many, argued that it was
pure invention; that there is no progressive
form of the verb “to be," and no need of it;
hence, that there is no such expression in
English as "is being.”
They pointed to the
following among other examples of literary
usage:
‘The books are selling.”—Allen’s Gramma!
‘The fortress was building,"—Washington
Irving.
"An attempt is making in the English Parliament.”—Daniel Webster.
The church now erecting in the city of
New York.”—North American Review.
These quotations are of interest as showing
the void—the need now supplied by "is being,"
which was characterized by the grammarian


Goold Brown as “one of the most absurd and
monstrous innovations ever thought of.'
Another writer said that "is being done” was
"a new-fangled and most uncouth solecism,
substituted for the good old English idiom dis
doing’—an absurd periphrasis driving out a
pointed and pithy turn of the English language."
Richard Grant White devoted many pages
of his interesting work, “Words and Their
Uses,” to his protest against "is being,” which,
said he, “about seventy or eighty years ago
began to affront the eye, torment the ear, and
assault the common sense of the speaker of
plain and idiomatic English.” He concludes
that “it can hardly be that such an incongruous and ridiculous form of speech as 'is
being done’ was contrived by a man who, by
any stretch of the name, should be included
among grammarians."
In spite of these fulminations of the learned
and the conservative, the locution "is being"
came to stay. At first regarded as an awkward neologism, usage has accustomed and
even reconciled us to it, and the imperfects
passive, "is being built, is being done," etc.
pass unquestioned in modern English and
American literature. Indeed Dr. Fitzedward
Hall has shown that such compound participial
forms have been used by good writers on both
sides of the Atlantic for more than a century.
“The deviser of our modern imperfects passive,” says Dr. Hall, "is, more than likely, as
undiscoverable as the name of the valiant
antediluvian who first tasted an oyster.”
As early as 1795 Robert Southey wrote of
“a fellow whose uttermost upper grinder is
being torn out by the roots by a mutton-fisted
barber," and Charles Lamb speaks of "a man
who is being strangled.” Many of the best
of living writers employ "is being” freely, and
having regard for the logic of facts the conclusion must be reached that the once obnoxious
neologism has firmly established itself in the
English language and its literature. This
does not, however, deny the right of the modern speaker to say “the house is building” if
he prefers that locution to "is being built.”
A pronounced difference is seen between
such phrases as "is growing” and "is being
grown,” the one indicating development from
within and the other the watchful care of the
husbandman. “Is feeding”" and "is being
fed” further illustrate the difference of signification.
belong. “Do you belong?” is a common colloquialism used when the subject of conversation is of some particular organization, etc.
Regarded as a colloquialism, and as elliptical
"to the society, etc.” being understood,
there is little to urge against this absolute use
of “belong.” Some writers, however, think it
objectionable.
belongings. An old English word recently
restored to good usage after a period of disuse.
Sometimes applied by the head of a family to
the members dependent on him.
beside, besides. These words are interchangeable in the meanings of over and above, distinct from, although besides is more frequently
used in this sense; as “There were learned
men besides these.” Beside means by or at
the side of, on one side of; as, "He sat beside
me.” Also, aside from, apart from, or out of;
as, “Paul, thou art beside thyself”.
Besides specially means moreover, in addition; as, “Besides, the gentleman is married.”
Generally speaking, it may be said that the
tendency of present usage is to use “beside”
only as a preposition with the original meaning, by the side of, or with the cognate meaning, aside from, out of; while “besides” is used
in the adverbial sense (moreover) and in the
remaining prepositional sense.
bestial. Often mispronounced. Should be
best'yal, with short e
be that as it will. Should be “be that as it
may."
better. Erroneously used for "more" inphrases
like “better than a mile,” which is incorrect.
between. Often misused for among. It is
strictly applied only to two things, parties or
persons, while among is used in reference to a
greater number. We say, “Between James
and John," but “Among the apostles."


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


ORLD
IDE
IRELESS
RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


9 PLAZA MORAGA


PHones:


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


20


E TATI
F
 ELARP
  OF
COMMERCE JOURNAL


October, 1929


What the Archives Say of Mehan Gardens


The following is translated from the Spanish
certified to by Manuel M. Miranda, chief of
archives of the Philippine government:
“Jardin Botanico (now Mehan Gardens).—
Decree of the Superior Government of September 13, 1858. As of this date I have decreed
the following:
Taking into consideration the proposal of
the town council of this city in the conference of
July 16 ultimo, concerning the convenience and
utility that would come of establishing a botanical garden in the extensive field of Arroceros,
which would at the same time be a school of
practical agriculture and the acclimatization of
exotic fruits; ...
Noting the opinion of the subinspector of
engineers of August 8, that also of the committee
of commerce and the director of the economic
society of September 6;
“Noting the endorsement of the superior
directorate of finance of August 25, ordering the
compliance of this body with the decree of September 4;
“Believing that from the viewpoint of hygiene
and ornamentation of the city devotion of the
field of Arroceros to plants and making it a
park and place of recreation for the public, and
that evident advantages will derive from the
planting and cultivation of plants with the object
of acclimatizing those which are not now being
grown here and teaching the better utilization of
others, so that a certain number of Filipinos of
the provinces, supported in Manila by general
funds, may be returned periodically to their
respective provinces to put into practice the
knowledge they have acquired;
“Having heard and being in conformity with
the ruling of the senior general assessor, I hereby
decree:
“Art. 1.—There is hereby created a School of
Botany and Agriculture in Manila under the
patronage of the superior government and the
immediate supervision of a board to be created
for this purpose to include an officer of engineers
and other persons from the different corporations
administering or having to do with the funds
from which this new establishment will be supported.
“Art. 2.—Within the boundaries to be indicated by the aforementioned subinspector of
engineers, the field of Arroceros is hereby set
aside for the practical work of said school, as a
botanical and acclimatization garden and demonstration plot, it being understood that the
roperty pertains to the town council under the
nitations which govern within the polemical
ne of a fortified plaza.
“Art. 3.—The permanent personnel of the
school shallinclude: one professor of botany with
a salaryof ₱1,500 a vear two teachersof horticulture with a salary of P500 a year each; ten stulents selected among the young farmers of the
rovinces, who shall be changed every three
rears and be aided during their term of study
vith P100 a year each; and the necessary numper of prisoners, chosen among short-term men
who are industrious laborers, to whom a gratuity
of P500 shall be yearly distributed.
“Art. 4.—For the acquisition of plants and
tools, there is hereby set aside the sum of P1,500
a year, reimbursable when the planting and
rceding is complete.
“Art. 5.—The products of the botanical garden and school of agriculture shall go, as far as
they will, toward covering the foregoing appropriations, but in case they are insufficient the
sums shall be made up from special funds in the
following form and according to the degree of
interest which for its inauguration must be taken
in this important improvement: the town council,
₱1,000; consular funds, P1,000; Amigos del Pais
(a corporation for the fomentation of Philippine
agriculture) P500; Filipinos community fund,
₱3,000; total, F5,500.
“Art. 6.—Until the personnel necessary for the
undertaking of the artistic work upon a scientific
basis is organized, the sum of P2,500 yearly shall
be employed in proportion to the sums set forth
in the preceding article for the preparatory work
and the planting of rows of trees which border


the streets and pathways for the use of the public.
“Art. 7.—If it becomes necessary to build
cottages, sheds, and railings for the purposes of
the school, and sentry boxes, porters” lodges
and other structures conducing to the better
administration of the botanical garden, due permission of the captain general must be requested,
on the understanding that all construction must
be of light material and subject to the general
conditions obtaining in the polemical zone.
“Art. 8.—The board of inspectors of the botanical and agricultural school shall agree upon and
submit to me such other measures as conduce
to the fullest realization of this project; and the
rules for instruction and work of the personnel
provided in Art. 3, subject to the approval of the
professor of botany; but meantime and as a
preliminary step, the board shall propose to me


This girl that “Mac” drew in
Judge is telling “Junior” she’s That
Way about him and "Mac” because
they always make the cocktails with
UURDON UIIN
it's always best!
Cop (to loiterer at the Rialto
after the last run of "Broadway"):
Say, what’s the big idea in hanging
around here? The show’s over.
Loiterer: 'S all right, Chief. I’m
waitin’ for that girl in the chorus,
Billie Moore, that’s all!
That’s a longer wait than you
have for your favorite whisky, which
of course isRODLRIDOIN
SCOTCH WHISKY
Kuencie &. Streif, Inc.
Importers
Tel. 2-39-36
343 T. Pinpin
Manila, P. I.


the most useful and advantageous employment
of the fund set aside in Art. 6, for the initial
preparatory work.
"Notify all concerned and return to the executive secretary the instructions submitted for
the approval of the finance department August
25, in order that the department may have
proper authority for the disbursement from the
community fund in accordance with Art. 6 of
this decree, which shall also be published in the
Official Gazette.”
Thus was the Jardin Botanico Manila’s spacious central park created by Lieutenant General Fernando de Norzagaray, a Spanish governor and captain general of the Philippines, 71
years ago. Sebastian Vidal y Soler, a naturalist, from Barcelona, became the director of the
park, where his statue, donated by his admirers
in Barcelona, now stands. “Sr. Vidal y Soler,
a native of Catalonia, was married to an American lady, of Philadelphia, very beautiful and
beyond dispute the most elegant lady of her time
in Manila. Her name was Ella.” Vidal died
July 28, 1889 and his statue was erected in
May 1892. When the Americans came to Manila six years later, the park was in a very repulsive and insanitary condition; it soon became the
work of John Mehan to improve this and all
other public grounds of Manila, notably including the Cementerio del Norte.
The park’s name was changed from Jardin
Botanico to Mehan Gardens, but remains popularly called the botanical garden. The original
purpose of establishing it has never been carried
out, the plant life there shares the neglect to
which the zoological specimens are subjected,
and—no monument to Mehan is found in all the
park. This is one of the circumstances of which
visitors to Manila ask why? Someone must know
the answer. There is a calle Norzagaray in
Manila, also two calles Soler.


The Ayuntamiento
The word Ayuntamiento means town council
and in Manila applies to the public building on
the northeast side of Plaza de McKinley in the
walled city, a building two stories high and nearly,
if not quite square, extending over an area of
some 6,000 square yards (6,240 varas cuadradas
being the exact area). Our data are kindly
furnished us by Manuel Miranda, keeper of the
Ayuntamiento archives—documentary records
dating back to 1561 and beginning with Legaspi’s
commission from Philip II of Spain, to occupy
and govern lands he might discover in this region
of the world.
The Ayuntamiento was built in 1735, Marshal
Fernando Valdez y Tamon, then governor and
captain general of the Philippines, laying the
corner stone January 31 of that vear. When
built it was the finest public building in the
islands; it remains one of the best and is excellently suited to be converted into a museum of
art and history. It is of stone, and of the European type of architecture; the old clock tower that
formerly topped the facade was thrown down
in the earthquake of June 3, 1863, at which time
the building suffered such general damage that
the town council and other bodies using it for a
meeting place had to abandon it for a time and
hold their meetings in what is now, and has been
for a score of years, the Corregidor Bar. During
Spanish times the Ayuntamiento was generally
known as the Cabildo (the capitol), from which
fact calle Cabildo takes name. The town council,
aside from holding meetings there, assembled
there to view from the upper balconies the fiestas
celebrated on the occasion of the arrival in
Manila of a new governor general, or a new
archbishop; and in the halls the great receptions and balls of the period took place, as many
do today,
The original structure being damaged beyond
use and eight years having elapsed, on May 30,
1871, Sr. Botella, the municipal architect, submitted plans for a new building, but the town
council rejected them because the space allotted
and its distribution were inadequate to the city’s
requirements. Botella became occupied with
(Please turn to page 22)


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


  


21


When in Manila Stop at The University
Apartments on the New Lunetal


We have reserved a number of special rooms and suites all modernly equipped
and completely furnished with Simmons furniture to the last detail for our friends
from the provinces who want rooms nearby the clubs and hotels and convenient to
Manila’s business section. Nothing like them in town: a Frigidaire in every room.
Private bath, shower and tub, hot and cold water. Rapid elevators. Moderate
first-class rates. Telegraph or write for reservations in advance. Live at the
exclusive place—University Apartments. Cuisine service on call.
W. J. Odom, P ietog.
Ea a a a a a
 1
21
N MEENE N AEEN EN EANN VE ENN 


2


  


October, 1929


The Ayuntamiento
(Continued from page 20)


ther duties, being, it seems, an engineer officer
f the Spanish military forces, and the governor
eneral commissioned the ports and highways
ngineer, Eduardo Lopez Navarro, to draw new
lans. These are the ones followed in the
uilding as it now stands, which cost P152,241.
Merrit’s headquarters were here when he
ommanded the American forces of occupation,
lugust 13, 1898, and assumed the duties of
lilitary a Anor. Otis, and then MacArthur,
ucceeding Merritt, had their offices in the Ayunamiento; and governors Taft, Wright, Ide,
mith, Forbes, and Harrison had their offices


here. The first American laws for the Philippines were enacted here, the general orders of
the military governors, and the acts of the Philippine Commission. Osmena long had his office
here, both as speaker of the Philippine Assembly,
which held its sessions here, in the Marble Hall,
and as speaker of the house of representatives
when the full legislature began functioning in
1916. At present the cabinet offices are here.
Mention of these few things only hints at the rich
historical associations of the Ayuntamiento,
which, stone below and only the best of hardwoods above, should stand for centuries to come.


The New Mentality
By PRESIDENT RAFAEL PALMA
University of the Philippines


YEducating youth today demands a change in
rinciple and methods in the same way that
cience and industry have sought new by-paths
n their development. We cannot educate the
routh of today under the tenets and doctrines
equeathed to us by our ancestors. Thev
epresented an epoch and a world entirely diferent from ours. The world of our forefathers
s no longer the world of today. To feed our
yrouth with the aggregate of the theories and
eliefs which have already lost their usefulness
vith the march of ages, would be to commit a
gross mistake. We cannot give to an adult only
he amount of food we give an infant, without
mperiling his health. Neither can we expect
o educate the youth of our day with the body
nf truths and knowledge possessed by our elders
inder social conditions which were not only
lifferent from, but diametrically opposed to
those that obtain at present.
yI do not mean that we should discard old
truths simply because they are such. I mean
that we should determine which of them should
be retained and which should not, in order to
hasten our development along the road of human
progress and wisdom. We cannot afford to
tarry in our journey, while the world is "up
and doing," unless we are content to lag behind.
The wheel of progress, like inscrutable time,
will not stop just because we stand in its way.
We must move with it or be crushed by its
relentless motion.
Some educators would make us believe our
salvation lies in the dogmas of the past. They
look upon present conditions as anomalous and
dangerous deviations from the time-honored
rules and norms of conduct which made our
infancy carefree and happy, and our parents infinitely more so with our conduct. But happiness in its true sense has yet to be defined
because its conception has varied with time and
place. In that twilight of civilization, known
as the Stone Age, man lived in caves. He was
happy and contented with the fruits he could
gather and with the raw meat he could get by
fishing and hunting with stones and splints.
Later on, not satisfied with the tools he had,
he hit upon flint to generate fire, the bow and


the arrow to kill animals from afar, and pottery,
not only to cook the game he had bagged, but
also to store water at home and thus avoid going
out to the spring every time he needed to quench
his thirst. After long centuries, he settled down
and tilled the soil, and domesticated, to help
him in his labor, the animals he previously
hunted. In this way he assured himself a
steady and permanent food supply; he no longer
depended, as he had been wont to do, only
upon what he could get from hunting and fishing.
Having ample time to accumulate property
and advance his well-being, he became an architect, beautified his dwelling, and in company with
other men, founded towns, constructed temples,
and built forts to protect himself from his enemies. As time went on, planting and cultivating
ceased to be his principal occupations. He transformed the products of the soil, and through his
resourcefulness and ingenuity, invented machines
for weaving and for locomotion both on land and
on the sea, utilized electricity to speed up communication, and still dissatisfied with the resistance of the earth, traversed the space above and
made distance no longer a hindfance to good will
among nations. His happiness increased as fast"
as he was able to invent, and to utilize the varied
forces of Nature for his own good.
Modern man is insatiable in his ambitions,
and the conception that he has of happiness has
gained in weight and measure. It would be
tyrannical to impose upon him the measure of
happiness that satisfied his grandparents, because they knew little of Nature and enjoyed
fewer comforts and conveniences in life. It
would not only be tyrannical, but humanly impossible, to cause the youth of today to renounce
enjovment of the benefits brought about by our
civilization and to dress in bark or leaves and
branches of trees as our ancestors of antiquity
did, or to travel not by rail but in carts drawn
by carabaos, or to read by the glow of a candle
instead of in the brightness of an electric light.
AWhether we wish it or not, youth will always
endeavor to avail itself of the privileges of this
age of machinery and, social revolt, regardless
of the consequences. VIt were better that educators and priests should not oppose this natural


OF INDIA, AUSTRALIA
CHARTERED BANK
AND CHINA


Capital and Reserve Fund...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor.................. 3,000,000


MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN


WANTED: BACK COPIES!
The following back copies of the Journal are wanted to complete a file and
any reader sending them into the office
will receive one year’s free subscription:
Year 1922: January, February, March,
April and August.
Year 1925: February and July.
Year 1927: January.
Year 1928: June, October, November
and December.


tendency of man in his upward flight, because if
religion and education are to maintain their
influence over youth, they should go with life
and not against it. To me, the greatest error
of the Church, as well as of the pedagogy of old,
was that both endeavored to mould life in accordance with a preconceived notion, and to
maintain this notion in spite of the revolts and
derangements which it occasioned and was
unable to check.
MThere are people who still cling to the belief
that life can be encompassed in the hollow of
one’s palm, when, as a matter of fact, the fountains of life are many and stream through innumerable channels. If religion, in collaboration with the school, was able, at one time,
to build a barricade which it thought sufficiently
strong to withstand the onrushing tides of life,
the natural sciences, politics, economics, commerce and law, as well as many other agencies of
civilization, undertook to demolish the dana so
that life could once more run normally. The
mission of the school should be, to my mind,
carefully to watch the course of life, to keep its
flow constantly supplied at its source by checking
errors and superstitions and by adding new information to the stock of human knowledge;
to set up before the vision of man sound principles
and high ideals to be striven for and attained,
that man may always maintain contact with
his spiritual destiny and thus discover for himself the true rewards of earthly existence.
God and Humanity are not antagonistic"
terms. He who would see a conflict of principles between God and man, wherein man could
not live surrounded by comforts and conveniences without displeasing God, insults the
Almighty who, in His infinite wisdom, kindled
in the heart of man the desire for his own personal advancement. Man should strive to
better himself, elevate the conditions that environ him, and beautify the planet in which he
lives. God did not put him in this world to do
nothing, to evade the struggles or to escape from
temptations and live in the seclusion of the
desert. It is his duty to discover the laws of
God by reading the book of Nature. Man is a
combination of matter and spirit, of body and
soul. It is his duty to unfold equally the forces
of matter and of spirit. Never should it be
consideredl that because man is composed of two
elements, there exists a principle of contradiction within himself. He must seek the perfect
equilibrium between the twvo. The old maxim
"mens sana in corpore gano" summarizes the
erudition of the ages. WThe Middle Ages endeavored to perfect the spirit at the expense of
the body. It was a mistake which produced a
weak and feeble civilization, full of impossible
visions and ideas which brought about more
wars and conflicts between men and men and
between nations and nations than any other
period in history. The present age tends to
elevate the body at the expense of the spirit.
It is another mistake. We must seek no conflict.
Man cannot be brutally materialistic nor inhumanly spiritualistic.
It is beyond my humble powers to understand
why a certain $chool of thought should insist
that we cannot please God if we continue adding day by day new moral and religious and
scientific truths to the stock of human wisdom.
Nor can I consider that we have exhausted the
sources of knowledge in matters of religion and
morality, and that religious and moral precepts
of our ancestors are unalterable and not amenCHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


October, 1929


  


23


able to any modification or betterment, consistent with the experience of the times. Why
should it be insisted that our children be tied
to the parental authority, as was the practice in
patriarchal times, and that they be subjected
to the perennial control of their parents, even
long after they have become mature beings?
Why, I ask, ought we not educate our children
with the greatest possible amount of freedom in
order to develop in them, from their tendervears, the inner moral restraints that they need
for overcoming evil impulses, without at the
same time lessening the respect and obedience
that they owe to their elders—who should, in
turn, treat them with the love and consideration
E-sting rational beings, and not as chattels
Ad beasts of burden? Some people still entertain the basically wrong notion that our children
are, by nature, incorrigible beings, so strongly
inclined to evil that they cannot be permitted
to do anything without the previous permission
and consent of their parents, thus converting
them into automatons doomed to a life of eternal
irresponsibility and, incapable of helping themselves from the moment they are deprived of
parental protection and help.
It is precisely to stimulate the good instincts
and suppress the evil that children should be
encouraged to assert themselves. Harassing
them with all kinds of restrictions and prohibitions, even in trifles, would be to stifle their
spirit. Of course, parents should at all times
be on guard to advise their children and sound
the alarm on prohibited matters, but if in spite
of this counsel a serious blunder is committed,
parents should administer the corresponding
punishment (in order that the children may
realize fully the consequences of their bad action),
and not be too indulgent and condescending with
their children when they misuse their freedom.
It is a poor educational policy to keep on
repeating old precepts and formulas and not
encourage youth to add, by its own efforts, a
new stone to the edifice of posterity. To judge
things of the present by the measure of ideas and
viewpoints of the past is a sign of narrow-mindedThe greatest deterrent to progress
ness.
gonsists in the belief that the past is "always
(little better,” something immutable and perfect.
Hf education is at all worthwhile in life, it is because it opens new avenues and unfolds new
vistas, repairs the worn-out and corrects the
inconsistent. It is just a waste of time to look
at the present with tearful eyes, crying in a loud
voice over changes and departures from old
habits, without recalling that many of the evils
and deficiencies of the present are but the results
and echoes of the education of the past.) We
should once and for all admit that the role of
education is to introduce innovations, blaze new
trails, proclaim new doctrines and try new experiences, for if our aim is simply to perpetuate
acquired habits, old customs and primitive
ways, the force of heredity is more than sufficient
to do that.
Our generation, determined as it is to seek
membership in the sisterhood of nations, cannot
commit a greater blunder than to repel the
influx of new ideas, processes and methods which
have caused other nations of the world to rise to
heights of power and supremacy. It is the
height of folly and a sign of intellectual nearsightedness, nay, a suicidal intent, to believe
that we can prevent this invasion by mere lipprotestations and denunciations against the
practices of the day. Isolation is a thing of the
past. There are now innumerable contacts
between different sections of the globe. No
country can prevent the coming of foreign commerce and trade, much less that of ideas and
doctrines of the age, which, by their nature, are
more subtle and penetrating than air and light.
There is a sophism in believing that we of the
Philippines are a separate group, that we can
with impunity preserve the ideas and habits
which constituted our old mentality, and at the
same time attain progress along with other
nations—in the light of that mentality long
withdrawn from the rest of the world. Unless
we consider ourselves as a race superior to the
at caly presumptuous

not govern our A
in a manner out
.160

ga a of the age. The


fact of the matter is that we are shamefully
behind the times, not only in the realm of economic development but also in intellectual, moral
and spiritual endeavors, precisely because bf gur
narrow and conservative attitude of mind. "One
has only to go beyond our borders to be convinced of our backwardness and inferiority, not
necessarily in comparison with Occidental
nations, but as compared with our neighbors,
—the Oriental countries. I do not mean to say
that we occupy the last rung of the ladder of
nations, but we shall soon find ourselves there,
unless we make all possible efforts to follow the
manners and usages of the modern world and to
work in accordance with its experience and
wisdom.
Mnstead of confining our knowledge to local
conditions, we should open our windows and
see the world without. The fundamental value
of education lies in furnishing universal knowledge. We should study not only our present
and past, but also the present and past of the
world. Our experiences are quite too limited
to be self-sufficient—so we should drink deep of
the wisdom of the world. We are but an integral
part of a single process. The world will go on,
with or without us,/and the longer we delay our
participation in its progress, the later shall we
reap the benefits/ We can preserve our point
of view as a nation, we can govern ourselves the
way we please, even in disagreement with the
standards generally admitted; but if we are
prudent, if we have common sense, if we do not
wish to renounce our right to survive, we should
familiarize ourselves with, and adopt, the constructive forces by which the more advanced
nations have made themselves great, and profit
by what they did and how they did it.
Above all, we need to alter our attitude of
mind, shaped as it is in the mould of the past
epoch, and to enrich it with the ideas of the
present. I consider this problem one of the
most far-reaching in the Philippines today.
see that there are still many of us who are in
love with the preconceived notions and ideas of
the past, and they are so out of tune with the
thought processes of our age that it can be said
of them that they are living in a world distinctly
their own. While 1 believe the past has bequeathed to us many beliefs and practices which
are good and useful even in our times, nevertheless, it has also left us certain errors and superstitions in which we can no longer acquiescesince they have fallen into the discard. To condemn, in the name of the past, our system of
coeducation, equal privileges between man and
woman, separation of the Church and the State,


INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBERETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, B. I.
Cable address: "YPIL,” Cebu.


woman suffrage, eight-hour days in shops and
factories, the dignity of all work and professions,
which severally constitute some of the most
outstanding principles of the modern world, is
tantamount to denying the conquest realized
by humanity in solving many perplexing problems which brought about great suffering and
miseries in olden days.
A am interested in this University’s becoming
the source of a new light which shall radiate new
teachings more in accord, in flesh and blood,
with the realities of life. Filipinos should not
live in a world of abstractions, but in the atmosphere of this age in which destiny has placed them.
This is the only way to achieve lasting and
beneficial progress and prosperity for our country.—


MANILA TEXAN VISITS TEXAS


ana. Vianag nag bag ban a la Maa.
He is back in Manila now. In America he
visited eleven states. One of them was Texas,
his native state. John is just an average fellow,
of the type inured to life east of Suez. Of
course he is a veteran of '98. Before he went on
his American visit he was the gentleman behind
the Silver Dollar bar. Years ago, when a series
of Sunday afternoon lectures was arranged at
the Chamber of Commerce, John bought the
first season ticket sold; and he attended regularly. His ethics are plain, but somewhat
catholic in scope: honesty counts a great deal
with him, and appearances little. When John
was visiting Texas, one Sunday morning after
breakfast he was sauntering down a business
street and enjoying a cigar.
“My,” he thought, "it’s right nice to be
back in old Texas again."
This pleasant soliloquy had hardly begun
when a committee of two female vigilantes bore
down upon him. Two menacing index fingers
pointed to his cigar. Why was he smoking,
and openly on the street, on the Sabbath? He
was depraved, said the vigilantes; he was....
It seems he was a great deal that is no longer
tolerated in Texas.
“This is my native state," said John, "and
this my favorite cigar—a Manila. I always
have one after breakfast. I never thought
smoking was any harm. I learned to smoke
in Texas."
This weak defense was wholly insufficient,
John only let himself in for further reproaches.
The scene on a main street of Dallas was distasteful to him.
“Ladies," he said, bowing, and with a gallant
inflexion of the word, "if you will just give me
time to pack my grip, I think you will not be
bothered by my smoking again."
John took the next train out of Dallas to
Mexico, where things went well with him until
Calles burned down the town; then, of course,
he had to move on once more. He began working
back toward the sunset. He crossed Texas
to do this, and bade his native state goodbye.
“I don’t understand Texas folks anymore,”
he explains. “I guess I’m dated.
John was a cowboy in Texas in his youth; he
has won his saddle in roping contests at old
Fort Worth; he is one of those hard-riding
chivalrous characters Texas children get excited
about in the movies.
Hitting the trail westward from Texas, John
stopped at Los Angeles.
“The breadline was just two blocks long there.”
At San Francisco he was more at ease, but he
went on north. Portland didn’t have anything
he wanted, Seattle made no appeal. But the
newspapers announced the proximate sailing
of an Empress ship out of Vancouver for Manila;
so John left Seattle for Vancouver and caught
the Empress. He still had the diner card of the
train that bore him to seaboard on the Pacific,
when he arrived back in Manila. It heralds
the all-day lunch service—individual hot meat
pie 25 cents. John admired this efficiency, for
he isn’t rich. But the card bears a more ominous
line—No cigarettes sold in Nevada or Utah."
“America’s changed a lot in the last thirty
years,” is John’s verdict. “It’s all right, I
guess—for them that like it that way. But
there certainly has been a change—specially
in the cow country.”


TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


24


  


October, 1929


SHIPPING REVIEW
BY H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, The Robert Dollar Company


September, in the
Philippines, saw a general decrease in exports,
as well as imports.
Owners felt this even
more than usual due to
increased competition,
with added new, fast
express liners in the
service. Unlike the
early six months of the
year, increased space is
not taken up by shiopers, simply for the
reason that the cargo
is not available. During the period when sugar
exports are going strong, extra tonnage is quite
readily absorbed in the Philippine market. The
exports moving over the U. K. and Continental
route can be termed as slow. This was particularly the case with hemp. Copra and copra
cake were fair and lumber steady. It is rather
difficult to predict the movement of the principal
commodities during October, but it is generally
believed by owners that the markets will strengthen, resulting in increased cargo. Exports to
the Pacific and Atlantic Coasts were very slow.
This was somewhat anticipated, but was felt
more than expected by owners, due to, as earlier
mentioned, increased tonnage on the berth.
Owners do not hold out on these routes for
October as the sugar season, the principal
commodity, does not open until November.
The movements to Straits Settlements, China
and Japan remained about normal. No trade
route from the Philippines, during the month
under review, saw any unusual movement of a
particular commodity.


From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines, there were exported from the
Philippines during the month of August, to
China and Japan ports 14,602 tons, with a total
of 57 sailings, of which 2665 tons were carried
in American bottoms with 11 sailings; to Pacific
coast for local deliverv 13,109 tons, with a total
of 12 sailings, of which 11,735 tons were carried
in American bottoms with 11 sailings; to Pacific
coast for overland delivery 559 tons, with a total
of 10 sailings, of which 330 tons were carried in
American bottoms with 6 sailings; to Pacific
Coast for intercoastal 2964 tons with a total of
11 sailings, of which 2655 tons were carried in
American bottoms with 9 sailings; to Atlantic
coast 44,480 tons with a total ot sailings, of which
23,767 tons were carried in American bottoms
with 5 sailings; to European ports 23,222 tons
with a total of 22 sailings, of which 181 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 2 sailings; to
Australian ports 1419 tons with a total of 3
sailings, of which American bottoms carried
none; a grand total of 100,355 tons, with a total
of 77 sailings, of which American bottoms carried
41,742 tons with 16 sailings.
Trans-Pacific passenger business, first class,
continues steady and a steady increase is anticipated for the next few months. Steerage
traffic is still seriously handicapped by United
States quarantine regulations, which require
that vessels be berthed to 25% of the licensed
berthing capacity only. This condition will
exist until these regulations are modified or
lifted. Just when this will happen, is a matter
of speculation and, so far is now known, they
will continue to be in effect indefinitely.
First class passenger business from Manila
to Europe and New York via Suez is steadily
increasing and it is anticipated will continue
to increase for the next few months.
The following figures show passenger traffic
moving during the month of September: (first
figure first-class, second figure steerage) To China
and Japan 159-183, To Honolulu 15-432, To


Pacific Coast 66-159, To Singapore and Straits
Settlements 13-0. To New York via Suez 3-0.
SHIPPING PERSONALS
R. Stanley Dollar, Senior Vice-President of
The Robert Dollar Co., accompanied by Mrs.
Dollar, daughter Diana and son R. Stanley, Jr.,
arrived in Manila, September 24, aboard the
s. s. President Polk and sailed by the same
steamer midnight, September 25. Mr. Dollar
and family are on a tour around the world in the
interests of the company.
T. J. Cokely, oriental manager for the Robert
Dollar Co., with headquarters in Shanghai,
accompanied Mr. R. Stanley Dollar as far as
Manila. Mrs. Cokely also accompanied Mr.
Cokely. Mr. and Mrs. Cokely left Manila,
September 30, aboard the s. s. President Hayes
for Hongkong, stopping over there for a few days,
and returning to Shanghai by a later steamer.
L. E. Nantz, formerly connected with L.
Everett, Inc., has resigned from that firm
September 1, 1929, has taken up duties with the
automotive section of the Pacific Commercial
Co., Manila.
W. J. Wilson, oriental engineer for The Robert
Dollar Co., arrived in Manila, September 24,
aboard the s. s. President Polk and left September
30, aboard the s. s. President Hayes for Hongkong, later returning to Shanghai, his headquarters. Mr. Wilson was in Manila on business for his company.
Captain James Tasker, formerly master of the
s. s. Robert Dollar, arrived in Manila, September
26, aboard the s. s. President Jefferson to take
up duties in the operating department of The
Robert Dollar Co., Manila.
Mr. Van Nieuwenhuyse, general agent for
the Eastern and Philippines Shipping Agencies,
Ltd., left Manila, September 28, aboard the
s. s. Margaret Dollar for Davao and other Southern Philippine ports and will be absent from
Manila several weeks.


Ralph Johnson, assistant director for the
Orient, United States Shipping Board, with
headquarters in Manila, returned to Manila,
September 26, aboard the s. s. President Jefferson
after several months absence in China and Japan.
H. M. Cavender, general agent, The Robert
Dollar Co., Manila, Ieft Manila, September 20,
aboard thes. s. President MCKinley for Hongkong,
where he met Mr. R. Stanley Dollar and party
and returned to Manila with the party, September 24, aboard the s. s. President Polk.
W. J. MeGough, representative of Isbrandtsen, Moller & Co New York, recently left that
city on a tour of the Orient and is expected to
visit Manila shortly.
H. F. Gourlie, formerly shipping manager of
Smith, Bell & Co., Ltd., Cebu, has joined the
shipping department of Macondray & Co.,
Manila."


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig S von Knobelsdorff
Agents
90 Rosario, Manila
Phone 22324


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OF COMMIR(CE JOURNAL


October, 1929


  


25


FREIGHT CAR LOADINGS


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By L. ARCADIO
Acting Traffic Manager, Manila
Railroad Company.


As usual we give below the commodities received in Manila, August 26,
1929, to September 25, 1929, both inclusive, via Manila Railroad:


1929


August


September


Rice, cavans.................


... 131,562


134,312


Sugar, piculs............. . . . .


1,344
 * *


2,856


Tobacco, bales..............


... 34,140


32,160


Copra, piculs.................


... 291,500


240,350


Coconuts............ .. . . . . .


... 870,100


1,709,400


Lumber, B. F. .............


12,420



866,700


Desiccated coconuts, cases.....


19,926
**


20,828


If the weekly carloading statistic is in your opinion a good material
for your readers we will continue to furnish such figures.


Rotarians’ plans for attracting travelers to Manila in accordance with
Governor Davis’s desires expressed to the Manila club of that world organization, go forward encouragingly under the leadership of the committee
and President C. W. Franks. Stanley and Mrs. Dollar were fortunately
in Manila recently and Mr. Dollar had the opportunity of personally endorsing the movement. Stimulation of travel to Manila should come
from the steamships on the direct route between Manila and San Francisco.
The Dollars have allocated some vessels to this new route, and other ships
may be attracted to it.
Miss Lucile Howell occupies a travel-bureau desk at the Manila hotel.
This is a happy selection. Miss Howell will, among other things, furnish
information on interesting places to go in Manila and the provinces.
Senator Osmena has long been urging his countrymen to travel abroad
more, and did so again at more length than usual in his recent Columbianclub talk. On the same occasion he told of many ways in which the islands
may be made a pleasant place for sojourners; his mere mention of his ideas
publicly is an assurance that he plans helping in an official way, but no news
has come from the legislature as yet as to providing provincial hotels.
They are essential to the best results.


COMMODITIES


NLMERA. 
FREIGHT CARS


MMAN
TONNAGE


MMAN
OR DECREASE


1929


1928


1929


1928


Cars


Tonnage


Rice...........)


809


813


NO5


MN


112


Palay..........


126


184


1,802


2,437


58


Sugar..........l


a


323


38


284


Copra.........


955


1,146


8,758


10,335


4


159


Coconuts.......)


227


323


2,520


3,901


96


1,381


Hemp.........


39


Tobacco.......


40


6


416


441


25


Livestock.....


76


101


3781


509


131


MineralProducts!


342


464


3,354


4,885


122


1,531


LumberandTimber..........


145


202


3,248


4,351


57


1,103


OtherForest Products......?.


5


7


2


49


2


Manufactures..


306


394


4,654


5,851


88


1,197


Allothers including LCL.....


3,133


3,725


23,091


29,314


592


6993


TOTAL.....


 6.195


7.428


59308


22908


1,233! 13,600


SUMMARY


Week ending Saturday Sept. 7.


1,313


1,916


12,810


18,687


603


5,877


Week ending Saturday Sept. 14.


1,701


1,870


16,526


18,408


169


1,882


Week ending Saturday Sept. 21


1,469


1,813


13,532


17,842


344


4,310


Week ending Saturday Sept.28.


1,712


1,829


16,440


17,97


117 1


1,531


TOTAL...L


a1E I


 7,428)


139 308 


1 72,908 1


1,233 1


 13,600


The decrease in numbef of cars and tonnage on almost all commodities
may be attributed to the interruption of our main lines and branches caused
by the typhoon of Sept. 2 which prevented the movement of most of our
trains during the greater part of the month.


AMEKICAN MALLANNE
BOLLARSTEAMS LANE
COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
SAILING
The "President” Liners Offer
ONCE A
ONCE A
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
WEEK
WEEK
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


TO SAN FRANCISCO
AND
LOS ANGELES
via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE FRIDAYS


Telephone No. 2-24-41
24 Calle David
MANILA


ROUND THE WORLD


President


Harrison -


Oct. 


President


Johnson


Nov.


President


Monroe


Nov..


President


Wilson


Dec.


President


Hayes


Dec.


Sailings every fortnight


NEW TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE
To San Francisco via Hongkong and Honol


VICTORIA


23


AND


6


SEATTLE


20


via


4


Hongkong, Shanghai, K


18


and Yokohama


SAILINGS


ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS


EN O NNNN E TENEN TE ANEN CANN O UNTOO


26


EARE

  


October, 1929


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


This is one of the best
September totals since
1920. Following the
excellent figures of July
and August, it would
seem that a temporary
depression in other lines
does not affect Real
Estate, at least not
immediately. The following are the September totals 1921 to 1929
inclusive:
1921, 1,022,093; 1922,
LATE
1,040,814; 1923, 1,153,-
444; 1924, 1,652,377; 1925, 1,164,819; 1926,
1,167,921; 1927, 722,047; 1928, 899,079; 1929,
1,179,905.
Sales City of Manila
Aug. 1929 Sept. 1929


Sta. Cruz............ ₱ 342,518 ₱ 145,463
282,403
84,618
Binondo.............
17,399
56,000
San Nicolas..........
98,547
293,658
Tondo............ . ..
152,489
61,580
Sampaloc............
35,000
1,000
San Miguel..........
43,000
Quiapo...............
48,500
35,000
Intramuros...........
54,398
68,068
Ermita...............
98,909
101,347
Malate............ ...
20,534
159,822
Paco............... ..
19,762
33,436
Sta. Ana.......... . . .
150,501
2,220
Pandacan............
1,000
19,010
Sta. Mesa............
12,000
Singalong............


VIANIENO PLANNS


TE MOE MELEINE
By PERCY A. HILL
G Munes, Nuena Ecija.
Director, Rice Producers' Association


Aspredicted in the last
review of the rice industry, prices have since
stiffened for both palay
and rice, the average
priceadvancebeingabout
40 centavos per sack.
This was due, as pointed
out, to dwindling supply and the stiffening of
the overseasexoort market, especially Tonquin,
furtheraggravatedby the
V
breakdown of railroad
shipping facilities caused
by the typhoon in the
early part of September, and which are still
suspended at the date of writing (Sept. 25th).
Curiously, the consuming public reacted to the
warning of the market’s advance tendencies, by
reviving the bogey of profiteering, hoarding, or
"what have you”. The sugar-men, alleging lack
of forthcoming supply, desire a reduction in the
protective tariff, the only thing that allows us to
produce rice at all. As a matter of fact, the
outlook for the coming crop is as good as it was
this time last year, in spite of baguios, cut-worms,
and press scareheads. In addition to the sugar
men’s suggested remedy of the state of affairs,
we have an over-taxed Labor Bureau trying to
give information to a mere one-half of one per cent
of all laborers. The “boomerang" law regarding
rice warehousing, another’s attempt to meet the
situation, will penalize the producer by restriction of credit, and a forced sale of his product,
since the deposit function is not supposed to
work after Jan. Ist, 1930, and the buyers themselves will not wish to carry a burden when their
profits are small. Thus storage of supply which
is a godsend to the producer is penalized by a law
that sounds good but which in effect is not to the
advantage of the buyers and millers to comply
with; they will buy outright, and let others take


up the burden of warehousing.
All these things are the regular slings of misfortune that occur annually about this time to
the detriment of the producer. Let us look first
at the attempt to "fix prices”. All persons in an
administrative position with a modicum of sense
know that this has never succeeded in any industry which ignores supply, demand and price.
To date, all these noisy efforts of the Don Quixotes who strive for the milennium have never
reduced by one cent the price in open market of
this commodity, nor have all their lucubrations
increased supply by a single kilo. It is just an
annual brainstorm, like that of last year at this
time, which we have to suffer. As for the reduction of the protective tariff: First, it is a small
tax paid by those whose standard of living is
infinitely higher than the humble grower of this
necessary commodity. Secondly, this revenue
means much to a government whose most yital
question is that of seeking more and equitable
taxation for our ill-balanced finances. Thirdly,
the danger lies in the fact that, once the abrogation of the greater part of this protective tariff
(which can be accomplished by Executive Order)
is effected, given the present Chinese demand
and price, we could easily export our rice to that
market in preference to keeping it here; for in
the last analysis the rice producers, some four
and half millions, must, live in spite of the one
half of one per cent of labor, and irrespective of
the sugar-men. All of the above problems are
deserving of careful study.
As regards the benefit of irrigation, this lies
not so much in increasing the crop as that of
insuring the crop against the weather. Combined irrigation systems have perhaps increased
our vield by 8%, which is, after all, something
tangible, but there is no necessity of any further
expansion since in a good year we are self-sufficing. A permanent expansion of our rice yield
would put us in a much more unfortunate position than the sugar men, a product with no adequate market. The price of rice in a good year
falls below the cost production. At present the
gain to the industry over cost is slightly more
than our legal interest. Any radical move that
will affect the industry adversely will consequently drive the rice producer to other crops,
which would mean sugar, and then we have
another impasse.
The upward trend of the overseas rice market
is due to Chinese and Japanese demand. We
must import to stabilize supply, and of course no
law we can make will affect world prices or overseas supply, all of which is obvious. At present
the coming crop promises as well as the crop of
last year did at this time. Approximate estimates can be made within the next 75 days.


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the
Manila hemp market
for the month of September with statistics
up to and including
September 30th, 1929.
12
U. S. GRADES:—The
first of the month found
the selling market in
New York quiet with
buyers showing little
or no interest. Shippers
were offering on the
basis of: E, 12-144
cents; F, 11-1/4 cents;
G, 8-348 cents; I, 11 cents; J1, 10-1/4 cents;
S1, 10-748 cents;'$2, 10-144 cents; $83, 8-172
cents. Hand to mouth business continued and
by the middle of the month sellers were becoming
overanxious and prices had declined to: E,
11-778 cents; F, 10-748 cents; G, 8-1/8 cents;
I, 10-548 cents; J1, 9-748 cents; Si, 10-344
cents; $2, 9-748 cents; $3, 8-1/2 cents. The
more the shippers endeavored to sell, the less
interested the buyers appeared to be and the
weaker prices became. By the end of the month
an unusually large quantity of hemp was being
offered and the nominal asking prices were:
E, 11-172 cents; F, 10-578 cents; G, 8 cents;
I, 10-174 cents; J1, 9-1/2 cents; Si, 10-348
cents; $2, 9-748 cents; S3, 8-1/4 cents. This
showed a decline of from 1/4 cent to 344 cent
per lb. on the various grades during the month
but these prices do not reflect the true situation
and undoubtedly hemp could be bought from
1/4 cent to 1/2 cent under these prices. Davao
hemp which usually carries a premium and finds
a ready market was being offered in large quantities with no buyers and the asking prices were
as low as the prices on hemp from other provinces.
In Manila the market for U. S. grades was
extremely quiet the first of the month with
rather indifferent buyers on the basis of E, P26;
F, P24.75 G. ₱i7.25; I, P24; J1. P21.25;
Si, P24 82, ₱22.50; 53, ₱17.75. There was
very littie change by the middle of the month
so far as prices were concerned but the undertone was decidedly easy. Sales were made on
the basis of E, P26- T, P24.50; G, Pi7.50;
I, P24; J1, F2125; 51, '₱24, 52, ₱22.25; 83,
₱17.75. Throughout the balance of the month
prices declined steadily and the buying was


THE YOKOHAMA SPECIE BANK
E LTD. E
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
- 100,000,000.00
Capital (Paid Up) -
Reserve Fund
108,500,000.00
Undivided Profits -
10,420,920.97


MANILA BRANCH
600 DASMARINAS, MANILA


K. YABUKI
Manager


PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER


PHONE! 2-37-58—Export, Current Account, Cashier
12-37-55—Import, Accountant


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


  


27


confined principally to speculators. The month
closed with sales of province hemp at: E, P25.50;
F P23.50 G ₱i7.25; 1, P22.50; J1. ₱20.50;
$1, F22.75, 82, P21.50; 83, ₱17.75. It became
apparent that the consuming markets are unable
to assimilate present stocks of high-grade hemp
and until production declines or consumption
increases, there is no prospect of any relief.
U. K. GRAdEs:—The London market opened
quiet with sellers at: J2, 236.10; K, 231; Ll,
231; L2, 228;MI, 228;M2, 225.10;DL, 225.10;
DM,E21. During the first half of the month there
was a fair amount of business and the market
remained steady. There were a few changes
in prices but on the average they remained about
the same, sales being made at: J2, 236.10; K,
231.10; Li, 231.5; L2. E28.5; MI, 628.5; M2,
225.5; DL, E25.5; DM, 221. The continued
heavy receipts prevented any advance in the
market and at the close London was from quiet
to dull with sellers on the basis of: J2, C36;
K, 230.10; Li, E30.10; L2, 227.5; Mi, 227.5;
M2, 224.10; DL, 224.10; DM, 221.
In Manila the market was extremely quiet
the first of the month with shippers buying on
the basis of: J2, ₱16.75, K FIALi ₱14;
L3, ₱12.50 Mi, ₱12.50; M2, ₱i0.25; DL,
₱10,25, DM, P8. 'There were a few adjustments
in prices during the first half of the month and
while all hemp offered found buyers, there was
little, if any, competition. Nominal prices were:
32, PI7 K, ₱13n5 Li, ₱13.75; L2, ₱12.35;
Mi, ₱1225; M2, ₱10.50; DL, ₱10.50; DAI,
₱8.25. In sympathy with the U. K. market
and probably influenced somewhat by the heavy
decline in U. S. grades as well as by continued
heavy stocks, the market for the lower grades
found buyers rather indifferent at the end of the
month although speculators in Manila were
buving province hemp on the basis of: J2,
₱16.78; K ₱13.50; Ll, P13.50; L2, ₱11.55,
Ml, ₱il.50; M2, P10; DL, PIO; DNI, ₱7.75.
Prices show an average loss of about P0.25
during the month and are about ₱1.00 down
from August Ist. The continued heavy receipts
and the depression in U. S. grades is bound to
have its effect on the U. K. grades notwithstanding the fact that this fiber is cheap when compared with other hard fibers throughout the
world. On the other hand, the better qualities,
or the so-called U. S. grades, are still dear even
at the present reduced prices.
JAPAN:—Notwithstanding the fact that the
exchange is greatly improved, the buyers for this
market are buying sparingly and are taking full
advantage of the depression in the U. S. and U.
K. markets. It is reported that they still have
considerable Manila hemp in store at Kobe.
MagueY:—This fiber declined owing to the
entire absence of demand. The first of the
month buyers were paying ₱12.75 for Cebu
No. 2 and Fil.00 for No. 3. At the end of the
month most of the buyers were offering ₱ll.75
and P10.00. However, a few of the houses
were paving P0.25, and in some cases P0.50,
more. With the season opening for Northern
Maguey within the next month or two, it begins
to look as if there is very little prospect of prices
recovering for the present at least.
PRODUCTION:—While receipts do not compare
with the earlier months of the vear, they still
remain comparatively heavy and total produetion for the year will undoubtedly reach 1,500,000
Bs. and some of the experts prophesy 1,600,000
Bs. In addition to Abaca, the Islands produced 37,000 Bs. of Canton fiber and 95,000
Bs. of Maguey fiber during the first nine
months of the year.
Freldur RAtEs:—There is no change in rates
on hemp since last report.
STATISTICS:—The figures below are for the
period ending September 30th, 1929:
Manila Hemp
1929 Bales 1928 Bales
On hand January 1st...
170,301 139,624
Receipts to date........ 1,220,379 1,035,093
LNOOO LIR7I
Shipments to—
1929 Bales 1928 Bales
259,786
VE...............
259,441
Continent............
133,326
154,272
U.S.................
436,214 282,967
Japan.............. ..
274,192 235,889
All Others............
59035
81.720
LIOSSS LUNSS


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
BY RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


TNg MANa aMaa
with all Banks buyers
of U.S. S T.T.ready and
forward at 344% premium. Selling rates
were correspondingly
strong at 1-1780 premium for T.T. By the
middle of the month
Banks had made heavy
purchases of T.T. for
immediate and future
deliveries and had so far
satisfied their requirements and incidentally
so reduced their cash
positions that buying
rates were dropped t
57825 premium forT.T.
and 148% premium for O/D. Selling rates were
likewise reduced to 19% premium. For the
balance of the month there was little or no fluctuation in quotations. No marked strengthening in rates is anticipated during the next few
months.


The following purchases of telegraphic transfers have been made from the Insular Treasurer


since last report:
Week ending July 27th.... $1,452,000
200,000
Week ending Aug. 3rd....
Week ending Aug. 10th.... 400,000
250,000
Week ending Aug. 17th....
Week ending Aug 24th.... 700,000
Week ending Aug. 31st.... 700,000
Week ending Sept. 7th....
310,000
20,000
Week ending Sept. 14th....
Week ending Sept. 21st....
Nil


Except for minor fluctuations.
Sterling rates
have held steady with sellers of T.T. at 2,- 7716
and buyers at from 2,- 9716 to 27- 578.
The New York-London cross-rate closed on
August 31st at 484 11/16, touched a low of
484 5/8 on September 20th and from that date
onward rose rapidly to 486 at the close.
On August 31st London Bar Silver was quoted
at 24 3/16 ready and 24 57/16 forward. Quotations did not rise above that point during September but weakened rapidly until on September
25th the market touched a low of 23 1/16 ready
and forward, closing on the last day of the
month at 23 3/16 ready and 23 1,4 forward.
Bar Silver in New York stood at 52 548 on
August 31st, was high for September at 52 144
on the second and fourth of the month, had
(Continued on page 28, Col. 3)


Travel
East
via the
(e
iorth
Coast


Limitea


NTOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between the
1 VNorth Pacific Coast and
Chicago! Leaves Seattle at
111:00 A. M. for all the principal
cities of the United States. Two
days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel
is its diner service.


The luxurious, new Observation-Club car with its deep, restful lounge—cushioned chairs—
library—writing corner—club
rooms—showers—and maid and
valet service—affords many
hours of pleasure.
New-type Pullmans and powerful, new locomotives.


Stop off at
Yellowstone Park
Season June 15-Sept. 20
Without exception this is the most
unique
outdoor playground in all the world—3,500
square miles of geysers in eruption hot col:
ored pools—boiling lakes—the deep, brilliant
gulfr ol ine erand Canyonand ba muenaw
bears to amuse you.


You will find unusual travel comfort and courteous, personal service aboard this fine
train. The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos. Cook &s Son,
Shanghai Commercial & Savings Bank or any trans-Pacific steamship company, will
gladly furnish additional information.
Oswald Crawford, G. A.
R. J. Tozer, A. G. P. A.
E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
501 Granville Street
912 Government Street
200 L. C. Smith Bldg.
Vancouver, B. C.
Victoria, B. C.
Seattie, Wash., U. S. A.
Northern Pacific Railway


IN RESTONDING TO ADVERIISEMENIS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERIGAN CRAMBER OF GOMMERCE JOURNAL


ARI
-H.
  


October, 1929


SEPTEMBER SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


NEw York MarKET:—During the first
week of the month
under review, small sales
of duty-free sugars were
made to refiners at
3.89 cents I. t. equivalent to about P9.15 per
picul ex godown Manila,
but at the close of the
market on the 5th,
holders of these sugars
advanced their prices
A

to 3.93 cents 1.t.
Holders of Cubasrefused
o sell below-2-3/16 cents c. and f. (3.96 cents
t. for P. I. centrifugals), at which price they
nad hoped to dispose of their sugars. The market
vas irregular during the second week, but prices
mproved for the following reasons: (1) The
revailing drouth in both Europe and Cuba,
vhich threatens the reduction of the crop prosects in both places, and (2) the carrying into
ffect on August 31st of the plan of the Cuban
Single Selling Agency. The following week was
haracterized by inactivity with prices on the
lecline. Small sales of Cubas were made for
rompt shipment on the 19th at 2-7432 cents
and f. (3.99 cents l. t.), while Philippine afloats
hanged hands at 3.96 cents, equivalent to
₱9.31 per picul ex godown. A material imrovement was visible in the fourth week, when
efiners developed a greater buving interest on
he 26th and holders were able to sell small
luantities at 2-5716 cents c. and f. (4.08 cents
t.). The market was inactive at the close of
he month, witha quotation for Cubas at 2-11,32
ents c. and f. (4.11 cents 1. t.), at which
rice there were sellers but no buyers.
The latest visible stocks in the U. K., U. S.,
uba and European statistical countries for the
nonth under review are 2,517,000 tons as comared with 2, 275,000 tons at the same time last
ear and 2,195,000 tons in 1927.
Futures. Quotations on the New York Exhange during September fluctuated as follows:


High


Low


Latest


929—September...


2.31


2.09


2.23


December...


2.37


2.19


2.35


930—January......


2.35


23
2.20


2.34


March.......


2.35


.23


2.34


May.........


2.40


2.30


2.38


July.........


2.46


2.36


2.44


September..


 2.49


2.46


2.49


Philippine Sales.


During the month of Sept

mber, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the
tlantic Coast were reported as follows:—afloats,
ear arrivals and for future deliveries—amountd to 42,500 tons at prices ranging from 3.96
ents to 4.20 cents 1. t. as compared with sales
mounting to 6,250 tons during the same period
ast year at 3.96 cents landed terms.
EuroPE:—Owing perhaps to the prevailing
routh in Europe, Licht’s latest estimate of the
ew European beet crop is 8,154,000 tons, a
ecrease of 1.86 per cent as compared with the
ast out'turn which was 8,308,981 tons.
Dr. Mikusch reports in his circular for August
hat despite the delay in the development of the
eets in some countries in Europe, his estimates
r the 1929-30 crop was released at the usual
ate. He warns however that his estimates are
t best an attempt to characterize the present
ondition of the beets. He states it will be
ufficient to call to mind the surprise of last
utumn to show the extent to which the future
eteorological conditions may change the crop
rospects during the next few months. Dr.
likusch estimates the acreage for the 1929-30
rop at 2,645,000 hectares with a production
8,575,000 metric tons as compared with
,460,000 tons’ out’turn last year.
LOCAL MARKET:—The local centrifugal market
uring the first week was very quiet with exorters quotations at ₱5.00, ₱9.25, while
cal traders paid as high as ₱9.75 for sugar
uitable for direct consumption. Values ad

vanced in the second week in sympathy with the
rise in prices elsewhere, but since stocks were
small these prices were not sufficiently attractive
to holders. Chinese were interested buyers in
the third week, and sugar for local consumption
were obtainable at P9.80 ex godown Iloilo and
₱10.10 in Manila. Transactions in the last
week were very insignificant since local stocks
were practically exhausted.
Crop Prospects: Weather conditions have
improved since the 10th of this month. During
the three-week period following September
10, there has been adequate sunshine, optimum
soil moisture and intermittent showers which
have partially compensated for the severe drouth
of April and May on Luzon and the heavy rains
of July and August on both Luzon and Negros.


The
Philippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS
SURETYSHIPS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance


ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest


Callor write for particulars


Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


OXYGEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure
HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hydrogen
99.8% pure
ACETYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes
WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops
BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
Electric Storage Batteries


Philiopine Acetyiene Co.
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.


The Kabankalan Sugar Co, began milling on
September 30, which is a few days earlier than
their usual schedule. A decided innovation
however has been the early milling of the Pampanga Sugar Development Co. (October 2).
With juice purities of 80 or better on the first
day of milling, it is apparent that Pampanga is
following a wise procedure in beginning milling
early, since April purities at the same central
average around 72 and in May even lower.
Another advantage also of early milling is that
the efficiency of the capital investment in central
equipment and railways is increased by a minimum of 12 per cent, and planters are enabled to
obtain seed for early planting with a consequent
beneficial result to the following crop.
In spite of the improvement in weather conditions, it is unlikely that the relatively high
unit yields obtained last year, which were mainly
due to a very favorable and seasonable weather,
will be equalled this year.
Tabulated below is a preliminary estimate of
the centrifugal sugar production of the Philippines by islands for the 1929-30 crop as compared
with the previous crop:


1928-29
Island
Piculs
Met. Tons Met. Tons
Negros...... 6,790,000 429,468 417,356
249,838
Luzon...... 3,950,000
246,161
Panay......
505,000
31,941
24,421
150,000
10,886
Mindoro....
9,487
80,000
5,060
Cebu.......
844
None
Leyte....... 25,000
1,581


INHL A  IADINO TDIS WOOO


Philippine Exports: Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for the 1928-29 crop from November, 1928, to September 30, 1929, amounted
to 619,991 tons, segregated as follows:


Metric
tons
Centrifugals... 619,991
Muscovados.................. 23,901
Refined.......................
7,432


Total............. 651,324
JAVA MarKer:—The Javan market was
relatively firm throughout the month. After
disposal by the Trust of the balance of the
present crop at Gs. 13-1/2, equivalent to P7.28
per P. I. picul f. o. b., in the middle of the month,
the market became quieter. Following are
the latest quotations:
Spot-October..... Gs. 13-1/8—P7.09iper P. I.
November........ Gs. 13-1/4— 7.15 picul
December........ Gs. 13-348— 7.22) fo.b.
Jan.-Feb.-Mar....Gs. 13-548— 7.341


Review of the Exchange Market
(Continued from page 27)
declined to a low of 50 1/8 on September 28th
and was quoted at 50 1/4 on September 30th.
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on September 30th:
Paris, 12.40; Madrid, 152; Singapore, 115-172;
Japan, 97-344; Shanghai, 88; Hongkong, 97-148;
India, 135-3/4; Java, 122-172.


The Robert Dollar and Company and the
Mackay Radio and Telegraph Company can
now install and operate radio stations for the
dissemination of radio messages both in the Philippines and abroad following the granting of
certificate of public service and convenience
yesterday.
The certificates were signed by Judge Roman
A. Cruz, associate public service commissioner,
before whom the hearing on the applications of
those radio companies took place:
The Mackay Radio and Telegraph Company
plans to operate a round-the-world radio service
with head offices in California and Manila.
A powerful radio station in Paranaque, Rizal,
will be installed soon by the Mackay Radio and
Telegraph Company, it was announced at the
commission yesterday.
The Robert Dollar Company will develop
the radio business in the Philippines and radio
stations will be built in places where present
means of communications is scanty or otherwise
inefficient.


N RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


October, 1929


  


29


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporation


The Manila copra
market during September opened at levels
somewhat under export
equivalents. It was
obvious that much of
local supplies would
move to the Continental
market unless Manila
prices advanced or U.
K. bids declined. Although Marseilles advices showed the market
A
to be weak in spots, on
the whole Continental
demand remained fairly steady during the month.
and with bad weather conditions locally during
the first half of September, Manila buyers advanced their prices pending improved production.
The month closed with arrivals considerably
improved and a steady demand. Total arrivals
for the month of September were 388,262 bags
as compared with 506,544 bags for September,
1928. Latest advices follow:
San Francisco, F. M. M...4-1/4 to 4-348 cents
London, Cebu Sundried. .. 222,15,0
F. M. M... 22241070
Manila, Buen Corriente P0.25
Arrival Resecada.... P10.00 to P10.25
CoconUT OIL:—European demand for copra
has little effect on the U. S. coconut oil market due
principally to the comfortable situation of large
consuming buyers and the generous supply of
competing FatsandOils. The bulkof September
trading has evidently gone to the edible trade and
scattered tank car sales were reported at substantially better prices than were obtainable for August.
With the higher equivalent bids made by Europe
for copra, it was but natural that local coconut
oil manufacturers should look to the Continent
for coconut oil bids. However, we have no
record of substantial trading with Europe in
coconut oil although we have been advised of
the sale of one bulk parcel. There seems to be
little prospect of improved demand from the
U. S. market unless prices decline more in line
with buyers’ ideas. Latest cables follow:
New York. ....7 to 7-lg cents C. I. F.
San Francisco..6-e cents F. O. B.
Manila....... .31-le centavos per kilo in
drums.
COPRA CAKE:—Hamburg demand for this item
was very well sustained during the first half of
Septemberand a fair amount of trading was noted
at advancing prices. The month closed however
with heavy resale offerings down to E9,0,0
October-November-December shipment, under
which pressure buyers have become indifferent
and refuse to quote at better than ES,1746.
Latest cable advices follow:
Hamburg..... .E8J1746
San Francisco. No quotations
Manila, Sellers.. P66.00 per metric ton ex
godown
Buyers....... P63.00 to P64.00 per metric
ton ex godown.


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


RAWLEAF:—The market for local and export
grades during September remained a quiet.
The quantity exported was very small. Comparative figures are as follows:


Rawleaf, Stripped and Seraps
Kilos
Australia............... . . . . . . . . . .
310
China......................
12,402
Hongkong................ . . . . . . . .
31,536


11,810
Japan...........................
2lio
dava.
20,848
North Atlantic (Europe)....
5,103
North Africa............... . . . . . .
Straits Settlements................
2,434
162,139
United States........... .. . . . . . . .


248,701
August, 1929............. 2,334,651
September, 1928.......... 1,917,114


CIGARS: While September exports to the
United States show a slight increase against
August, they are considerably behind the corresponding 1928 period.
Comparative statistics of cigars shipped to
the United States: September 1929, 15,477,900.
August 1929, 15,031,324. September 1928, 19,-
455,333.


HOW THEY DO IT


The government has allotted more than
₱800,000, proceeds of the gasoline and lubricating-oil tax, for bridges and roads. Perhaps
not less than 75% of this tax is collected in
Manila, from gasoline and oil consumed in motor
vehicles operating here. But the city’s allotment is but P84,000—another instance of taking
directly from Manila in order directly to aid
the provinces, which have limited taxing power.
It seems evident from travel over the highways
in this section of Luzon that the tax in question
helps keep the roads in repair. Even after the
typhoon, the road into Baliuag, Bulakan, was
better all along the way than almost any street
or avenue in Manila. Another treasury vacuity
is reported here, and strect work lags.


Take the NEW
EIARAOE BUMLRER
Companion train to the
ORRRRRAD
EANAAHED
PO
Across America


G7) lHEN you take the short
C
Trans-Pacific route to Seattie—or ifyou enter at San Francisco—you have a most diverting
trip to eastern America awaiting
you on the New Empire Builder,
companion train to the Oriental
Limited. This luxuriously appointed and skilfully serviced no
extra fare trainreaches Chicago in
o1l4 hours from Portland or Seattle. 1200clean, cinderless, scenic
miles are traversed behind either
oil-burning or electric locomotives. The route includes 60 miles


in daylight along Glacier National
Park.
Enroute, see the electrified New
Cascade Tunnel, longest in the
Western Hemisphere—8 miles
through the Cascade Mountains
—shortening the distance across
America on the Great Northern
Railway. At Chicago make connections with fast de luxe trains
for Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburgh,
Philadelphia, New York, Boston,
Washing ton, D. C., and other
American cities.


CLEAN. CINDERLESS, LUXURIOUS, SCENIC ROUTE


Apply to Tourist Agencies orTrans-Pacific
Steamship Lines or write
J. Wesley Young, Gen’l Agent Pass’r Dept 1400 4th Ave., Seattle, Wash.
A. H. Hebb, Agent, 916 Government St., Victoria, B. C.
Edw. A. Dye, Gen'l Agent, 607 Hastings St., Vancouver, B. C.
C. A. Gerken, Gen'l Agent, 679 Market St., San Francisco, Cal.
M. J. Costello, West. Traf. Mgr., Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hillrail


A Dependable Railway


N RETONDNG TO ADVERISEMENVIS FEEASE MERION THE AMENICAN CRAMBER OF COMMERGE JOURNAL


30


  


October, 1929


THE"


ZZ
rreatest success
y

mall Emochistoru
Sales Tell the Story—And 1930 Buick
Sales Break All Records


ATHE 1930 Buicks have attained tremendous popularity in Manila over night.
AAll who have seen this “greatest of all
Buicks” have expressed sincere admiration for
the beauty of the new Fisher bodies—the attractive lines which make the 1930 models
distinctive.
Public approval has been translated into
sales—which is the truest test of the acceptance
of new motor car models. All Manila sales


records for cars in Buick’s class were broken
during the first two days of the showing of the
1930 models.
Call today and see the 1930 Buicks. Take
note of the many improvements—the luxurious
appointments—the new symmetry and grace
of lines. You will recognize at once that Buick
has attained new heights of excellence. Here
is a car truly worthy of the Buick tradition.


Automotive Sales Company
DISTRIBUTOR
Buick — Marquette — GMC Trucks
Pinpin and M. del Banco Nacional


L      E


October, 1929


  Or


COlviViERo





PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


July,


1929


July,


1928


Monthly average for 12 months
ending July, 192


Quantity


Value


75


Quantity


Value


0


Quantity


Value


0


ugal


37,208,377 ₱ 5,557,593
.. . * *


24.0


17,959,91
P


3,040,901


15.5


1,801
54,168,924 ₱ 8


31.


HANND


15,067,57
* *............*


4,626,539


2,056,253


3,646,876


8.


15,876,6


4,725,082


Coconut Oll..


13,663,639
..........


4,100,349


3


13,641,676


4,481,1


8


16,037,832


5,159,03


Copra......
. . . . * . . . . * *. * ... . . . .. . . . .  *


11,187,689
..... *...


1,902,255


8.


15,874,324


,179,960


16.2


18,323,8


"e


12


Cigar (Number).............


17,084,565
 * .. ......  4


17,662


2.


19,236,900


50,598


4.6


17,121,306


Embroidery.....................
* .. * . . . . . * . .


  .  *


1,137,7.


4.9


32,234


3.5


,21


3.


Maguey..
 ............ .  * * . *


967,340
 ...... * .. .


194,205


0.8


764,821


155,88


1.1


1,317,882


273,92


Leaf Tobac

* ... .. * ..........


2,908,283
** * * . .......


964,631


4.2


301,550


91,5


O.8


38
1,744,26


600,8:


Dessicated and Shredded Coconut..................


1,842,545
*.......... ..4


585,216


2.5


1,926,115


693,957


3.


1,735,143


62


Hats (Number
* ...... ..   . . ... .. .... .


94,21
.........


296,378


112,008


476,130


37,098


38,04


Lumber (Cubic Meter)................... . . . . . . . . .


15,928
*........ ... ..


32,766


12,559


42


4,760


517,054


Copra Meal.....


9,673,685
...... . . . .


12,91-


6


7,163,630


2.8


8,681,504


630,964


ordage..


497,893
** 


65,22


575,9


309,495


8


375,937


323,319


o


Knotted Hemp
. . .. .. . .......... * . .. .. ...... 


112,79



402,98


¬


1,290


54,544


D.o


58,028


29
202,9:


6


Pearl Buttons (Gross)..............................


73,258
...


32,507


0.3


5,484


59,17


0.6


58,726


64,901


Canton (low grade cordage fiber)....................... .. . . . . . . . . . ..


593,289


2,807


O. E


598,232


99,121


O.8


578,588


106,165


0. 3


All Other Products............................... ..


*...


.
252


3.8


4,061,289


20.6


545,274


1.9


Total Domestic Products...........................................
₱19,392,433 99.1
₱22,721,823 99.1
P28,300,382 99.5
11,758 0.9
6,193
O.
61,86
United States Products................................. . .... . . . . . . .
7,622
32,083 0.1
51,353 0.2
Foreign Products............


P28,468,658 100.0
₱19,511,813 100.0
P22,935,036 100.0
Grand Total..


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


CARRYING TRADE


Monthly average for
July, 1929
Articles
12 months ending
July, 1928
July, 1929


Value


25


Value


75


Value


0


Cotton Cloths..........


₱ 2,977,142


13.7


₱ 3,119,968


11.2


₱ 3,708,959


12.4


Other Cotton Goods.....
Iron and Steel, Except


916,589


4.3


1,408,697


5.1


1,252,135


4.0


Machinery ...........


1,598,527


7


2,809,426


10.1


2,023,446


6.I


Rice....
* ... .......


1,342,424


6.:


57,857


1.0


759,240


2.0


Vheat E
I


17,154


1,642


.0


916,068


2.6


Machinery and Parts of..


991,08


4.6


2,830,178


1,585,351


5.3


Dairy Products........


7


3.t


675,9-


604,046


4


Gasoline..............


458


12
1,)


774,220


2.1


Silk Goods.............


776,190


9,28


748,4


2.0


utomobiles............


363,36


90


191,2


O


Vegetable Fiber Goods...


1,892


234,7


478,65


1.


Meat Products..........


832,38:


3.


10,361


01,727


2.C


Illuminating Oil........


6
643,0





MES


2,17


*


Fish and Fish Products..


32,4


..1





91
E


Crude Oil..............


0,7a


4,064


Oal.
hemicals, Dyes, Drugs,


477,8


2.2


218,492


O.8


459,813


1.8


Etc.......


372,726


1.7


487,860


1.7


424,333


1.6


Fertilizers..............


59,3


1.


64,394


356,446


.4


Vegetables............
Paper Goods, Except


245,655


1.1


306,760


1.1


394,211


1.5


Books.....
Tobacco and Manufac

458,469


2.1


547,043


1.9


433,577


1.7


tures of.......
*
.


386,365


698,403


421,807


1.7


Electrical Machin
y..
Books and Other Printed


330,327


18


679,785





432,911


1.7


Matters.....
*   .


238,3


1.1


403,303


235,018


O


Cars and Carriages.....


86
E


0.4


266,6


0,810


.9


Automobile Tires.......


702
313


328,4


307,033


fruits and Nuts........


91,343


0.4


193,16


314,732


Woolen Goods..........


118,839


.6


25,62


129,503





Leather Goods..
Shoes and Other Foot

198,523


0.9


420,656


1.5


254,640


1.0


ware.................


402,967


1.9


281,731


149,516



Coffee.............
Breadstuff, Except Wheat


206,865


1.0


192,291


O.7


173,408


8.


Plour..........


189,359


0.9


197,336


197,420


).8


Eggs...
 
* * *
erfumen
and Other


227,926


1.


224,722


O.8


207,587


0.9


Toilet Goods........


115,268


0.:


197,889


O.


147,429


O..


Lubricating Oil.......
Cacao Manufactures, Ex

160,077


O.8


280,245


1.0


197,268


O.8


cept Candy.....


91,559


134,49:


136,281


e2


Glass and Glassware..
Paints, Pigments, Var

122,409


84


208,639


64


178,955


nish, Etc.....


157,285


239,858


153,789


0.6


Oils not separaty v listed
Earthern
 and


96,824


63


384,305


22


145,686


0.6


Chinaware.



122,638


169,526


140,869


0.6


Automobile A/ .jories..
Diamond and Ather Pre

172,199


68


159,000


es


176,147


0.7


cious Stones Unset....
Wood, Reed, Bamboo,


65,400


0.3


145,738


0.5


128,069


0.5


tattan..............


118,334


O.6


166,277


70


India Rubber Goods....


109,694


O.2


154,45)


LSA


0.?


Soap..


75,356


.4


83,26


Matches........... . . . .


96,518





O.


70,746


O.


lattle................


56,912


32,933


O.


Explosives.............


43,457


6.


8


46,00


0.2


Cement...
*
*


9,286


0.5


Gin


99,588


0.4


Sugar and Molass



63,639


9,4


26,110


O.1


Motion Picture Films...


5,342


O.


9,902


31,806


O.?


All Other Imports......


1,763,280


8.1


2,226,591


7.9


6,178,174


24.8


Total..........


₱21,579,474 100.0


P28,045,453


100.0


P24,550,199


100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Ports


July, 1929


Monthly average fon
July, 1929
12 months ending
July, 1929


Value


5


Value


5


Value
75


Manila.


*.


....P30,012,132


66. 9


₱35,562,144
3,470,755
5,856,698
697,045
122,011
1,186,459
662,154 1.3


68.1
₱36,185,218
7,042,424 13.2
3,492,457 12.
610,397


Iloilo...





*
6,259,460


75.4


Cebu...


* .....*.


5,605,184



14.1
7
12.


Zamboanga.........


* 
572,737


Jolo....


*.......


* * . .
82,171


1.4
0. 3


Davao.


*  . ......


*
1,440,695


3.3
1.3


.2
2.4
1,41
1,20


Legaspi.


* . *......


* .
542,131


Total......


...₱44,514,510


100.0


₱47,557,266


1OG


₱53,101,441 100.0


IMPORTS


Nationality of Vessels


July, 1929


July, 1928


Monthly average for
12 months ending
July, 1929


Value


5


Value


30


Value


75


American..............


₱ 8,148,845


37.3


₱12,399,046


44.2


₱10,710,404


43.9


British.................


6,903,262


31.6


9,744,119


34.8


7,634,027


30.


Japanese...............


1,358,07


6.4


1,063,817


3.8


1,096,997


Dutch.................


1,099,132


5.2


1,128,419


4.0


681,021


Lrerman..


1,621,550


1,827,700


6. 5


1,677,6


Norwegian.............


1,215,545


5.6


1,007,016


3.6


1,429,9:


5.


Philippine..............


18,317


0.4


137,17


0.5


118,007


Spanish.......... . . . . . .


66,136


0.4


119,687


0.4


159,166





Chinese............. .. .


101,904


0.6


57,043


0.2


90,736


.5


Swedish................


2,791


0.2


12,169


O.


Danish................


482,972


2.3


251,738


French.......


56,277


3


By Freight.............


₱21,088,531


97.6


P27,484,019 98.0


₱23,890,025


97.


By Mail...............


490,943


2.4


561,434


2.0


660,174


2.7


Total..........


₱21,579,474


100.0


₱28,045,453


100.0


P24,550,199


100.0


EXPORTS


Monthly average for


Nationality of Vessels


July, 1929


July, 1929


12 months ending


July, 1929


Value


75


Value


75


Value


5


American..............


₱12,566,910


54.7


₱ 8,460,657


42.6


₱13,108,534


45.7


British.................


784,594


25.3


6,467,140


32.4


7,443,894


5.-


Japanese...............


1,378,49


2,278,833


11.7


3,304,483


10.


German................


874,96


3.8


676,085


3.7


59,986


Norwegian.............


470,205


2.0


6,525


O.6


919,200


Spanish................


432,211


1.


373,78


2.2


102,896


Dutch............


398,019


452,832


2.6


783,


Philippines.............


50,423


D.2


51,449


0.5


Shinese................


,179


.1


o0





Swedish................


203,197


0.9


3.


1.2


French.................


1,88


Danish...............


931,309


3.3


By Freight.............


P22,182,232


96.7


₱18,830,308


96.4


₱27,458,421


96.5


By Mail.............


752,804


3.3


681,505


3.6


1,009,387


3.5


Total..........


₱22,935,036


100.0


₱19,511,813


100.0


P28,467,808


100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for


Countries


July, 1929


July, 1928


12 months ending


July, 1928


Value


5


Value


7


Value


7


United States..........


P28,896,895


64.3


₱33,116,526


70.3


₱36,178,01


68.2


United Kingdom.......


2,099,97


,021,665


4.2


2,160,82


Japan..............


3,095,808


5


3,778,447


3,341,08


China....
* . ... *


1,357,167


,786,606





1,798,344


French East Indies.....


1,316,933


246,973


.4


51,354


Germany...............


7
1,449,77


1,209,401


2.4


1,3



Spain..................


997,473


80,4


..I


1,08


Australia...............


930,4


2.2


543,71


British East Indies....


545,379


1.


408,87


Dutch East Indies......


50,908


25


PI


France.................


044
1


L.5


15,


Netherlands............


,94


84


0.5


Italy..............


690,2:


1


58,657
7


3.


Hongkong............ ..


114,434


O


Mipan


84


,73


0.4


Belgium...............


1,431


O.8


545,107


455,029


Switzerland............


310,196


o.7


324,123


834,0-


2


Japanese-China........


168,28


0.4


110,988


0.2


40,70


o.3


Siam...............


31,496


O.I


,153


1


16,253


O.


Sweden................


150,874


5,966


107,99:


Canada................


99,89.


0.2


26,012


3


2,0.


Norway................


59,33


0.2


2.7


6.60


S2


Austria...............


8,788


25,549


O.


10,50.


Denmark..............


20,951


O.I


43,59


..


366


Other Countries........


362,450


0.8


198,812


0.4


1,611,941


8.


Total..........


₱44,514,510


100.0


47,557,260


00


141
5


  


October, 1929


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


KerrSteamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
E
“SILVER FLEEI
Express Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigcrated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


 RR P
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18
BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


THOMAS BRESLIN
MINING ENGINEER
Qualified Private Surveyor
Room 6, Borromeo Building
154 Calle Norte America, Cebu
Tel. 372-L
Residence: abolo, Cebu


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


«n
'LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
P. O. Box 1423
Manila, P. I


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: “SALEFIBER”


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON &. ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


V
TE
An



UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
P26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE


110 P. Faura


Tel. 5-69-44


Telephone 22070
P. O. Box 1394
r
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Collections
Investments
Income Tax
Manila, P. I.
121 Real, Intramuros


NYA
SEGRNE EE D
AAAEI


73 Escolta 73


MR. MANUEL VALENTIN
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.
Manila, P. I.
244 Plaza Sta. Cruz
Phone 2-61-30


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


IN RESTONONG TO ADVERTISEMENIS FUEASE NENHON TEE ANENICAN GRAMEER OF COMMNERGE JOURNAL


TRUNKS


RIU HERMANOS —623-ESCOLTA-623


Manila Wine Merchants
Limited
174 Juan Luna Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


Recommended By Leading Doctors


Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake


TEL. 5.73.06


Nature's Best Mineral Water


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for


Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in Journal subscriptions for your friends in the
United States—men who are
(or out to be)) personally concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


SHALL YOUR EXECUTOR BE A BANK!
You make a Will so that the needs of your dependents may be
adequately provided for. You make it now because you know the
uncertainties of human life.
These reasons argue forcibly for the appointment of a corporate
Executor under your Will. A bank does not become ill, die, or move
away. It does not go to the United States or to Europe on an
extended vacation. Its facilities do not become impaired by time or
accident and its decisions are the result of collective judgment.
This Bank makes a business of managing estates. Its fees are
the same as would be paid any other executor.
INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION
TRUST DEPARTMENT


M    MA MAIAS DA MANENO GAANO  ANAE MIE


For lovers of 2 2 


HNE CARS


Lovers of fine cars will discover, in the new
Dodge Brothers Senior, one creation that
measures up to all their highest ideals
of what a truly fine motor car should be.


Here is a brilliant expression of the new
quality of Dodge Brothers craftsmanship under Chrysler leadership.


Modern in mode, vivid in action, it
unites the strength and sound dependability of Dodge with the sparkling
charm and spirit and vigor of Chrysler.


DODGE BROTHERS SENIDR


CHRYSLER MOTORS
PRODUCT


SOLE AGENTS:


17 9


ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, INC.
536-568 GANDARA
ILOILO
MANILA
CEBU


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURI


Can Y ou Writel Ten to One You Can!


PRIZE COMPETITION ANNOUNCED


For the Best Narrative, Not More Than 3,000 Words, of
Philippine Economic Progress Under the United States
submitted prior to January 31, The Journal will pay 150 pesos
For the second best paper on the same subject, 50 pesos


Similar competitions, open to all, in which substance will be weighted
equally with diction, will be announced frequently until further notice.
Determined to develop a literary market here, The Journal offers the
same price for manuscripts as that paid by first-rate American magazines.


There Is but One Condition
Competitors must be yearly subscribers to The Journal. If not already
subscribers, each should send P4 and his name and address with his
manuscript. In addition, editorial service—kindly, sympathetic literary
criticism—to the limit of the editor's physical capacity is
proffered free to all yearly subscribers.


TRULY A MAGAZINE—PREEMINENT IN THE PHILIPPINES


The men folks back home will
appreciate a box of genuine


AABCALERA
OTGARS
LET us send them for you—ALL CHARGES
PREPAID to any point in the United States.
Price lists may be secured at, and orders left
with the TABACALERA CIGAR STORE
57 Escolta


The time is short; place your order TODAY


THE STORY OF THE GOODRICH AIR CONTAINER—


Strong compression is created by
building the compression member
upon the OUTSIDE of the tube,
and then turning the tube INSIDE OUT before splicing.
Side wall blows delivered at either
edge of the compression member
are resisted, just as the sprung
bow resists further bending; and
side wall breakdown is retarded.
All inflation stretch in the Air
Container is at an approximate
right angle to the compression
member, keeping it "live” with
every flex of the tire while in
service.


THE GOODRICH INTERNATIONAL RUBBER COMPANY, INC.


DERHAM BUILDING, PORT AREA, PHONES 5-69-42 AND 5-69-43
P. O. BOX 1402
MANILA, P. I.
L. A. COOPER, Branch Manager


NO EEN O N ENEENENIE TEAT ETEN TE EMES TEN A ENAINIA OIO


When a nail punctures the Air
Container it is tightly gripped by
the compression member. When
the nail is withdrawn compression
instantly closes the opening.
The tread surface of the tire,
down to this point on either side,
is reinforced by a pliable bridge
of compressed rubber similar to
an arched bow of sprung steel.
During inflation the stretch in an
Air Container is confined to that
part supporting the lower side
walls of the tire and extending
down around the beads and flap.
Another Success by
the Producers of
SILVERTOWN TIRES


November, 1929


  


A Revelation in Driving
and Riding Luxury


No car will give you greater
confidence at the wheel than
the Dodge Brothers Senior Six.
It has such exceptional ease
of steering, such tremendous
reserve power, such eager,


swift acceleration, such sure,
smooth brakingAnd if you know and appreciate fine motor car style, no car
will appeal to your good taste
more convincingly.


E


SOLE AGENTS:
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS, INC.


ILOILO


536-568 GANDARA, MANILA


CEBU


EN NO LAAN ENA E EE E MEN CEEIN N EEEIEAL MOA


  


November, 1929


Interior Street-Car Advertising
Small in Cost—Large in Results


EL V

IO

E


For Rates and Particulars—Call Up
Telephone 2-19-11
Manila Electric Company
A. B. TIGH
Advertising Manager
134 San Marcelino
Manila, P. I.


Has Your Wife Seen the
"New Yorker”


ELECTROLUX


GAS REFRIGERATOR
A Splendid
New Model
No Motor—No Noise
Only P390.00
Or On Convenient Monthly Terms
Manila Gas Corporation
Showroom:
Tel. 2-16-43
5 Calle David


CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
HALF-A-CORONA
EXCELENTES
ES PECIALES
BELLEZAS
PRESIDENTES
Etc., Etc.


Watch
For
The
Name
ALHAMBRA
On Rings
and Labels—
It’s Your
Protection


Alhambra Cigar and Cigareite Mfg. Co.
31 Tayuman
Manila, P. I.


IMITATED BUT
NEVER EQUALLED!


N LON O N     O AN E


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
The American Chamber of Commerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I.
Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
P. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, VicePresident
John L. Headington, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
J. C. Rockwell
Kenneth B. Day


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Wm!H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavende?
R. L. Hiendh


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Cari Hess
Joln Gordon


MANUFACTURING
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Aif Welhaven
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
J. R. Wison"


COMMITTEES
FINANCE
W. H. Rennolds, Chairman
E. M. Gros
O. M. Schuman


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
L. L. Speliman
M. M. Salceby


PUBLICATIONS
P. A. Mever, Chairman
Roy C. Bennett
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, ChairmAN
W. J. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, ChairmOn
F. W. Butler
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
, Chairman
y L. VIa
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
G. P. Bradford
L. E. Nante
INVESTMENTS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
R. M. Cavenider


Kyrie Eleison—Lord, Have Mercy!
It has been a month of things-not-done with the executive. Governor
Davis has not gone fishing. He has not grown unduly impatient, as has
the daily press, of the fact that the legislative mill grinds slowly. Best
of all, he has not gone haywire, as the country generally has, over the
King-resolution vote in connection with the Federal senate’s consideration
of the tariff; a vote which stood 39-43 against setting up a new nation in
the orient, that nation to be the Philippines, and immediately taxable
under the American tariff. Governors, and no less legislatures, may sometimes be commended for what they refrain from doing: it seems now that
Congress will not even pass the tariff bill, let alone passing it with King’s
or Broussard’s extraneous addenda attached.
Yet the fire of oratory plays round the Philippine question in Washington, and the Philippines seem at once to spurn and to yearn toward
its hopeful but devastating light. The King resolution, if correctly remembered, would authorize the President to negotiate a set of international
treaties respecting the Philippines; that is, it gives with one hand and withholds with the other. Long are the years involved in negotiating any set
of treaties, and quick is the inclination of the Federal senate to reject them
—once executive diligence has patiently put them through. According
to men withauthority to speak, the Philippines are not really looking around
for a new consort, nor do they expect Uncle Sam to abandon them or drive
them out into world alone. Should he do so, they would be much in the
character of the buxom dame who, recommending herself to a marriage
bureau, remarked, “I can live with anybody—I have been divorced.”
There is something in smiling and keeping wide awake, but thoroughly calm. The work of thirty years could be scranped overnight, but it
hardly will be. The question seethed for awhile, filling men with perturbations, but Governor Davis’s watchful and silent neutrality helped a lot,
and feeling soon eased perceptibly.
Ben Wright, after six years, retired from the insular auditor’s post—
with pleasure in ridding himself of a wearying office, and commendation
of Goveror Davis's vay of handling questions risingto hinn frora the
auditor’s decisions. It is not radio news that another has succeeded Fighting Ben, ordinarily the auditor’s office is as barren of news of national
significance as a mildewed tombstone in Cementerio del Norte. Ben, not
the office, or the official, was the news.
More movies went talkie. The senate, too, went into many a talkie
caucus, but when this paper had to be typed Governor Davis was still
smilingly confident and the game was still being played on his own pitch.
Before this comment reaches the reader, the legislature will have adjourned
and what is really to happen will be known. Meantime a little act has
become law which empowers probe committees to summon witnesses and
examine them under oath, and to compel them thus to give testimony.
This looks bad for the weak side.
Unable to elicit information as to what the executive may do in matters
which remain under consideration in the legislative branch of the government, the newspapers have begun guessing. They have guessed, and would
it shall be truel that Governor Davis will not extend the beef-cattle-importation contract. Not to do so would, of course, the law remaining unamended, mean millions a year to the Philippine cattle industry—and


THE NEW FORD TRUCK
(CHASSIS ONLY)
With Front Bumper and Spare Wheel
₱1,640.00 CASH


The World’s Most Economical
Transportation Unit
SPEED...
DEPENDABILITY...
POWER!
Do Not be Misled by Claims of Economy
-Ask the Man Who Owns a New Ford
“After We Sell, We Serve”
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY COMPANY
MANILA
Iloilo
Bacolod
Cebu


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


4



TN
NY
P
  
November, 1929


anything bringing even a single million to any
of the islands industries just now is well worth
putting into effect. It is hard, however, to
bring one’s self to believe that so much confidence
in the resources of the islands prevails among
officials, but one may guess it does.
No doubt Governor Davis is watching another
matter closely, that of the radiograph contract
between the government and the Radio Corporation of the Philippines, which expires May 10,
1930. Recommendations for renewal have come
from most of the communities benefiting, which
in all are eight: Iloilo Cebu Zamboanga, Cagayan de Misamis, Tacloban, Davao, Aparri, Laoag. As everyone knows, the
telegraph service was formerly an activity of the posts bureau, and so it remains
excepting the portion here mentioned.
Some would even give this back to the
bureau, and are asking sums varying
from ₱15,000 to F350,000 (for the first
year alone) for the purpose. It was,
in the beginning, by mere accidental
arrangement that the telegraph service of
the old army signal corps fell to the lot
of the posts bureau: the functions of the
military administration were being distributed among the bureaus being estabA
lished under the civil government, and
so the posts bureau got the telegraph
and cable lines. Inadvertently, almost,
a branch of the Federal government went
into the dispatch business. Shall it now
gradually withdraw?
The radio equipment the contracting
company has installed may have cost
around P300,000; it is to be written off
during the term of the contract, and the
residue of profits, if any, is for the company; excepting, that of all the tolls
collected the posts bureau receives 25%,
the government being sure of this much
profit. The lot of employes is better with
the company than with the government,
it seems. The company is a subsidiary
of the Radio Corporation of America,
and its employes are associated therefore
with the world organization; the company likes to get its operators on a base pay of
₱125 a month as soon as they are competent,
while experienced operators in the posts bureau
lag along for years at P60 to P70 a month—
not a living wage for a man with a family.
Business houses do not relish comparing the
two services, the old being a nightmare to them
and the new very satisfactory in all respecis.
It is true that during a period of eight months
the new service has encountered some 1,100
complaints, 800 of them during periods of circuit
trouble. But it is also true that the old practice
of sending messages rush at triple rates has been
eliminated almost entirely, and during the eight
months mentioned the total number of messages
handled was235,000, of which 1,100 is 16 of 1%—
really a little less. One would say this is not
a bad showing, and the attitude of the public
using the service shows that it is not. One
firm’s experience has been an average delay of
30 minutes between Iloilo and Manila, as against
540 minutes in the old service (with many messages sent rush at triple rates), and an average


delay of 90 minutes between Cebu and Manila,
as against 600 minutes in the old service. The
service between Cebu and Manila can be improved, as no doubt it will be, particularly if
the contract is extended.
Such are some of the elements of the question,
another vital one being that the contracting
company has the benefit (which the posts bureau
would not have) of expert supervision both of
engineering and traffic by staff members loaned
from the parent company. These men are
employed for the transoceanic service and are
available for the interisland service. For


Kirby in N. Y. World
“Tell Papa where it hurts the worst.”


Maybe it hurts worst in the region of the Philippines.
equally competent technicians the government,
should it resume the undertaking, would have
to pay very high. It would not do so, and it
therefore would not put itself into a position to
render the service the public is now enjoving,
and an increasing personnel is benefiting from
by receiving living wages.
Another guess as to what will happen.
On October 10, a Sunday, Governor Davis
opened to public traffic one of the most strategically placed river bridges in the islands, the
General Antonio Luna bridge over the Rio
Grande de Pampanga at Valdefuente, Cabanatuan. The bridge is 605 meters long, of 13 spans;
originally begun years ago by a contractor,
the work was finally taken over by the government and finished by administration under the
public-works bureau. The cost is estimated
at about P900,000, which may be carried in
the mind of the taxpayer as a million.
The cost will very promptly be returned
to the treasury in tolls, which are to be


collected, on which point Percy A. Hill furnishes some data:
““The bridge will be a toll bridge for all
traffic except pedestrian, the charges falling
heavily on the trucking companies transporting
palay. The tolls on trucks are graded according to tonnage, from P0.80 to P7.40 for trucks
from 1 to 4 tons if loaded and slightly lower if
empty. Trailers used to pay the same tolls, so
that if a truck and trailer of combined 9-ton
capacity cross the bridge the tolls are, going
and coming, P6.50, or approximately 3 centavos
a cavan of palay carried. The argument used
is to place prohibitive tolls on heavy
traffic. For example, a 4-ton trailer
loaded pays ₱1.40, and P1.20 if empty; if 5 tons are loaded it pays P2.50,
practically double for the extra ton.”
It seems that passenger automobiles
cross the bridge for a toll of 30 centavos. Mr. Hill furnishes the following
schedule of tolls on trucks: Loaded;
IT FO.sO, 2f ₱0.90, 37 ₱1.20, JE
₱1.40; empty, IT Fo.50, 2T Fo.so,
3T ₱1.00, 4f ₱1.40. This will hit industry hard, but at least the bridge
obviates the oldtime ferry service over
the Rio Grande.
“The bridge at Pasong Insik (Chinese
Ford), north of San Juan de Guimba,”
says Mr. Hill, "was opened two months
ago and the only ferry-bridge remaining on the Manila-north road is that
over the Rio Chico at Gapan, where
a bridge, which would be far less
costly than that at Cabanatuan, is
badly needed. By reason of the Antonio Luna bridge, the Manila-north
road is shortened some three kilometers, to say nothing of eliminating the
waiting at the ferry during the rainy
season. The bridge is the outlet to
market in Cabanatuan (Rocky Ford)
of 3,417,800 cavans of palay (the
crop last season) from nine towns.
This does not include 750,000 cavans from the Aliaga-Zaragoza district, which
will be hauled over the old collapsible
bridge to avoid a 5-kilometer detour, nor
an egual amount coming into Cabanatuan from
the Bongabong-Laur district along the south
bank of the Rio Grande.
The utility of the bridge is not questioned,
but this year it will fill a special requirement
concerned with the new warehouse act going
into effect January 1 and killing the placing of
palay on deposit in Cabanatuan. Palay will
have to move over the bridge during the entire
season, provided prices offered are favorable to
producers. The law has proved a boomerang
and backed the rice industry to the rear"
which is getting quite far afield and is where
Mr. Hill’s notes must be closed. One might
hazard a wild guess that at his convenience
Governor Davis will look into the question of
bridge tolls throughout the islands, and tip
some functionary yoff to do something about
them.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


November, 1929


  


5


Tells Scope of MacDonald-Hoover Parley
The following article by Edward Price Bell is taken from the Chicago Daily News and is of particular interest because Mr. Bell is the newspaper man who brought about the very conference, between
Premier MacDonald and President Hoover, of which he outlines the scope. London man for the
News for twenty-five vears, during the past ten years Mr. Bell has devoted himself to world problems
affecting peace; and in this capacity visited the Philippines five years ago, obtaining interviews with
Leonard Wood, Sergio Osmena and Manuel Quezon. While the conference has already been held,
it is being followed by diplomatic negotiations no doubt very largely based upon what Mr. Bell says
here.—Ed.


“Bigger things than even a British-American
naval adjustment on the basis of parity and noncompetition in warship building, with a corresponding arrangement affecting all maritime
nations, will be discussed by Premier MacDonald
and President Hoover in their prospective
conversations in Washington and perhaps at the
president’s summer camp on the Rapidan river.
The whole problem of the relations between
the British commonwealth of nations and the
United States of America will come under review.
The prime minister and the president will ask
themselves this question: “How are we to make
certain that no warlike eventuality, from whatever quarter it may
threaten, shall imperil
the peace of the Englishspeaking world?"
To achieve BritishE
American naval parity or
approximate parity is
excellent. To put an end
to British-American and
general naval competition, with prodigious
economic and moral advantage to the world,
is better. But these accomplishments, assuming that they are made
effectual, are far from
exhausting the beneficent possibilities of the
British-American or the
world situation.
When the British and
American navies are substantially equal in combat strength, and when
rivalry in warship building no longer casts a
shadow over civilization,
Problem of Fleets the question of how peace
is to be maintained still
in War
will remain. Britain and
America and other sea powers, having decided
upon the relative proportions of their navies,
will be compelled to proceed to the further and
yet more vital conclusion of how their fleets
are to be used in the event of unpreventable war.
This question is wide open today. Sea law is
in the melting pot. Almost no views concerning
it have been formulated. There continues to be
talk of the 'freedom of the seas'—whatever that
nebulous and variously interpreted phrase may
mean—but vigorous thinkers, abreast of the
advance of international law, are beginning to


challenge the whole position suggested by the
ffreedom of the seas."
“Already in these dispatches it has been stated
that America’s classic doctrine of neutral maritime rights is likely to be reversed. That this
statement will have its verification in due time
scarcely needs be doubted. The moment of
verification depends upon events. Just now the
"freedom of the seas’ is not to the front officially
in Washington. Senator Borah has striven to
make it the uppermost topic—to put it ahead of
naval dimensions in British-American and world
politics—but he has failed. Both Washington
and London are agreed that the traditions,


prejudices and perplexities of sea law must await
naval agreement looking to acceptable relativity,
noncompetition and economy.
But the time is near when the larger problem
must be faced by Britain and America. It will
be faced by MacDonald and Hoover. Their
ideas may or may not be made public prior to
a more mature development of the international
naval situation. Nevertheless they will understand each other, as, before their conversations
are finished, they are virtually certain to understand each other with reference to every other
matter of importance to the harmonious functioning of the English-speaking states in their
own interests, which, of course, are indissolubly


bound up with friendly and trustful connections
embracing the other nations.
“The premier and the president will seek to
erect their peace structure upon the corner stone
of the Briand-Kellogg pact. It is accepted by
both statesmen as the world’s new political
starting point. Both regard prepact international political thought as either obsolete or in
want of review. This standpoint applies particularly to the 'freedom of the seas.' Many
persons reason about this and other international
questions as if the Briand-Kellogg pact (not to
mention the league of nations covenant or the
treaties of Locarno) did not exist. But not
MacDonald or Hoover. Neither is befogged,
nor so politically unreal, as this.
“Under the pact (again forgetting the covenant and Locarno) Britain may not attack
America, nor America Britain. Indeed, under the
pact there can be only
Who Is Aggressor? one kind of war in the
future—a war between an
aggressor and the rest of the world. Such a war
would be between a lawbreaking nation or
nations and law-abiding nations. Neither Britain nor America will
commit aggression, will
break the law.
"What MacDonald
and Hoover have to
consider, and if possible
to decide, is how, in the
event of an attack
threatening the peace of
the world, they are to
determine who is breaking the law and who defending it, in order that
their fleets may be in no
danger of being ranged
on opposing sides. No
war, if Britain and America can prevent it, no
PDUDOOO
collision between their
fleet if they cannot—this
is the principle in this
problem, which will engage two of the most
serious, honest and capable minds in the world
when MacDonald and
Public Works Photo. Hoover get together in
Washington or in the
woods of Virginia early
in October.
“It is a stupendous question, crucil, fraught
with weightier human interests than any other
now confronting statesmanship. Betseen lawbreakers and law defenders there can be no
ethical hesitation as to choice. In outbreaks of
war, however, the aggressor, some contend,
cannot be distinguished. They argue, that is
to say, that there can be no decision in such cases
as to who are lawbreakers and who law defenders.
If this difficulty were insuperable, the outlook
verily would be dark for any system or method
of marshaling the major force of civilization
against war.


Antonio Luna Bridge over the Rio Grande at Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija


Retail
Importers


obalippINe


American D


BOTICA BOIE


rug o


Wholesale
Agents


MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
We have been selling drugs for 98 years


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  


November, 1929


“But is this difficulty insuperable?
MacDonald and Hoover think not. It is
highly honorable to their statesmanlike temper
that they think not. They will not accept as
insuperable any difficulty which blocks the path
of international peace. They may not win
through. They may fail. The goal they aim at
may be for other and later statesmen to attain.
But at least the great Scotsman now at the head
of the British government and the silent, thoughtful, informed, stiffwilled man now at the head of
the American government will not lie down or
run away because somebody lifts the shout,
'Insuperable.”
“The probability that the doctrine of the
"freedom of the seas’ will be reversed or disappear
arises from the Briand-Kellogg pact. It means
that neutrality in widespread
Neutrality to be war is coming to be conceived
of as impossible. It means,
Impossible


too, a feeling amounting to practically a
conviction that any imaginable great war
will find the majority, if not all, the sea powers
on the side of the resisters of aggression. In
this event, naturally; navies would wish to
exercise the fullest belligerent rights in terminating the activities of the aggressor or aggressors
at the earliest possible moment. It belongs to
this point of view that ‘contraband,' whether
‘conditional' or 'unconditional,’ has become a
meaningless term and that blockade’ as historically used falls under the same description.
"Premier MacDonald and President Hoover,
informally, at any rate, will explore the problem
of extending the Canadian-American peace to
the relationship of the whole British commonwealth with the United States. Canada and
America are frequently disputatious but never
warlike. The effort will be to effect an identical
situation covering the whole English-speaking


world. This effort or idea well may contemplate the demilitarization of the British islands
in the Caribbean, with perhaps strategic and
financial concessions to Britain.
“These latter are still quite 'in the air, but by
no means absent from progressive speculation
relative to a permanent British-American accord.
We have not only the peaceful Canadian-American frontier, confirmed by generations of reciprocal friendship, but the nonfortification clauses
of the Washington Pacific treaty, deemed a
virtual impregnable safeguard of peace on the
premier ocean of the globe.
“Why not extend these examples of political
goodwill and sanity to the entire British-American frontier and this lay the securest foundations
yet devised of an international peace of justice,
the only kind of peace which can endure?”


(6l
1”
How Manila Newspapers Raise the Wind
Your Newspaper: 3rd Article


The largest single item of expense in the publishing of a newspaper is that for the paper itself,
newsprint. It is for the pulp with which to
make this paper that large areas of American
forests have been sacrificed during the century
which has elapsed since old rags ceased to be
abundant enough to supply all needs for raw
material for paper, and the discovery was made
that wood pulp or any other vegetable fiber may
be converted into paper—the subject of the first
article of this series. Many a newspaper has
gone under the sheriff’s hammer, unable to meet
its bill for paper; and others have closed their
history for the same reason but with more dignity, one means being, selling out to the opposition paper and letting one thrive where two
would surely fail.
The lengths to which small newspapers must
sometimes go to obtain paper involve the lugubrious efforts which are made the themes of
stories and popular plays. The honest editor
with the beautiful daughter holds up grimly
under the mortgage and rebukes the banker’s
solicitations for his daughter’s hand, and the
paper merchant bills him his paper by express,
c. o. d. This in idealized country towns in America; perhaps it has its counterpart in the Philippines, for the chief anxiety of every publisher is
his paper and how to keep getting it. In Manila, however, the capital of an aristocratic
class, angels are found for newspapers, in need
of paper; which can employ editors able to play
popular editorial tunes; and both the Philippine
National Bank and wealthy individuals have
served in this generous capacity—not, by the
way, excepting for a bank, an improper role.
There need be no concern with names.
The tendency in any community new in respect to newspapers is for too many newspapers
to be started; the heavy mortality among newspapers published during the early years of the
present regime was referred to in the second


article of this series. It was followed by the
death of all the Democrata newspapers, those of
the minority, and by the birth of a powerful
group of independent newspapers under the
ownership and management of the Roces family,
the T-V-T group. Consolidations and amalga

mations will continue to be the rule until Manila
newspapers are fewer, but better. Among all
the American newspapers started, the Manila
Daily Bulletin remains, a thriving, well-edited
and well-managed publication, the sole one in
the field. The Manila Times has arrangements
with the T-Y-T, and has the status of an afternoon newspaper with a Sunday morning edition
still enjoying principally an American clientele.
It has an American editor, other American staff
members, and the benefit of the trenchant pen
of L. H. Thibault, the man in general charge of


Battery of Presses, Chicago Daily
It requires gigantic rotary presses of this kind to run off half-million editi
such as American city papers regularl:
print


Associated Re-fuels
UKAT LEILELIIN
When the world’s greatest flying ship was re-fueled at Los Angeles
the gasoline selected was
ASSOCIATED GASOLINNE
More Miles to the Gallon
COMPA
ASSOCIATED OIL
S
ILOILO
CEBU
MANILA


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNAl


November, 1929


  


7


the T-V-T group. There seems to be a place for
the Times and its former prosperity seems to be
returning.
All newspapers derive their revenue from two
sources, subscriptions, including daily sales, and
advertising. Those less happily circumstanced
and needing some special source of money for
expenses are organs; and of all the means newspapers have of getting revenue, advertising is by
long odds the most important. But circulation
income is, among Manila newspapers, a greater
factor than it is to metropolitan newspapers in
the United States; an American city newspaper
will not expect to get from circulation even the
bare cost of its paper, but Manila newspapers
get more than the cost of paper from their circulation revenue, and, at the prices charged for
advertising, they must. There are some which
sell their thin week-day editions for five centavos, but they get ten centavos for their larger
Sunday editions; the day of the penny newspaper is far away and the pioneer penny papers
will be vernacular sheets. The key to the masses
is the vernacular.
Resorting to numerals as a device for anonymity, Newspaper No. 1, whose income was canvassed, was found to have collected about
P350,000 during 1928, ₱100,000 from circulation and P250,000 from advertising; and its
bill for paper was P50,000, about 15% of its
total expense.
Newspapers No. 2 had an income of P371,000,
of which P156,000 came from readers and
₱215,000 from advertisers. Their bill for paper
was P56,000, about 15% of their total expense.
Newspaper No. 3, during seven months, had
an income of P35,000, of which circulation
revenue was P14,000 and advertising revenue
₱21,000. Its paper bill for the seven months
was P5,000, about 15% of its total expense.
Newspaper No. 4, during eight months, had
an income of P95,000, of which P30,000 was
from circulation and P65,000 from advertising.
Its paper bill was P10,000, about 119% of its
total expense.
Newspaper No. 5, during eight months, had
an income of P221,000, of which ₱110,000 was
from circulation and F111,000 from advertising.
Its paper bill was P64,000, which was 30% of its
total expense.
The papers to which these data pertain are all
turning a profit; they include the most profitable newspapers in Manila, and it is seen that
their principal revenue derives from advertising.
The question of who advertises remains to be
investigated. For this purpose a slightly different grouping has been chosen, that of the
Sunday morning newspapers in English and the
Monday morning Bullelin. These newspapers
will serve as an illustration of all the rest.
The display advertising in one of these papers,
one Sunday morning, was found to total 993
column inches, of which 846 came from American sources—American merchants, or other
merchants advertising American manufactures
for which they are agents. That in another of
the four totaled 1,330 column inches, of which
1,056 came from American sources. That in
another totaled, 1,270 column inches, of which
1,142 came from American sources; and that in
the fourth totaled 1,243 column inches, of which
884 came from American sources. Predominantly, then, it is the advertising of American
commercial houses, and others having American
manufactures for sale, that furnishes Manila
newspapers their revenue. Wanting this advertising, the newspapers could not survive to
serve their readers unless other advertisers came
forward or unless very much higher subscription
rates should be charged, or other makeshifts
should be found partially adequate to an impoverished situation.
So much advertising derives from Americaosources, of course, because it is desired to sell the
goods advertised; and the public, for the most
part, is the Filipino English-reading public.
Only one outstanding class of advertising is still
addressed chiefly to the American-European
public, i. e., that of the women’s-wear shops
which appears in the society-notes columns of
the newspapers. Practically all other advertising is addressed to the English-speaking public
generally, in which Filipinos greatly predominate. It is the first thought of an American


merchant or manufacturer, in selling goods, to
advertise—a practice found to be profitable in
Manila only within comparatively narrow limits.
The types of goods advertised are few. The
bulk of manufactures sold in the Philippines are
not advertised at all; this includes staples such
as would be cried up to buyers in American cities
in the homeland in whole-page and double-page
spreads. The explanation is that importers sell
staples directly to the retail merchants, nearly
all of them Chinese, to whom the public goes in
search of what it wants and in quest of cheerful
opportunities to haggle over measurements.
prices and qualities. Buy from one Chinese
merchant or another, it is all the same; they are
likely all to be in a guild, or they are mere clerks
in a chain of shops owned by a single family or
by one man. The only advertising these retailers do is to keep open their shops fifteen hours a
day, ignoring alike the secular and religious holidays of the country. No one aspires to be a
Woolworth, and none becomes one.
Not staples, but a few modern inventions of


Judge’s artist, “Mac,” who
shares honors with Judge, Jr.
in High Hat, is worried about
Xmas-card ideas. That’s because he’s in New York. Out
here, of course, the thing to do
is just to send one’s ordinary
card to a friend, with a case of—
GURDOrr Gry
—and rest assured of your
friend’s eternal gratitude!
Then again—
RODLRIBOIN
SCOTCH WHISKY
—it’s preferred
for good highballs always.
Kuenele & Sreiff, nc.
Importers
343 T. Pinpin
Tel. 2-39-36
Manila, P. I.


high-unit cost are the things chiefly advertised
in Manila newspapers; the advertising follows
more the magazine advertising in the United
States than that in homeland newspapers. The
special comfort, luxury or necessity, usually
to be had on the easy-payment plan, is advertised here. One sees here no Wanamaker able
through the power of the printed page to draw
multitudes into his store for special sales. If some
budding Wanamaker should try the experiment,
perhapsit would fail—possibly the crowd would
continue to go bargaining on the by-streets.
Besides, while the charges in each newspaper
are low, the charges in all of them together are
high: to reach a public not exceeding 100,000
subscribers, many of whom reside in the provinces, would be to use practically all of the newpapers and pay a price commensurate with that
charged by a homeland metropolitan paper going
to double the number of subscribers in a single city.
It falls out that we have Manila newspapers,
of the size, quality and general merit they are,
because of a half-dozen inventions. Substract
two of these, the automobile and the phonograph, and the newspapers would be on lean
pickings. One Sunday newspaper had in one
issue, 334 inches of automobile and auto-accessories advertising, 110 inches advertising phonographs and records, 41 inches advertising patent
medicines, 110 inches advertising household
utensils, and 381 inches advertising sundry other
items. Three others, closely comparing with
this one, were checked. Radio advertising still
claims minor space, but increases.
Fortuitously, Manila newspapers have attained the position they occupy today because the
automobile and the phonograph, a new form of
rapid transportation and a new form of entertainment, instruction and diversion, were
brought to commercial perfection about the
time of the American occupation of the city,
and brought out here a few years later. Some
of the American merchants who early established
themselves here, and some of the other merchants, sagaciously reached out for the Philippine agencies of the new inventions, as these
happened to come along; and these merchants
became, as they remain, the great advertising
patrons of the newspapers. They are now sharing this position only with the manufacturers
who resort to more direct distribution through
Manila agencies of their own.


Another paper in this series on Your Newspaper will appear in the December issue.


Aside from being one of the richest sources
of antique furniture, much of it of genuine old
mission design and much of it of a unique type,
in Manila, the Philippines offer the buyer the
best of modern hardwood furniture. If desired,
this furniture will be made to order according
to any design the buver wishes. The craftsmanship is unsurpassed.
The Philippines manufacture, by hand, of
course, the world’s best straw hats, obtaining the
straw from the midrib of the fronds of the buri
palm. Wholesale shipments can be arranged
for through the Journal, which will put the
customer in touch with a responsible dealer.
The wholesale value of native beef cattle
annually marketed in Manila amounts to
₱1,500,000.
If vou wish to buy rattan furniture, buy the
world’s best quality in Manila. This city is
now manufacturing bark-side rattan furniture
whichis practically indestructible. The workmen
are all trained craftsmen, the product genuine
throughout. Find the shops that have this
type of furniture, the other type is destructible.


Truth
The truth is such a precious thing
One never should abuse it;
One should be careful never to
Promiscuously use it.
So therefore, ordinarily
Employ some neat evasions,
And save the precious, perfect truth
For use on state occasions.
—A. E. Macdonald, in Life.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


8


  


November, 1929


The Miracle of Negro Spirituals
By JAMES WELDON JOHNSON


The Spirituals are
purely and solely the
creation of the American
Negro. And their production, although seemingly miraculous, can be
accounted for naturally.
The Negro brought with
him from Africa his
native musical instinct
and talent—and that
was no small endowment
E
to begin with.
In comparing the Spiritual with African folk
song, we note the significant fact that both are
sung in harmony, and all other folk songs except
those of Hungary are expressed in unison. The
Spiritual is sung by a leader and answered by a
chorus, as in African folk songs. Generally
speaking, the European concept of music is
melody, and the African concept is rhythm. In
this respect the African music is beyond comparison with any other music in the world. The
syncopated rhythm of the African drumbeat is
amazing in its wealth of detail. It has a share
in one of the best known musical rhythms—
that of the Habanera, which is simply a combination of Spanish melody and African rhythm.
What was it which led the Spirituals to rise
above the base of primitive African rhythms and
go a step in advance of African music through a
higher development of harmony? Why did not
the Negro in America revive and continue the
beating out of complex rhythm on tomtoms and
drums while he uttered barbaric and martial
cries? It was because, at the precise and psychic moment, there was blown through or fused
into the vestiges of his African music the spirit
of Christianity, as he knew Christianity.
At the psychic moment, there was at hand the
precise religion for the condition in which he
found himself thrust. Far from his native land
and customs, despised by those among whom he
lived, experiencing the pangs of the separation
of loved ones, knowing the hard lot of the slave,
the Negro seized Christianity, the religion of
compensations in the life to come for the ills
suffered in the present existence, the religion that
implied hope for the next world.
The result was a body of songs voicing all the
cardinal virtues of Christianity—patience—
forbearance—love—faith and hope—through a
necessarily modified form of primitive African
music. The Negro took complete refuge in
Christianity, and the Spirituals were literally
forged of sorrow in the heat of religious fervor.
It is not possible to estimate the sustaining
influence that the story of the trials and tribulations of the Jews, as related in the Old Testament, exerted upon the Negro.' This story at
once caught and fired the imaginations of the
Negro bards, and they sang their hungry listerners into a firm faith that, as God saved Daniel
in the lions' den, so would He save them; as
God preserved the Hebrew children in the fiery
furnace, so He would preserve them; as God delivered Israel out of bondage in Egypt, so He
would deliver them.
Thus it was by sheer spiritual forces that
African chants were metamorphosed into the
Spirituals; that, upon the fundamental throbs of
African rhythms, were reared those reaches of
melody that rise above earth and soar into the
pure, ethereal blue. And this is the miracle of
the creation of the Spirituals.
How, it may be asked, were the Spirituals
composed? Were they the spontaneous outburst
of a group, or the work of talented song makers?
In the old days there was a definitely recognized order of bards, and to some degree it still
exists. These bards gained their recognition
by achievement. They were makers of songs
and leaders of singing. They had to possess
talents; a gift of melody, a strong voice, a good
memory and a talent for poetry. There was,
at least, one leader of singing in every congregation, but makers of songs were less common.
My memory of childhood goes back to a great
leader of singing, "Ma” White, and a maker of
songs, "Singing” Johnson. “Ma” White was


an excellent laundress and a busy woman, but
each church meeting found her in her place
ready to lead the singing. And, even as a child,
my joy in hearing her sing Spirituals was deen
and full. One of her duties was to "sing down”
a long-winded speaker, and even to cut short a
praver of undue length by raising a song.
"Singing” Johnson’s only business was singing. He went about from place to place singing
his way. He composed songs and his congregation joined in his singing with antiphonal responses. He was a great judge of the approHere’s how to
get Manitas:
Genuine
Manila
Hand Made
Long Filler
Cigars are
S
obtainable
R
in your city
A
or nearby!
S
A

List of
A
SA
N
Distributors
furnished
upon
request
to—
C. A. BOND
Philippine Tobacco
Agent:
15 Williams St.
New York City
or
E
Collector of Internal Revenue
Manila, P. I.


Manilas will
satisfy your taste!


priate song for any service and could come to
the preacher’s support with a line or two of song,
after a climax in the sermon.
A study of the Spirituals leads one to the belief
that the earlier ones were built upon the form
so common to African songs—leading lines and
responses. Most of the Spirituals and some of
the most beautiful slave songs are cast in this
simple form. One of these is "Swing Low,
Sweet Chariot.”
But as the American Negro developed melody
and harmony, he also went a step beyond in the
development of form. The lead and responses
are still retained but the response is developed
into a true chorus. In a number of songs there
are leads, a response and a chorus. In this class
of songs the chorus is dominating and comes
first, as in “Steal Away to Jesus.” In this song
the congregation begins with the chorus, singing
it in part harmony.
In a few songs this development is carried to
a point where the form becomes almost purely
choral, as in “Deep River” and "Walk Together
Children."
Carl Van Vechten has declared that white
singers cannot sing Spirituals. I agree that
white singers are, naturally, prone to go to either
of two extremes: to sing them as if they are mere
“art” songs, or to assume a "Negro unctuousness” that is obviously false, and painfully so.
I think that white concert singers can sing Spirituals—if they Jeel them. And if Negro singers
do not feel them, they also fail.
Through the supreme artistry of Roland
Hayes, these songs are transfigured and we are
transported. By a seemingly opposite method,
through sheer simplicity and adherence to primitive traditions, Paul Robeson achieves substantially the same effect. The essential that these
two singers have in common is that both feel
the Spirituals deeply. Mr. Hayes, notwithstanding all his artistry, sings these songs with
tears on his cheeks.
It is not, however, as solo singing that we
should think of Spirituals, it is rather as communal music, singing in harmony. The harmonization of the Spirituals by the folk group in singing them distinguished them among the folk songs
of the world. It is only natural that Spirituals
should be sung in harmony, for the Negro’s
musical soul expresses itself instinctively in the
communal spirit and in rich and varied harmonies.
Of the words of the Spirituals not so much,
of course, can be said as of the music. Both the
Negro bard and his fellow singers worked under
mental limitations that handicapped them.
Many of the lines of the Spirituals are trite, and
there is monotonous repetition. But there is
an appealing simplicity—and in some of the
Spirituals, real poetry, the naive poetry of a
primitive race—From the Readers Digest."


That’s Stimson 'Em Some!


Skipper Sam Pinch
On the thirteenth of June rose an awful typhoon
Off the southernmost coast-line of Sulu,
Inky-black was the sky, waves a hundred feet high
As a storm it was truly a lulu.
But our Skipper, Sam Pinch, didn’t waver or flinch
He remained at his post, never paling,
Let the mountainous seas rise as high as they please,
He kept to the course he was sailing.
For his courage was stout, not a flicker of doubt
Seemed to trouble or fret or delay him,
All the storms they could boast off the Philippine coast
Never seemed to disturb or delay him.
Many good ships were wrecked in that gale, I expect,
For the fury of Hades was in it,
But Sam Pinch remained cool as was always his rule,
And he brought us to port—on the minute.
Let the wild tempests roar off the Philippine shore,
There was never a one that could faze him,
Let the typhoons arise in the tropical skies
The worst of the lot wouldn’t daze him.
Would our Skipper, Sam Pinch, either waver or flinch
Would he shake, would he quake, would he quiver, "
When it’s ten thousand miles from the Philippine Isles
To his boat on the Chesapeake River?
—Berton Braley, in Life.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENIS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERIGAN CRAMBER OF COMMENCE JOURNAL


November, 1929


  


portation to Manila. It was necessary to get
desire to return to the Philippines by way of ports, the Russian vises we were two days in
Two trains leave Berlin each week for Moscow.
This time it was our London office speaking; I We left Berlin 36 hours ahead of time in order


Traveling Through Soviet Siberia
By B. SKOU
The author is the Philippine representative of Paike, Davis &: Company, manufacturing druggists, and he and his sister have but recently returned to Manila,
via Siberia, from a vacation in America and Europe. Mr. Skou’s are
the latest data available on traveling through Russia.—Ed.
“It can’t be done, on account of the war,”
they told me in Europe when I expressed my Polish, Russian and Japanese vises on our passSiberia. “Reserve passage,” they said, "via getting and they cost $11 each.
Suez, at once. The boats will be overcrowded.'
had arrived there from New
York when the Chinese-Russian conflict over the Manchurian railway was reported
to have grown serious.
I had returned to Manila
from Europe twice by the
Suez route. Wishing to vary
the monotony if possible, I
clung to the idea of Siberia
and made no steamer reservation. At least I should
have a visit with my people
in Denmark before deciding, I
thought, and so put the matter
off.
In Denmark I spent four
delightful weeks living the
simple life of a European peasant, on my father’s little
farm.
On the farm I made a discovery which may interest
other persons of northern
blood who have been living
long in the tropics. It is
possible to readjust one’s self
to the climate of the north
by manual labor. Stay away
from the stove, and keep
warm by working. Circulation, breathing and endurance
B. Skou, author of the accompanying travel notes, regaining health on his father’s
will daily improve. The musfarm in Denmark
cles will harden, and the chilly
air become pleasant.
Danish newspapers, when I was there, reto visit Warsaw, Poland. The city is a disapcorded terrible happenings in Siberia; everyone pointment, but Polski food is the best I have
told my sister and me that Red Russia was bad eaten anywhere and is cheap. After a frightenough to get through in time of peace, and fully dusty day’s travel from Warsaw, we arrived
impossible in time of war. But in the face of at the Russian frontier, the town of Niegoreloje,
all this discouragement we went to Hamburg to at dusk Baggage was examined with varying
inquire.
thoroughness; the foreign money of some of the
No, it was not possible to go by rail all the passengers was counted, and the passengers
way to Shanghai, as usual; we could only go to received certificates allowing them to take it
Vladivostok, first class, for 800 marks per ticket. out of the country. Others were asked if they
A Japanese steamer connected with the train, had any Russian money, which it is unlawful
and from Japan it would be easy to get transto bring into Russia.


BECOMING


NUEIIADR
MANILA.
F
90 94 ESC0LTA
MASONIC TEMPLE


N LASSES that merely correct the
Ueyesight Wnly serve half of their
purpose.
To be truly “better glasses” they
must fit the features too; in other words,
they must add to the personality and
not detract from it.
CLARK & COMPANY “better
glasses” satisfy their wearers on both
these points.
Always the best in quality
but never higher in price


Cameras are allowed, but must not be used
at railway stations except in Moscow. Everybody changed money at the government exchange at the official rate, one ruble, ninety
kopeks per dollar. The government keeps the
rate up artificially, the present value of a ruble
being not more than 20 cents. We had no
trouble whatever in getting over the border.
The sleeping cars were a surprise to us. Nothing more elegant or comfortable could be expected, but possibly the Soviet government had
merely requisitioned them from their rightful
owners at the time of the revolution. The
roadbed was as uneven as it could possibly be.
The train made the 9,328 kilometers to Vladivostok in nine days and 22 hours, an average of
39 kilometers per hour. We
ran down two cows, also a herd
of sheep of which we left five
dead. Two cars broke down
A
en route; one was repaired, the
other left behind. Passengers
from the abandoned car were
crowded into the others still in
the train. A young German
was billeted in the compartment of an American missionary lady, and both had to
make the best of it. On an
earlier train a Russian woman
had to share the compartment
of a German for several days.
It is the custom of the country,
it seems, and perfectly all right,
but the victims of these involuntary companionships have
to stand considerable razzing
from their fellow-passengers.
Dinner on the train cost 1.75
, rubles. It consisted of a generous portion of soup, usually
cabbage soup, with a big piece
of boiled meat in it; fish, generally sturgeon; meat, and dessert, generally stewed fruit of
inferior quality. In Russia a
huge plate of sour rye bread,
and in Siberia graham bread,
the slices cut more than an
inch thick, was on the table.
The meals were wholesome
and substantial.
The train stopped several times daily from 5
to 20 minutes at stations where boiling water
could always be had free of charge; and everybody bought teapots and brewed their own
tea on the whole trip. There were restaurants,
such as they were, at the bigger stations, and
stores where a few of the absolute necessities of
life could be purchased through a small window.
In the Ural mountains semiprecious stones and
ingenious birchwood pieces were also for sale,
sometimes cheap, sometimes at a high price.
Most of the Russia we passed through is as flat
as a pancake. Siberia is more mountainous.
Few trees other than birches and conifers are
seen. In central Siberia the birches were turning
vellow from the night frost—around September
10. A huge valley was flooded and innumerable
stacks of hay stood in a foot of water. Distress
will reign there this winter.
In Siberia the people seemed better dressed
and more intelligent than in Russia proper;
crowds were often at the stations, sitting of
standing quietly and showing no animation.
There were few smiling faces. Many of the
men were in long boots, while some of the women
were barefoot; in Russia, clumsy shoes made
from straw were common and furs were in evidence everywhere.
We spent three hours in Moscow, with a guide:
had lunch in a workers’ restaurant and strolled
around the Kremlin, within which the Central
Government carries on. We visited the fantastic church of Ivan the Terrible, with its nine
spires—each a small chapel. When it was
finished, Ivan asked his Italian architect if he
could duplicate it or possibly make a better one.
On being answered in the affirmative, Ivan had
the man’s eyes put out to make sure the church
he had just finished should be his masterpiece.
We were fortunate in reaching the Church of the
Redeemer at noon, for we heard the wonderful
(Please turn to page 11, col. 3)


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


10


ET
F
  


November, 1929


Vol. IX
No. 11


November,
1929


QUITE GOOD
The forecast of proposed legislation, which will have been acted upon
prior to publication of this month’s Journal, seems not so bad; a number of
bills designed to be helpful are listed, though not many bills altogether.
Again, however, there has been criticism of the legislature for idling its
time away and, as editors say, not doing anything. We would mildly differ
from this view, counting that legislature best which attended to the budget
and did little or nothing more than while away its remaining days in harmless discussion. For it may not be too often mentioned that too many
laws, not too few, are likely to be the bane of representative governments,
ours included. Thus we are to have some laws this year which we do not
need; indeed, the Philippines are very old and with their customary prac
tices well established they need little new law. It is observed that a court
of appeals is being established, when the more effective thing to have done
was to provide enough supreme-court justices to keep three divisions of
that court going, instead of two. The islands will not escape without
other objectionable law.
But there is some good law. While it seems that the more the banking
laws are tampered with, the worse the banking situation becomes, apparently the Schwultz amendments are to be passed; and maybe they will
be beneficial or do no harm.
Correcting obvious defects of the marriage law is all right; providing
that children shall not be born in prison is humane; extending the provincialgovernment act over more provinces of Mindanao and Sulu accords with
the inevitable, we suppose; and finally, the several bills creating more jobs
are not surprising. When the record is available next month for examination, possibly unusually commendatory things will appear in it. Irritating as the situation often is, we are yet of the opinion that an expert
would be astonished at the moderation of our legislature, not its excesses
given the frequency and duration of its sessions. Forty-three States of
the United States have only biennial sessions; one, Alabama, has quadrennial sessions; thirty-one limit the biennial sessions and none extends, as
does ours, to one hundred days, the limit commonly not exceeding two
months. There are other vital contrasts, none favorable to the Philippines from the viewpoint of the public weal; in annual sessions of a hundred
days, excluding holidays, it is impossible for any leader to keep the energies
of the members all harmlessly wasted, and comparative success in doing
so is the utmost that may be expected.
IT'S WELL TO REMEMBER
Has any State in the United States greater crop diversification than
the Philippines have? We think of none, though all of them have larger
immediate markets and much better marketing arrangements which they
are constantly improving more rapidly than we are ours. Seemingly,
however, when a demand for a Philippine product develops there are people
who will produce it. Within the last few years, if anyone has been noticing,
activity in other industries, principally sugar, and the prosperity which now
seems to have subsided in copra and Manila hemp, created an unusual
domestic demand for rice and the growers of that product rose as best they
could to the occasion. One year with another our imports of rice have been
enormously reduced, the farmers working against odds all the time. If
there be a desire to encourage the rice industry, an official condemnation
of certain bureau executives and public prosecutors who affect to see colusion behind every rising rice market would be timely and helpful; for
there is more likely to be collusion when prices are falling, as they are now
The official statement might well include the fact, if it be one, that the
government is pleased when growers have prospects of good prices, and
that no embargo will be laid against the crop. That an embargo was once
imposed, every grower still keenly recalls.


Turning to rubber, of which there is much talk of an idle nature, we
shall not have it here in quantity until the big users of it are allowed large
tracts upon which to grow it. Who wishes to grow such a speculative crop
which has oscillated in price between three pence and forty pence during
brief periods, when he can as readily grow copra and hemp? Even sugar
is less speculative than rubber. The man who will grow it here is the man
who needs large quantities of it, as we have said before and now apologize
for repeating; and he will grow it as a bulwark against market fluctuations;
rigged deliveries and the other vicissitudes of the trade. It would be well;
harm no one, to let him do so; it is a risk which he alone will assume, doing
so with eyes open, to minimize other risks (to him) which are graver factors
in his business. It would seem easy to articulate this condition with
general policy, but, regrettably, the reverse seems to be true.
HEADLINES
Most of the top-head news of the month has been, in our opinion,
misleading. It has provoked anxiety, embarrassed leadership and generally wrought mischiof. It is often hard for us to keep in time with the front
page in Manila; the present is one such occasion. The tune is too jazzy
for us, what with every man Jack that wishes blowing his own horn at the
cost of these islands. Fortunately, the tune is an old one and the public
used to it; this has lessened the harm that might have been caused. The
senate is engaged in attempting to make a tariff, not a Philippine enabling
act, or something even more out of the question. Is it thoroughly ethical,
then, because, say, one news service would popularize itself to the detriment of another, to run round Washington getting off-hand opinions of this
senator and that one on the Philippines, to be flashed out here for general
broadcasting? The King-resolution vote is the palpable excuse for far
more than was genuine news.
But advantage may be taken of the ill effects now being experienced.
Who gets panicky and sacrifices, will lose, and who keeps cool and picksup
the legitimate bargains the scared chap lets go, will win. The trend will be
upward as soon as Manila hemp starts moving; it has slumped steadily
for ten months, may go lower before it goes higher, but eventually it will
turn and back will come brisker markets. It is better to know how hemp
is selling than to report what senators say they are thinking. After all,
the senators may be spoofing, while the largest hemp crop ever produced
and the most puzzling market are very tangible realities.
NO-MAN NEEDED
Someone suggests that the administration needs a common-sense
no-man. We endorse the suggestion. His business should be to counsel
the various executive functionaries as to the wise thing to do, in contrast
to the extreme legalistic thing. He would be a buffer between officials
ambitious for their bureaus and the public jealous of its purse. He would
be a peace-keeper.
Take the sales tax, a good example. While it is generally objectionable, there is need for the revenue and the chiefest complaints arise from
its application in extreme cases (which the law may tolerate but never
contemplated), such as levying it upon the product of a factory making
goods here which are only shipped, not sold, to the owners in America, the
factory being a branch of their business. Before the tax was imposed in
such cases a no-man should have said, “Maybe you can do this, maybe
you can get away with it; but don’t, it isn’t the right thing to do.” Other
instances suggest themselves, such as those interposed between dealers
here and a legitimate chance to submit bids for furnishing the government
supplies.
A no-man’s attention would sometimes be drawn to the provinces.
For instance, the Malogo bridge in northern Negros might interest him
because tolls ruinous to the land-transportation business in the province
are being charged there. While the public-works bureau finds excuse in
the law, the transportation companies are drained of income which ought
to go into new equipment and improvement of the service to the public.
The tolls are too high, documentary evidence shows. The bridge cost
about P60,000, which the law would have liquidated by the tolls during
five years; but the tolls run to P4,000 a month, P48,000, 80% of the bridge’s
cost, in one year. A no-man should say, "Fix this now. Even if you can
charge such tolls, don’t do it.” One can see that with such a man at work
the administration should soon find the public more generally pleased;
and the treasury would be foregoing no revenue it really ought to collect.
What, in the last analysis, has distinguished particularly Andrew Mellon
as Federal-treasury secretary? His gifts as a no-man, nothing else. He
has been too extreme about the tariff, imperfect in other directions, but
with a good sense of balance as an exciseman. There is a place for a no-man
here.


November, 1929


  


11


A Reporter’s Probe of Lands Bureau
By FRANK W. SHERMAN


The JOURNAL wishes to make special note of
the Manila Daily Bulletin probing the situation
brief quotation will be made here, are now out
are a good piece of newspaper reporting. While 
as many of them are, essentially they reveal the
remedies.—Ed.
Just 10 vears ago the land laws now in force
in the Philippine Islands went into effect. At
the time the law was passed there was need for
amendments, but the amendments that were
made certainly failed to serve their purpose.
The law which existed before 1919 was based
on principles adapted to Anglo-Saxon needs.
The same law worked ideally in the United
States, Canada, Australia and other countries.
It would have worked the same way in the Philippine Islands had it not been for the fact that
political leaders desired to make party issues of
in
The Anglo-Saxon ideals were discarded when
the law was amended to accommodate politics.
The power was taken from the statutes of the
Islands and transferred to the director of lands
and his advisors.
Following the passage of the new law, a set
of regulations was drawn up by the director of
lands. These allowed the director the power to
"limit and de-limit, add and take away, change,
cancel, approve and disapprove” all applications
received by him at his discretion. With this
arbitrary power there seems to have developed
in the bureau of lands an idea that the bureau
exists to prevent persons from settling on public
lands. Instead of the idle lands being turned
into productive areas they are "protected” for
the future good of the country.
Despite the care that is taken to comply with
every letter of the law, all classes of people have
been disappointed when they have tried to get
anything worth while in public lands. The
“tao,” who has nothing to lose, finds it just as
hard as the company with capital that is anxious
to really develop a piece of property and make it
productive.
This is all due to the fact that the land law of
1919, with the regulations that followed it, has
an interchangeable interpretation, depending
upon the will of the director. No one has any
assurance of gaining anything under the present
“letter and spirit” system.
Any person may go to the bureau of lands today and apply for a tract of 1,024 hectares of
public land. The history of this case will be the
same as that of any other. The career of this
applicant first will be investigated. The applicant will be asked to deposit survey fees of
approximately P650 plus the annual rent, not
less than ₱1,024, plus the annual land tax of
approximately P2,048. The applicant agrees
that he will apply a certain amount, say P500
to ₱1,000, annually on the development of this
tract.
So far so good. If this applicant is the average one, however, he will soon receive a personal
letter from the director of lands. The letter will
inform him that if he can show P50,000 in cash
he will be allowed to acquire the property. If
he does not have it, he is out of luck.
The sending of this letter is one of the discretionary actions of the director of lands. There
have been those who have not received them.
In bringing to a close this series of 10 articles
on the bureau of lands, the writer takes this
opportunity to express his appreciation for the
response the articles have so far receivedComment on the series has not been all favorable. It was not expected that it would be. It
is impossible to discuss a question so popular as
this has proved to be without stepping on the
toes of some people! So long as no misstatements have been made, the writer offers no apology to those who consider themselves offended.
In many instances these articles have failed
to touch fairly, perhaps, on both sides of the
question. This may be explained in the fact
that the series was intended as an expose of the
unwise methods emploved in dealing with and
administering the public domain, with a view


f a series of ten articles by Frank W. Sherman in
in the lands bureau. The articles, from which
in pamphlet form at 50 centavos the copy. They
all of Sherman’s findings may not be as accurate
e truth—and the truth seems to invite practical


of offering some suggestions for changes for the
better.
It is not a question of assisting some individual
or group of individuals who have had the misfortune of having to deal with the bureau of
lands and who have had personal experience
with the many flaws of the system in vogue. It
is a question which involves the future of the
Philippine Islands, insofar as economic independence is concerned.
So long as the citizens of these Islands are
discouraged by the slow, tedious and expensive
method of obtaining land, just that long will the


FRANK W. SHERMAN


Islands be dependent economically. If the
country is going to advance, its greatest resource,
agriculture, must be developed. The greater
the development the greater the advance.
In the past 15 years only about one-third of
the applications made by homesteaders have
been acted upon and settled. That is, no titles
have yet been issued for two-thirds of the land
applied for since 1915. This fact makes poor
statistics to put into the hands of congressmen
in Washington who may some day be called
upon to decide the future status of the Philippines.
Better conditions have existed in the Philippines. In the early days of American occupation there were many successful homesteaders.
The waste lands of central Luzon were settled
only 20 years ago. Filipinos were the settlers,
and their only capital was brawn.
But politics and the bureau of lands have not
mixed well. The common Filipino who once
would have staked everything to contribute his
share towards the development of the Islands by
homesteading public lands has lost all confidence
in any bureaucrat.
Aware of the experiences of others, the average person now prefers to “buy” public land,
settle it, improve it, and take as much from it
as he can. Later, when the land becomes valuable, the bureau of lands can bring this settler


JACOB


LEVY


PHILIPPINE HATS


Buntals


Bamboos


Calasiaos


Balibuntals


Correspondence Solicited


227 Calle David
Cable Address: "


Manila, P. I.
“TEXTILES”


into court and let the law determine who is the
owner. The settler is allowed first choice of
taking up the land. If he is without funds and
fails he is allowed the value of his improvements
from those who bid against him.
After all, considering the present state of
affairs, this seems to be less expensive and more
sure, for once the settler signs any form from the
bureau of lands he is utterly at the mercy of the
“limit and de-limit" regulations of the bureau—
the discretion of the director has not always
proved to be good.
It is useless at this time to say more about the
bureau of lands and the system of land registration lest one gets further entangled in the national pastime—words without deeds. If there
is an honest desire for economic independence
and a healthy development of the Philippines,
legislative and executive action will follow.
This action will not stop with a lands committee
or frivolous amendments to the land laws. It
will be so deeply seated that it will pull up the
roots of evils planted by over-ambitious persons
years ago.
Through Soviet Siberia
(Continued from page 9)
choir-singing which in Russia takes the place
of organ music. The paintings are of the finest,
especially that of Joseph and the Child, inside
the massive dome. From the top of the church
we saw the hill where Napoleon stood and watched the burning of the city; it was to commemorate his retreat that the church was erected.
A view of Moscow withits many churches and
the Kremlin is strongly suggestive of the magic
cities described in the Arabian Nights. There
is nothing like it; the desire to see it again will
haunt one a lifetime.
Contrasting with the splendors of the past is
the shabby, ragged population—the unspeakably
decrepit carriages, the rattling old taxies, the
streets paved only with rough cobblestones,
and the general lack of repair in everything.
A few public buildings are going up and a few
streets are being asphalted. Provincial towns
have Moscow’s shabbiness with little or none
of its grandeur. The houses are mostly built
of logs and are unpainted. There are no gardens
and no flowers in the windows; the streets are
clouds of dust when dry and pools of mud when
wet. Some of the fields around the villages
were so full of weeds that only portions of them
had not been harvested.
The Russian government—communism? If
anyone believes it in fact the ideal it is theoretically, let him go to Russia and see its practical
results. He will see a blighted people—the most
miserable of all the white races. I had never
been in Russia before, and was there less than
two weeks, but it is plain to see that though the
country has rallied somewhat from the depths
to which it sank during the revolution, it is still
far below the pre-revolution standards. It is
still drawing upon the meager reserves left from
that period in order to keep going at all.
The upper and middle classes have been
destroyed, only the working class has benefited.
The peasants, the backbone of the Russian
people, are worse off than ever. The taxing


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


12


  


November, 1929


power is used for the ulterior ends of state; I was
told that if a peasant has more than one horse
or more than one cow, he is forced, by taxation,
to dispose of the surplus animals. His surplus
grain is requisitioned by the state; he has no
hope of owning the fields he cultivates and satisfying his hunger for land.
Bank deposits are encouraged, but depositors
may only make withdrawals to satisfy pressing


GOODRICH BUYS HOOD RUBBER CO.


VIn a Clg G Man GARI PO
wear Leader.—Acquisition of the property,
assets and business of the Hood Rubber Company at Watertown, Mass., by the B. F. Goodrich Rubber Company of Akron, as ratified the
last week in August by Hood stockholders and
directors, brings together two of the pioneer
rubber companies of America, effects one of the
most important mergers in the entire history of
the rubber and tire industry, and makes Goodrich one of the world’s largest manufacturers of
rubber footwear as well as a figure more conspicuous than heretofore in the production of
tires and other rubber commodities.
The consolidation brings a well earned respite
to one of the industry’s pioneer and prominent
figures—Frederic C. Hood, the founder and
president of the Hood Company and one of the
founders of the original Rubber Club of America,
parent organization of the present Rubber
Manufacturers' Association.
Founded in 1896 the Hood Rubber Company
has multiplied its factory capacity thirty times,
has become the outstanding corporation in the
rubber industry in New England and has the
largest single rubber footwear factory in the
world.
“The present Hood properties at Watertown,
as acquired by Goodrich, include 96 acres of
land, more than 60 factory buildings with a
combined floor space of nearly 50 acres, one of the
largest rubber chemical and research laboratories
in the industry and production facilities for the
daily manufacture of nearly 100000 pairs of
footwar, 3,600 pneumatic tires and 7,000 tubes,


needs, such as those of illness. It is too bad
that communism should have been experimented
with upon such a gigantic scale; it is to be hoped
that very soon Russia will discover what truth
it may contain and be able to discard its errors.
Passing from Siberia into Japan is like coming
out of a desert into a garden, or turning from a
land of decay and lost hope to one of life and
opportunity.


150 solid tires, 50,000 pairs of rubber heels and
15,000 pairs of rubber soles. The consolidation
gives Goodrich an annual sales volume exceeding
$175,000,000 annually. Hood sales in 1928
were approximately $30,000,000 while those of
Goodrich were nearly $150,000,000. It also
makes Goodrich an outstanding figure in the
rubber footwear business, adding production
facilities for nearly 100,000 pairs daily to the
Goodrich footwear plant in Akron with, its
capacity of nearly 25,000 pairs daily.
In connection with its expansion program
Goodrich has made numerous important changes
in executive personnel. President J. D. Tew
has announced the appointment of J. H. Connors, former president of the Republic Rubber
Company at Youngstown, as general manager
of the Goodrich mechanical division, in charge
of manufacturing and sales.
First Vice-President T. G. Graham is assigned
additional duties as he takes over complete
management of the manufacturing and sales of
tire division, and in addition continues in charge
of the health and production control departments.
T. B. Farrington, in charge of the factory
service division, in addition assumes charge of
processing and machine development work.
President Tew retains control over the research
laboratory and original equipment divisions,
with J. W. Schade head of the laboratory and
H. C. Milier in charge of original equipment,
reporting direct to him.
Total assets of the Hood Company last December 31 were $34,080,750 and current assets
were $21,743,000. Current liabilities were $4,-
041,270. Net working capital was $14,917,280.
At the close of 1928 Hood showed an operating


loss of $29,797 and a total loss of $1,478,104
this loss consisting principally of crude rubber
inventory reductions. Goodrich in 1928 showed
an operating profit of $9,014,360. Its total
assets on Dec. 31, 1928, were $117,071,002 and
its current assets exceeded by $53,000,000 its
current liabilities of $13,250,000. Hood officers
include Frederic C. Hood, president; H. Gagefirst, vice-president; A. B. Newhall, vice-president; Donald T. Hood, treasurer. Good production activities will be continued as in the past,
with the entire Hood factory operating as a
separate unit, Goodrich officials announce.
Mr. Hood on August 20 issued the following
statement to Hood tire dealers:
“Despite persistent rumors to the contrary,
Hood tires of the same high quality, are and will
be available to you through regular shipping
points, under our regular contracts. The
alliance of this Company with the B. F. Goodrich Rubber Company, one of the oldest and
most rehable companies in the industry and
known for its quality products for years, will
give to the makers of the tires you are selling
the benefit of the knowledge and experience of
the producers of the famous Silveriown Cord,
and is your assurance that you may continue
to sell and recommend Hood tires as usual without
hesitation."
I often think a sculptor is
A very lucky cuss;
Who never need to dread demise
Like all the rest of us.
For when he sees his end draw nigh—
As soon or late it must 
The bounder, all he has to do
Is make a face and bust!


My lover makes me wretched
On the level;
He takes my heart and twists it—
He’s a devil.
I’m never sure he’s faithful—
Well, what of it?
At least he keeps me guessing—
And I love it!


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
18400 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


NE
To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


14-16 CALLE DAVID


CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS


MANILA, P. I


THE VVIMEEMIRESS OF MMETACfIO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


November, 1929


-TE
  


13


Spanish Scholar Talks on Talkies


The talkies keep rollin’ along like ol' man
river, and in the Philippines when they are
installed in our high schools will be the first
practical substitute for the 900 American teachers who were at one time engaged in teaching
and supervising teaching in the public schools.
Corroboration of the JourNAl’s view comes
from all points of the compass, and is in happy
evidence in all talkie theaters in Manila. Being
about to quote from The Language of the Future,
by C. Villalobos Dominguez, of Buenos Aires,
translated in The Living Age, we would invite
attention to the fortunate situation of the Philippines, above that of most regions of the world,
in having as every-day languages English and
Spanish, the two picked upon by Sr. Dominguez
as destined to the widest survival.


Turning to those languages which are truly
Occidental and which are spoken by highly
cultured peoples, I see no reason to expect any
expansion of German, French, Italian, Danish,
and the other languages which are spoken by
relatively few people living in relatively small
areas. I therefore arrive at the conclusion (as
others have before me) that only English and
Spanish have any likelihood of overcoming the
others in the struggle. The reason is that both
English and Spanish are in the direct line of
descent from the traditions of Greco-Latin
culture (a requirement which alone would be
enough to exclude German), and for the present,
at least, they have the advantage over all others
in that they are spoken over very large and
scattered territories which not only are well
populated to-day but give every evidence of a
rapid growth in populations of unmixed race.
And, most important of all, both are spoken
on the American continents.
“Everything points to the ultimate predominance of English. The motion picture, for
instance, was invented in France; but, because


the United States was better equipped to exploit
it, the Americans have assumed a quasi monopoly
of this powerful means for diffusing ideas. The
result is that the screen has already had a tremendous influence in familiarizing the whole
world with the products of Yankee civilization,
in so far as photography and pantomime can


While waiting for the islands to grasp
the boon the talkies are to them, we should
like to know from Manila theater managers
when some or all of the following are to be
exhibited in the city:
On With the Show: A big girl-and-music
talkie, all in natural colors and with a
surprisingly liberal amount of plot, comedy and real eye-appeal. Well worth
your while.
Drag: Richard Barthelmess and Lila
Lee in an all-talkie that will keep you
interested and amused from beginning
to end. An unusual picture.
The Valiant: It will make you cry,
and it’s probably just hokum, but you
should see Paul Muni’s splendid performance in a very ticklish role.
They are recommended by A. M. Sherwood, Jr., movie critic of the Oullook
and Independent. He knows good ones
when he sees/hears 'em.—Ed.


perform this task. And now the Americans
have invented talking motion pictures, a development which is of tremendous importance, since
it enormously increases the possibilities of the
theatre both as a means of entertainment and as


a means of spreading ideas. This new device
makes it impossible to send the same films all
over the world merely by translating the captions.
Sound pictures which are not merely musical
must be produced in a single language, and this
language must be understood by anyone who
wishes to enjoy the pictures. It is in the English-language countries that the best and most
elaborate pictures can be made, and it is there
that the biggest audiences are found. Necessarily, talking films produced in any other
language will be less good. Thus an Argentine,
Peruvian, French, German, or Spanish motionpicture fan who wishes to enjoy the best films
must learn English.
“Can a more powerful weapon for the spread
of a language be imagined? Can any reasonable
person see any force which can oppose it? And
since, moreover, the various phases of culture
are interlinked, the more people there are who
know English, the more books and periodicals
printed in English will be read, the more opportunity there will be for those who write in
English, the more advertisements will be written
in English, the more products of the Englishspeaking peoples will be bought, and so on.
“It is already apparent that forced development of local dialects is reactionary, dangerous,
and vain, and the time will soon come when it
will be equally dangerous for the general good
to attempt to maintain national languages by
artificial means. In some respects, there are already obvious evidences of an attempt toward
internationalization, such as the steady substitution of Roman characters for Gothic characters and Japanese ideograms, and the adoption
of so-called Arabic numerals in Turkey. These
changes are largely the result of the development
of the typewriter.
“I am not trying to make predictions, but
merely attempting to analyze a problem which
exists and to draw the logical conclusions from
this analysis. Possibly new or unforeseen forces
will providentially arise; but it is wise not to put


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM


can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
all Yarders in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Islands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


IF YOU BUY TIRES ON FACIS...
YOU WILL BUY


Here are the facts:
45,000 CRAFTSMEN
backed by
40 YEARS' EXPERIENCE
financed with
$195,000,000 RESOURCES
annually using the rubber from
55 MILLION TREES
and the best cotton from
160,000 ACRES
to make tires so good that
26 MILLION DUNLOPS ARE NOW
RUNNING


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


14


  


November, 1929


too much faith in a miraculous Providence when
one is attempting to study the march of events.
“One thing is certain: the smaller languages
and dialects will die off more and more quickly.
The time has passed when a ridge of mountains
a river, or a valley can separate two towns and
permit their inhabitants to speak different dialects. It was in that way that provincial Latin
degenerated into the various Romance languages.
To-day, however, steam navigation, printing,
railroads, postal and telegraphic service are
enough to accentuate or maintain uniformity
of language within each nation and within its


colonies or within the colonies which it once held.
This process by which many local dialects fuse
into a single language which for one reason or
another reaches a position of preeminence and
becomes the national language will tend to repeat
itself in the broader field of world languages.
For the means of communication mentioned
above are now augmented by aviation, motion
pictures, and the wireless telephone, and not
only do rivers and valleys offer no obstacles to
communication, but even the highest mountain
ranges and the broadest oceans have been overcome."


Useful Plants in Foreign Lands
By P. J. WESTER


This is the third article in a series on this subject by Mr. Wester. The next will appear in an
early issue.—Ed.
Rice, the most important crop in the Philippines, is probably a native of India or IndoChina, whence it has spread to all countries
suited to its cultivation and has become one of
the food staples of the world. It was firmly
established in Babylonia some time before
Alexander made it a part of his empire, according to Delandolle, and reached Syria about the
beginning of the Christian Era. Thence it
spread to Egypt, and finally reached Italy in
1468. Long before the Arabs had carried it into
the Iberian peninsula. Prior to the close of the
seventeenth century it was already established
in the New World (n South Carolina).
When and by whom rice was introduced into
the Philippines will always remain unknown.
Since it was in cultivation in China more than
2800 years B. C., we may be sure that it is also
of very ancient introduction into the Philippines,
where it has become the most important crop as
well as the staff of life of the people. With an
area of 1,785,000 hectares planted to rice vielding 2,200,000 metric tons, valued at P183,300,000
in 1928 this is about as strong an argument in
favor of plant introduction as I know of. I am


the last to begrudge the unknown soldier his
monument, but what of the unknown human
benefactors who have helped to carry rice around
the world?
The chayote is one of the latest examples of
successful plant introduction into the Philippines. About half a dozen fruits of this excellent vegetable were received by the writer from
the Office of Foreign Plant Introduction, Bureau
of Plant Industry, U. S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., in 1920. As an
insurance against accidents they were divided
into two lots, one of which was sent to the
forestry nursery in Baguio, while the other was
mailed to James A. Wright, then the principal
of the Trinidad agricultural school. Both were
successfulin propagating the chayote, which now
is common in Baguio and has already become
disseminated to a considerable extent into other
parts of the Philippines, and in time may be
expected to become a standard vegetable
wherever it can be grown. Already it is being
shipped from Baguio and marketed in Manila.
The ordinary chayote does not thrive at sealevel, and does the best at elevations above 450
meters. But a few months ago I received from
O. W. Barrett in Porto Rico, four chayotes of a
variety reported to do well at sea-level. From


this material a plant has been raised in Manila
that promises to become the progenitor of a new
race that will grow in the hot low-lands. Aside
from its value from the fruits it is believed that
the chayote could be grown and used as an asparagus substitute.
Other useful plants recommended for introduction into the Philippines include the following species:
The onIBAsu, Euryale ferox, is an ornamental
perennial spiny aquatic herb ranging from northern India to China and Japan. It is closely
related to the lotus and the water lily. The
leaves are round, from 30 to more than 100 em.
across, dark green above and purplish and spiny
beneath. The flowers are about 5 em. across,
and in color vary from red to blue and purple.
The round fruit attains a diameter of from 5 to
10 em., and contains 8 to 20 large seeds, sometimes as big as cherries, embedded in a fleshy
pulp. These are gathered and roasted and eaten
like those of the lotus. In China the onibasu
is said to have been in cultivation for some 3000
years. It has been introduced into America
and Europe, where it is grown as an ornamental.
The swiss CHArd, Beta vulgaris cicla, is a
biennial herb 50 em. tall or more, probably
derived from a plant found wild along the coasts
of southern Europe. The leaves are large, dark
green, tender, and fleshy, and make excellent
spinach. The stalks are thick, fleshy and tender,
and may be used as a substitute for asparagus.
The chard has been introduced into the Philippines, and it has been demonstrated that it
thrives at all seasons, both at sea-level and in
the mountain regions. As vet it is practically
unknown, but is certain to be extensively cultivated as soon as it becomes better known. The
seeds should be sown thinly in rows about 25
cm. apart, and thinned and transplanted to
about 20 em. apart in the row. Seeds may be
purchased from most dealers in garden seeds,
but are sold under various names, like Chard,
Leaf Beet and Silver Beet.
The Itono. Geitonoplesium cymosum, is a rather
large leafy climber native of Eastern Australia


y bically Thilippine
CHIKISIMAS CARDS


INE of Our exclusive PhilipOlia aaaa an
to your greetings to the
n
folks back home.
We would suggest that you place
your order for cards as early as
possible so that we may print or
engrave them for you carefully.
Come in today and select a Philippine design.


Philippine Education Co., Inc.
101-103 Escolta


MIKE SHUL FACTURi
STYLE CREATORS
286 San Marcelino
MANILA


75e
re
MHOE
Built by Filipino Craftsmen
PAHERE are HIKE models for
L every member of the family—
quality shoes, yet moderately
priced


There are HIKE
Shoe Stores in
most towns
t hroug hout
the Philippines


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


November, 1929


AN SHA
  
PE
  


15


OX Y GEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure


HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hydrogen
99.8% pure
ACETYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes
WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops
BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
i Electric Storage Batteries


Philippine Acetyiene Co.
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.


from Victoria to Queensland. The leaves are
linear to lanceolate-oblong. The small flowers
are borne in loose terminal clusters, followed by
small dark blue fruits. The tender shoots make
a fair substitute for asparagus, to which the itono
is related.
The JATOBA, Hymenaea courbaril, is a large
spreading tree, often 30 meters high, ranging
throughout tropical America at low and medium
altitudes. The leaves have two leaflets, obliquely ovate to oblong, thick and leathery, up to 10
cm. long. The large flowers are whitish to purplish,
and are followed by rough brown pods, 5 to 10
cm. long to 45 mm. broad, somewhat flattened,
and contain usually 2 large seeds embedded in a
dry mealy sweet edible pulp. The tree does best
in sandy loam. It yields excellent timber and
is related to the ipil and narra.
The pecego, Chytranthus manni, is a small
tree of a palm-like aspect about 5 meters tall,
a native of Angola and San Tome in tropical
West Africa below 700 meters altitude. The
large pinnate leaves are 90 to 120 em. long, with
5 to 7 pairs of leaflets 25 to 45 cm. long and 7
to 10 em. broad. The leafstalk is often more
than 30 cm. in length. The fiowers are borne in
dense oblong clusters growing from the old
wood. The edible fruits are 3-lobed, shorter
than broad, about 5 em. across, with a wrinkled
leathery reddish-brown shell. It is related to
the Chinese litchi.
The orrr-coro, Couepia rufa, is a handsome
large tree up to 20 meters high, ranging from
Pernambuco to Amazonas, Brazil. The leaves
are oblong, 17 to 27 em. long, thick and leatherv,
glossy above and reddish-velvety beneath. The
flowers are borne in terminal clusters. The fruit
is irregularly roundish to roundish-oblong,
wrinkled, 12 cm. in diameter, with bright yellow
edible much appreciated flesh. It is related to
the apple.
The KELAngo, Fusanus acuminatus, is a tall
shrub to a tree 9 meters high, ranging over the
greater part of Australia, Queensland excepted.
The leaves are opposite, lanceolate and leathery,
usually to 8 em. long. The flowers are produced in great profusion, and are assembled in
small terminal clusters. The fruits are round,
about 2 cm. across and one-seeded. The flesh
makes excellent jelly and preserves, and may be
sundried and stored like apples. The seeds also
are of good eating quality.
The NYTIA, Conyza aegyptiaca, is an annual or
biennial herb relafed to lettuce, a native of tropical Africa. The leaves are linear-oblong to
oblong-spatulate, coarsely toothed or pinnatified,
5 to 10 em. long. The fiowers are yellowish.
In lower Kongo Belge the leaves are marketed as
a vegetable.
The CHAMBURO, Carica candamarcensis, is a
small semi-herbaceous tree to 6 meters high, a
native of the highlands of Colombia and Ecuador. In appearance it strongly resembles the
papaya, a close relative, from which it differs in
climatic requirements, growing at elevations
ranging from about 1800 to 3000 meters. The
fruit is 7 to 10 em. long, ellipsoid and pointed,
with 5 well marked grooves, deep orange yellow,
with sub-acid and aromatic flesh about a centimeter thick, forming a cavity containing many
seeds embedded in gelatinous edible pulp. The
flesh is too acid to eat raw, but is excellent
cooked with sugar or made into iam or preserves.
The chamburo is commonly cultivated in Ecuador and Colombia, and was introduced into the
highlands of Ceylon 30 vears ago where it is
commonly grown, and whence seeds were procured by the writer some months ago for planting in Baguio, where it is hoped it will prove a
successful addition to the few fruits thriving
there.
The PIRANGA, Baciris piranga, is a small, handsome spiny, almost stemless palm, a native of the
States of Para and Amazonas, Brazil. The
leaves are pinnate, up to 150 em. long, the fruits
are ovoid and smooth, 15 em. long, and have
reddish subacid pulp highly esteemed for food,
ripening in February.
NThe PALILLO, Campomanesia lineatifolia, is a
small tree about 3.5 meters tall, a native of eastern Peru to Amazonas, Brazil, in moist regions.
The leaves are ovate to ovate-oblong and longpointed, 7 to 13 em. long and about half as wide,
hairy beneath. The fragrant white flowers are


borne singly. The fruits are round and yellow,
4 em. across. They taste like guavas to which
the plant is related and are used like them. The
tree is cultivated in Peru.
The corACAre, Cereus coracare, is a spiny leafless cactus found in Paraguay. The fruit is the
size and shape of an apple, and is of excellent
taste.
The TASAJO, Hylocereus undatus, is a climbing
or trailing leafless cactus with 3-winged practically spineless stems, widely disseminated in
the tropies and subtropics as an ornamental.
The handsome white flowers are 20 em,. long or
more, and open at night. The red, edible fruit
is oblong, 10 em. long, covered with large scales.
A variety of this species was long ago introduced
in the Philippines, but it rarely bears fruits, and
is of no cconomic importance. In Jamaica the
flower buds are eaten in soups like okra to which
they are reported equal if not superior as a vegetable. Two varieties grow in Yucatan whose
fruits are considered among the best in that
country. The Chacoub, distinguished by the
purple edges and tips of the perianth segments
and the globose reddish purple fruit; and the
Zaccoub, which is distinguished by its creamy
white fruit.


BEWARE OF THIS ELEMENT WO!


At the Rochester meeting somebody said that
the job of the safety man in the chemical industry is a tough one because new elements and
new compounds are constantly being discovered.
He advised that it was the safety man’s job to
become familiar immediately with the physical
and chemical properties of all such new substances.
Our contemporary The Syracuse Chemist has
recently reported a new element No. 93
Woman. Symbol Wo, a member of the human
family. This new element has the following
properties:
Occurrence:—Isabundant in nature; found both
free and combined, usually associated with men.
Physical Properiies:—A number of allotropic
forms have been observed. Their density,
transparency, hardness, color, boiling and melting points vary within wide limits. The color
exhibited by many specimens is a surface phenomenon and is usually due to a more or less
closely-adhering powder. It has been found
that an unpolished specimen tends to turn green
in the presence of a highly-polished one. The
boiling point for some varieties is quite low, while
others are likely to freeze at any moment. All


varieties melt under proper treatment. The
taste varies from sweet to very bitter, depending
upon environment and treatment.
Chemical Properties:—Absorbs, without dissolving in, a number of liquids, the activity being
greatly increased by alcohol. Absorbs seemingly unlimited quantities of expensive foods.
Many naturally-occurring varieties of Wo are
highly magnetic. In general, the magnetism
varies inversely with the density and size, directly
with the square of the valence and inversely
with the cube of the age. Some varieties tend


TAtai Gun ant ratile Co.


OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OUR


16


P
 A
 1)
  


November, 1929


"For No Man Knoweth the Hour"


The last time I saw the Cabral family together
was on a midweek day prior to Sunday three
weeks ago. It was in their store on Taft avenue
and calle Padre Faura, and the family was at
lunch. One noticed, even while making purchases, the innate family discipline of the Filipino family of this type, the respect of the
younger members for their elders, and the instant obedience to the father. The meal was a
frugal middle-class one, plates of boiled rice,
smoked fish, boiled vegetables, bananas. The
happiness prevailing in this family was impressive, they had joy in each other’s company and
the fact was evident in their demeanor.
Their store is well situated to cater to students,
both of the University and of the Central School.
It is well stocked with sundry school supplies,
Magnolia products, etc., and serves meals to
collegians. Everyone is waited upon as
promptly and courteously as possible: there are
rush hours and rush minutes, but the service
runs smoothly; to the Central School especially
it is an advantage to have as good a place so
convenient to the school ground, just across
calle Padre Faura. All this one noted, having
seen the store grow to its present proportions
from the tiny shop of a few years ago; and one
said to one’s self, “Here is a Filipino making
good in business, starting in a modest way, giving
the business close personal attention and converting the profits into larger capital—satisfying
the trade. The children are assured of their
education, at the same time they are learning the
ways of business.”
The next Sunday the family had an outing;
they piled into the automobile and drove out
into Laguna. Coming back to town at dusk,
in passing, perhaps at racing speed, another car,
the Cabral car collided with a carretela which,
in the gathering darkness, the driver had not
seen. In this collision the father was killed,
his sister and his wife seriously injured. The
notice in the Monday morning papers was a
shock to patrons of the store. I visited the
store again. The children, disciplined as they
are, were carrying on; but it moved one to see
them burdened with such grief They were
going through the hardest day of their lives, and
doing, no doubt, much as their father would
have had them do.
Ever thoughtful of them, he had not left them
destitute of everything save the store. Was
there insurance? Oh, yes.
Having a practical turn of mind and knowing
the inevitable hazards of life, Melchor Cabral
had carried insurance on his life to the amount
of P17,000; and now, as an imperishable memory
of their father, the family have this capital and
the business proceeds to the fullest advantage
possible under the circumstance of the loss of
the head of it.
“Without leaving the house,” wrote the widow
to one of the insurance companies, which settled
its claim first." I was able to get the insurance money.” This claim was for ₱4,000;


to form Anne-ions, others cat-ions. Their ionic
migrations vary widely. All varieties exhibit
great affinity for Ag, Au, and Pt, silver, gold,
and platinum, and for precious stones in
both chain and ring structures. The valence
toward these substances is high and its study is
complicated by the fact that the residual valence
is never satisfied. Many stable and unstable
unions have been described—the latter in the
daily press. Some varieties, Veing highly explosive, are exceedingly dangerous in inexperienced
hands. In general, they tend to explode spontaneously when left alone temporarily by man.
The application of pressure to different specimens of Wo produces such a variety of results as
to defy the Principle of LeChatilier.
Uses:—Highly ornamental. Wide application in the arts and domestic sciences. Acts as
a positive or negative catalyst in the production
of fever, as the case may be. Useful as a tonic
in the alleviation of sickness, low spirits, etc.
Efficient as a cleaning agent. Equalizes the distribution of wealth. Is probably the most
powerful (income) reducing agent known.
—Bulletin, National Safety Council.


while the widow was still in hospital, agents of
the company had attended to the details establishing oflicially the fact of death, and the company had then sent along its check covering the
claim.
This is a vivid example of the value of life insurance in plans undertaken to advance the economic position of a family; so much depends upon
the head of the family that ample insurance is
necessary for the family’s due protection.
October furnished another similar instance,
the accidental death by pistol-shot of Dr. Miguel


Lim, of Camiling, Tarlac. Dr. Lim collected
P55 in fees for examining applicants for insurance, from the general agency of the Insular Life
company. With this money he bought a pistol,
and that same day, in demonstrating the
pistol to a friend, he discharged the weapon
accidentally and wounded himself fatally. He
had been insured for P2,000 and the claim has
been paid.
“I have insured my life for P1,000 what do
you think of it?” a man in a clerical position
reports. “I decided to do so because of the


articles vou have been running in the Journal.
I pay a little more than ₱29 twice a year. Is it
all right?” It surelv is all right. This man,
still quite young and only ordinarily fortunate
would leave his dependents scarce anything if
he died now, wanting insurance; but P1.000
would be a substantial capital for them. If he
lives, he will have the P1,000 with earned interest, from the premiums he pays. After he pays
awhile, the policy will have a loan value
which will enable him to buy a home or make
some other sure investment. The ₱1.000 is
little enough, but it is enough to ward off actual
poverty; on the basis of this man’s earnings it is
a reasonable amount for him to carry.


The Philippine Education Company, Inc.,
is taking out group insurance covering its 450
employes, part of the premium coming from the
company and part from the employes. The
policy is present protection and a form of oldage pension. Such practices are commendable
from every viewpoint, inculcating thrift and
imbuing every employe with reasonable confidence in his future. No man knoweth the hour or
the day when death cometh.


—W. R.


The Insular Life Assurance Co., Ltd.
MANILA, P. I.


ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oansonrealestates repayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
FOR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


HOME OFFICE


Call or write for particulars to:


4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 11
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
Kneedler Building
Manila, P. I.
Telephone 2-36-74


IN RESTOMDING TO ANVERTISEMENIS FUEASE MENION THE AMERICAN GRANBER OP COMMERCE JOUANAL


November, 1929


R
  


17


Haphazard Studies in the English Language
(Continued from October)


bid. We should "bid a man go," not bid him
to" g
big. Frequently misused for great or large,
and better applied to the iower animals than
to men.
Great” is applied to all kinds of dimensions
in which things can grow or increase; "large”
is properly applied to space, extent, and quantity; "big” denotes great as to expansion or
capacity. “Big” may be justified in great
girth—a big man, but "large” is prreferable to
denote tallness and size in proportion. “Great”
is used of men’s reputation, character, or
ttainments. Abraham Lincoln was both a
large and a great man, but it would be inele,
nt if not incorrect to say that he was a
big man.
house, a room, a heap, a pile, an army,
etc., is great or large; an animal or a mountain
s great or big; a road, a city, a street, etc.,
is termed great, rather than large. We speak
ectly of "an event big with the fate of
nations.”
birth. Look up the difference between this
word and berth in the main vocabulary of this
dictionary.
An old word for a small piece of anything, and often used absolutely, as “There
everal bits in the collection to delight an
are
en used in phrases expressive of
egree, as "a bit older, or wiser."
E
Though sometimes regarded as a colloquialism,
the word is of ancient and accepted usage.
ick, blacken. Not to be used indiscriminately. We black boots, but blacken reputations.
blame it on. A gross and improper expression.
We may blame a person “for an offense, or
lay blame “on" him, but to “blame it on" is
not even excusable slang. It is sometimes
used by persons of whom better things might
be expected
blatant. Should be pronounced with the first
a long. Perhaps the slang word blah, a as in
far, came from the word "blatant.”
blessed. The adjective is pronounced bles’ed,
the participle blest.
blowhard. Not a refined term, and should be
replaced by boaster when speaking of one who
boasts.
boatswain. The only pronunciation recognized by boatswains themselves is bo’sn.
both. Frequently misused with absurd effect,
as in “They both met at dinner.” “They
both resemble each other.” In such cases
it is a simple redundancy; also in the following examples: “He holds the offices of both
the secretary and the treasurer.” “He lost
all his property—both houses, lands, and
ready money.”
Do not say “John and James both are here,”
but “Both John and James, etc."
In negative sentences “both” is sometimes
so used that the meaning is obscured; thus,
“Both candidates were not elected.””
Was
either of them elected, or were they both
defeated? Such sentences require reconstruction to make their meaning clear.
both alike. In this connection “both” is misused. It may be used with like, but not correctly with alike. “They are both alike” is
improved by omitting "both,” while the following sentence is correct: “Both children are
like their mother.
bound. A colloquialism in the sense of determined, as in “We are bound to go to the
theater," or with the meaning of sure, certain,
as in “Children are bound to play.”. This use
has been called by some modern writers a
barbarism.
Bourbon. Pronounced bur’bon in Kentucky;
boor’bun when applied to the island and
dynasty.
brace. See score.
brand new. Pronounce the d in brand. Many
writers and speakers erroneously omit it,
bran new.
brethren. Often mispronounced breth’-er-en.
It should be two syllables only, brethren.


bring, fetch, carry. Erroneously used as
interchangeable, and care should always be
taken in discriminating between them.
To bring is simply to take with oneself
from the place where one is; to fetch is to go
first to a place and then bring a thing; whatever is near at hand is brought; whatever is
at a distance must be fetched: the porter at
a hotel brings a parcel, a boy who is sent for it
fetches it. Bring always respects motion
toward the place in which the speaker resides;
fetch, a motion both to and from; carry,
always a motion directly from the place or at
a distance from the place. A servant brings
the parcel home which his employer has sent
him to fetch; he carries a parcel from home.
Bring is an action performed at the option


of the agent; fetch and carry are mostly done
at the command of another.
Do not say, "When you come home, fetch
some berries,” but “bring some berries."
Say “Fetch me my hat from the hall," and
“carry your umbrella with you.”
The distinction between bring and fetch
is sharply drawn in this passage from the
Bible: "“And as she was going to fetch it,
he called to her and said, Bring me, I pray
thee, a morsel of bread."
broke. This word has acquired a certain respectable colloquial use in the sense, "without
funds.” It is of course a corruption of broken,
but the original word does not fit the case and
“broke” has come to stay.
bulk. “The bulk of the crop is uncut.” This
use of the word, in the sense of greater part,
mass, or majority, “the bulk of the people,”
is opposed by many careful writers.
(Continued in December)


We offer vou 50.000
Ortmlo rinest Aiormeterg
vou've ever driven!


And we make this startling statement! Give
your engine proper care, use the New Mobiloil
and the first-year feel will stay in your engine
for at least 50,000 kilometers. In tests, the
New Mobiloil has frequently preserved this
first-year feel for more than twice this
distance. VACUUM OIL COMPANY


the


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


  


November, 1929


s of the Roman Catholic Church
ri.
GIBBON—(Continued from September)
lishing a few pages of Gibbon because the authentic origins
took the indefatigable task of evangelizing the Orient, suclippines and barely failing in Japan, are no doubt of general, if
se islands.—Ed.


goods, which had so
gination of Plato, and
egree among the auss, was adopted for a
re church. The fever
rs"
pted them to sell
vhich they despised,
he feet of the aposth
selves with receiving
general distribution.
n religion relaxed,
pro
lu
generous institu than those of the
ave been corrupted
les
selfishness of human
o embraced the new
E
he possession
gacies and inheritepa
e property

ade and industry
e, a moderate pro
ministers of the
2
nthly assemthe exigency
his wealth
ary offering for
piety,
Nothing, however
t was diligently
cated
of Tithes, the
bligation; and
s perfect disciay a tenth part
would become the
hemselves by
bles
and to acquire
uous treasure,
ated with the
h n
sary to observe
ular church, which
of
ting a nature,
verty or the opre dispersed in
ne great cities
ng
e of the emperor
magistrates,
the
e were possessed of
vessels of gold
ous worship,
thalytes had sold
increase the public
leed, of their
tu
d themselves
s had been saints.
e suspicions
casion, howecious and probable
ciro
ances, the
Ve
our knowledge,
s, or convey any
ne period, the
ct
e
less opulent
ne,
ndred thoundred and fifty
se
call of charity to
erling), on
who had been
aa
barbarians of the
aaa 
before the reign
d received, in
ngle dona
, the
t hundred thouterces from
r of Pontus, who
to fi
s res
the capital. These
mo
blation:
vere made in money;
was the society o
ians either desirous
capable of acqui
ny considerable
egree, the encumbrance
anded property.
ad been provided by several laws, which were
acted with the san
as our statutes of
estat
s should be given
ortmain, that no r
r bequeathed to any corporate body, without
articular dispensather a special privilege or
r from the senate; who
on from the emper
ere seldom disposed to grant them in favor e
sect, at first the object of their contempt, and
t last of their fears and jealousy. A transac

tion, however, is related under the reign of Alexander Severus, which discovers that the restraint
was sometimes eluded or suspended, and that the
Christians were permitted to claim and to possess
ands within the limits of Rome itself. The
progress of Christianity, and the civil confusion
of the empire, contributed to relax the severity
of the laws; and before the close of the third
century many considerable estates were bestowed
on the opulent churches of Rome, Milan, Carthage, Antioch, Alexandria, and the other great
cities of Italy and the provinces.


The bishop was the natural steward of the
church; the public stock was intrusted to his
care without account or control; the presbyters
were confined to their spiritual functions, and
the more dependent order of deacons was solely
employed in the management and distribution of
the ecclesiastical revenue. If we may give credit
to the vehement declamations of Cyprian, there
were too many among his African brethren who,
in the execution of their charge, violated every
precept, not only of evangelic perfection, but
even of moral virtue. By some of these unfaithful stewards the riches of the church were lavished in sensual pleasures; by others they were perverted to the purposes of private gain, of fraudulent purchases, and of rapacious usury. But as
long as the contributions of the Christian people
were free and unconstrained, the abuse of their
confidence could not be very frequent, and the
general uses to which their liberality was applied
reflected honor on the religious society. A
decent portion was reserved for the maintenance


Have


You Got


Your


Coupons let


FREE COUPONS


ith every purchase you get the
W amount of the sale in coupons.


FREE PREMIUMS


For every coupon there is a premium.
If you trade here regularly and save the
coupons, you can own many things that
you need not buy. Our free premium
catalog tells you all about it. They are
free—ask for one.


BIGGER SAVINGS


You can buy anything you need for
personal use or household here at prices
generally lower than you pay elsewhere,
and you get the coupons besides. Thus,
your saving is double.


HELPFULNESS


Get your friends to trade here and
to give you the coupons. Since your
friends plan to buy certain things anyway, and since they can probably buy
them here cheaper than they can somewhere else, you not only help yourself,
but help your friends also.


FIGURE IT OUT
Then Buy at
Our Store


You would be surprised how rapidly
coupons accumulate. Recall and add
up what you have spent in the last
week for things you could buy here at
a lower price, and see how much you
would have in coupons if you had
bought here. Then come in and buy,
and get your friends to buy, and save
the coupons until you have enough
to buy what you want from our premium catalog.


DLOKO


UUOX


VRESPONDING TO ADVERTISEME.


November, 1929


  


19


of the bishop and his clergy; a sufficient sum was
allotted for the expenses of the public worship,
of which the feasts of love, the agapae, as they
were called, constituted a very pleasing part.
The whole remainder was the sacred patrimony
of the poor. According to the discretion of the
bishop, it was distributed to support widows and
orphans, the lame, the sick, and the aged of the
community; to comfort strangers and pilgrims,
and to alleviate the misfortunes of prisoners and
captives, more especially when their sufferings
had been occasioned by their firm attachment fo
the cause of religion. A generous intercourse of
charity united the most distant provinces, and
the smaller congregations were cheerfully assisted
by the aims of their more opulent brethren.
Such an institution, which paid less regard to the
merit than to the distress of the object, very
materially conduced to the progress of Christianity. The Pagans, who were actuated by a
sense of humanity, while they derided the doctrines, acknowledged the benevolence, of the new
sect. The prospect of immediate relief and of
future protection allured into its hospitable
bosom many of those unhappy persons whom
the neglect of the world would have abandoned
to the miseries of want, of sickness, and of old


age. There is some reason likewise to believe
that great numbers of infants, who, according to
the inhuman practice of the times, had been
exposed by their parents, were frequently res

cued from death, baptized, educated, and maintained by the piety of the Christians, and at the
expense of the public treasure.
(To be continued)


OHow Taft Bargained for the Friar Lands
(His Own Account of the Deal)


“As early as 1898, the Peace Commission,
which negotiated the treaty of Paris, became
convinced that one of the most important steps
in tranquilizing the islands and in reconciling
the Filipinos to the American Government
would be the governmental purchase of the
so-called friars’ agricultural lands in the Philippines, and the sale of these lands to the tenants
upon long, easy payments. The same policy
was recommended by the first or Schurman
Commission after an investigation by it, and in
the first report of the present Philippine Commission much time was devoted to the political
phases of the relations of the four great religious
orders to the people and the wisdom of buying
the agricultural lands and selling them to the
tenants was much commented on and approved.


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


ORED
ABE
IRELLSS
RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


9 PLAZA MORAGA


Phones:


2-26-01
2-26-92
2-26303


Always Open


Since Taft effected the purchase of the
friar lands with the first issue of publiccredit bonds of the Philippines under the
United States, a new generation has grown
up in the islands. Members of this generation now sitting in the legislature, where
there is a movement afoot to have the
government purchase remaining large
agricultural estates of the Church in the
Philippines, may refresh their information
on the friar-lands purchase by reading
Taft’s report of it, set forth here.
Whether the simple right of eminent
domain runs in such cases or not, no
doubt hinges somewhat upon the acuteness of the agrarian situation involved:
Taft’s method was an appeal to Rome and
an accord with the pontifical authority.
Some of the estates remaining in the
Church are charity endowments and are
of the nature of trusts. When the demands of a situation are acute (and otherwise, ordinary rights prevail) salus populi
suprema lex, the safety of the people is the
supreme law.—ED.


The Secretary of War and the President concurred in the recommendations of the Commission.
Accordingly in May, 1902, the writer, as civil
governor of the Philippine Islands, was directed
by the Secretary of War to visit Rome and to
confer with the Pope or such agents as he might
designate in respect to the question of buying
the friars’ agricultural lands and other questions
of a similarcharacter which were pending between
the Roman Catholic Church and the Government. The negotiations which were had on
this subject in Rome were set forth in the correspondence published by the Secretary of War
in his report to Congress for last year. In a
word, the Pope approved the purchase of the
agricultural lands of the three great religious
orders that owned agricultural lands in the
islands and appointed an apostolic delegate
with as full powers as he could be invested with
to bring about this result.
“The apostolic delegate, Monsignor Jean
Baptiste Guidi, archbishop of Staurpoli, reached
the islands in the fall of 1902, and negotiations
were at once begun. In one of the letters written
by Cardinal Rampolla, contained in the correspondence already referred to, he stated on
behalf of the Holy See that the resources of the
religious orders would be taken into charge by
the supreme authorities for the benefit of the
church in the Philippines, and it at first seemed
that the religious orders, with little prospect of
reaping much pecuniary benefit from the sale
of the lands under this arrangement, were not
anxious to further the proposed purchase; Probably this inference did an injustice to the religious
orders in view of the event. It turned out upon
examination that the agricultural lands which
had originally belgnged to the three religious
orders of the Philippines, to wit, the Dominicans,
the Augustinians, and the Recoletos, aggregated
420,000 acres. The Commission in 1901 had
directed a survey to be made by a Filipino
surveyor or agrimensor, skilled both in surveying agricultural land and in estimating its value,
by name Juan Villegas. He surveved between
1901 and 1903 all the agricultural holdings of the
three religious orders, except an estate belonging
to the Augustinians in the province of Isabela
and an estate belonging to the Recoletos in the
province of Mindoro. He classinied the lands
and placed a value upon the differing classes,
giving data from which it was possible to estimate the total value of the lands, except the two
estates in Isabela and Mindoro, respectively,


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


20


  


November, 1929


already mentioned, the value of which was determined by the agents of the Commission from
other sources.
“The event proved that the Dominicans had
conveyed their holdings, amounting to 60,461
hectares, to one Andrews, an Englishman living
in Manila, under a promoter’s contract; that
Andrews organized a company, under the supposed existing laws of the Philippines, known as
the  “Philippine Sugar Estates Developing
Company (Limited),” to which he conveyed
all the Dominican lands, with the exception of a
small estate known as San Juan Del Monte,
containing 156 hectares, which was held under
such trust restrictions as to prevent its sale.
Investigation showed that the Augustinian
order as far back as 1893 or 1894 had conveyed
to a Spanish corporation, known as the “Sociedad
Agricola de UItramar," all of its agricultural
holdings. It further appeared that the Recoletos had conveyed the estate of Imus, or rather
the estates of San Juan and San Nicolas, known


as the “Imus estate,” containing 18,419 hectares,
to a company organized under the laws of Hongkong or Great Britain. The Mindoro estate
remained in title and possession with the Recoleto
order of the Philippines. It became necessary
therefore to deal with the representatives of the
title holders to the lands. The Dominican
lands, the title to which was in the Philippine
Sugar Estates Development Company (Limited),
were represented by Senor Don Francisco Gutierrez, a stockholder and managing director of
the company. The Augustinian lands owned
by the Sociedad Agricola de Ultramar were
represented by the attorney in fact of the company, an Augustinian friar, Padre Juan M.
Yanez. The Imus estate, conveyed to the
British Manila Estates Company (Limited),
was represented by a voung Englishman named
Marcus MCGregor. The Mindoro estate of the
Recoletos was represented by the procurator of
the Recoleto order in the Philippines.
"In order to determine the value of the estates,


the representatives of the various companies
and other interests were invited to attend a
hearing, when various witnesses were called to
testify. The apostolic delegate was also present.
A stenographic report of these hearings is hereto
attached and marked 'Exhibit F."
“In addition to the hearings written statements were made by experts for each interest
and were filed with the apostolic delegate and
with me. The representatives of the various
interests were not disposed at first to welcome
the presence in the conference of the apostolic
delegate. It was vigorously denied that the
friars retained any titular interest in the lands
which were the subject of the negotiation, and
the right of the apostolic delegate to intervene
was therefore questioned. "From the best information that I could obtain it was true that
the religious orders had parted with their legal
title to the sharesin the new companies, except the
Recoletos in Mindoro, and that it was very difficult to find out just what their interest in the
property continued to be. That they had an interest, and a most substantial one, went without
saying, but, for reasons it is unnecessary to comment on, these interests had been made as ambiguous and doubtful as possible. In accordance
withthe agreement reached in Rome, I sent to the
apostolicdelegate a request for a statement of
the exact interests retained by the religious orders
in the Philippines in the lands which were the
subject of negotiation. No formal answer to
this letter was ever received, but informally it
was stated to me by the delegate that the authorities in the Philippines had informed him that
they had so disposed of their interests that they
were unable to make a statement of what their
interests were, if any.
“The value of the lands, as estimated according to the statements of the agents of the
companies, aggregated a sum between thirteen
and fourteen millions of dollars gold. The
estimate of Villegas, the surveyor employed by
the Commission, showed the valuation of the
lands to be $6,043,000 gold, if his value in Mexican should be reduced to gold at the rate of two
to one, which was the gold rate about the time
of his survey and classification, though the
Mexican dollar fell considerably after that.
Considering the bad conditions which prevailed
in agriculture the loss of cattle, the dispute
concerning title, and the agrarian question that
must always remain in the management of these
estates and embarrass the owner, I considered-—
and I believe the Commission generally agreed
with me—that $6,043,000 gold was a full price
for the lands. The sum, however, was scouted
by the persons representing the owners, and
there appeared to be very little prospect of
reaching an agreement. With the knowledge
and approval of the Commission and of the
Secretary of War and the President subsequently
had, I sent a letter to the apostolic delegate and
forwarded a copy to each representative of the
respective estates, as follov.s:
OFFICE OF THE CIVIL GOVERNOR OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS,
Manila, P. I., July 5, 1903.
YOUr ExCELLEncr: After a very full consideration of the subject, and with the concurrence
of the Commission, I beg to make an offer on
behalf of the Philippine Government for the
so-called Friars’ lands, which include, first,
certain haciendas at one time owned by the
Dominican order of these islands and now owned
by the Philippine Sugar Estates Development
Company, represented by Mr. Gutierrez; second,
certain haciendas at one time owned by the
Augustinian order and now owned by the Compania Agricola de Ultramar, represented by the
Augustinian friar, Padre Juan; and third, the
haciendas of San Juan and San Nicolas, generally
known as the Imus estates, at one time owned
by the Recoleto order, and now owned by an
English corporation, the British Manila Estates
Company (Limited), represented by Mr. MeGregor, and also an estate in Mindoro of 60,000
acres, still owned, as I am informed, by the
Recoleto order. The offer I am about to make
is, of course, subject to the approval of the
Secretary of War, but if accepted, it will doubtless receive his approval.


THE NEWEST TRUCK SENSATION
YT will OUT-PULL, OUT-CLIMB and
A OUT-PERFORM all other trucks of
the same rated capacity under full load.
Now on Display


MACLEOD AND COMPANY
154 M. DE COMILLAS, MANILA
BRANCHES IN: ILOILO CEBU LEGASPI DAVAO VIGAN


IN RETONDNG TO ADVERTSENENIS FEEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN GRAMBER OF CONMENCE JOUINAE


November, 1929



  


21


The total valuations in Mexican are as follows:
The Dominican lands.......... $5,473,799.13
The Augustinian lands......... 4,407,335.65
The Recoleto lands............ 2,205,303.33
Making a total in Mexican
currency of............... $12,086,438.11
The civil government proposes to pay for a
od title to these lands, free and unincumbered,
the prices above named reduced to gold at the
ratio of two to one, as follows:
For the Dominican lands....... $2,736,899.57
r the Augustinian lands...... 2,203,667.83
For the Recoleto lands......... 1,102,651.67
Making a total in gold of.... $6,043,219.07
Treceived a negative answer from all of the
tatives. Not discouraged, however, by
cumstances that seemed most discouraging,
tolic delegate bent his energies to bring parties to a settlement. After some
negotiation the delegate first stated that he
le could arrange a sale for $10,500,000
ld. I told him there was no hope of bringing
about a purchase at that figure. Some months
rised by Mr. MCGregor that if an
er was made for $8,500,000 he thought he
cou
compass the sale. This was definitely
hen advised the apostolic delegate
rested that I would recommend to
d tho
ommission and the Secretary of War an
in the price offered, for the sake of peace,
$1,500,000, but no more. Then followed a
nd protracted discussion between the
who were to be the venders as to how this
divided, and there was much
shou
riving at a solution—so great a
deed, that I was informed that
a 
,000 was paid there was no hope
an agreement. With the approval
Secretary of War and the Commission, I
13,000 was our ultimatum and
that S
t give more than that, and this
he basis upon which the price
ul
ed. It turned out, upon further investie Augustinian Company and the
ola de Ultramar had contracted
iedad A
the Mandaloya estate, which lay in the
zal and extended from the city of
IO
town of Pasig along the Pasig
ver, at a certain price, and that a strip 150
wide by 6 kilometers running along the
contracted to be sold to the railver had be
ompany for mercantile purposes. The
loya
ate is a poor estate, from an
cultural standpoint, and its use for merrposes we were entirely willing to
ce in, because it would not present the
ficulties concerning agricultural tenancy as
nainder of the land. The estate contains
out 10,000 acres. By omitting this from the
land sold and deducting the price fixed by Vigas, with25 per cent added thereto, and making
tain other reductions for parcels sold bona
fide by the owners, and leaving to the Sugar
states Development Company a tract of sugar
land of 2,500 acres on the hillside of the Calamba
estate, we finally closed the purchase of upyard
of 410,000 acres, at a price of $7,239,000 gold.
Copies of the contracts of sale are hereby appended and marked 'Exhibit H."
“It is thought that the result of these negotiations and the purchase of the lands form a
most important step in the rehabilitation of the
people of the islands and the readjustment of
their relations to the Roman Catholic Church,
which can not but be of material benefit in a
political way to the insular and provincial
governments. The disposition of the lands to
the tenants on contracts of sale with easy payments for a number of years entails a work of
tremendous labor upon the insular government
and will necessitate the organization of a separate bureauforthat purpose. We can not prophesy that the adjustment will rid us entirely
of the agrarian questions. There will be doubtless litigation and local centers of disturbance
growing out of government landlordism; but the
elimination of the friars from the question can
not but tend greatly to facilitate satisfactory
adjustments. During the last six months I


have been in receipt of petitions from tenants
in the provinces of Cavite and Laguna, where
the agrarian question has been most bitter,
urging the purchase of the lands, with a statement that the tenants fully understood that the
lands are to be sold to them and that they are to
pay for the same. The visit to Rome was
watched with intense interest by the people of
the islands, and had it not resulted in a purchase
of the lands, my judgment is that great disappointment would have been felt. As will be
seen by a statement which follows; the number
of friars in the islands is rapidly diminishing from
year to year, and with the adjustment of the
land question and the division of the proceeds
between the orders and the church and the use
of the part belonging to the Roman Church for
the improvement of the Philippine church
we may reasonably hope that in a decade the
agrarian and political question of the friars in
the Philippines will have been completely removed from among the obstacles ta good government with which the Americans, in coming


to the islands and assuming control thereof,
were confronted.
“Arrangements are being made for the floating
of the bonds necessary to raise the money to pay
for the lands. It is understood that the bonds
may be floated at 4 per cent and that they will
take the form of bonds payable after ten and
before thirty years at the option of the Government. This will entail an interest charge upon
the revenues of the Government of $290,000 a
year in addition to the expense of administration,
which will be considerable. It is not thought
that the income from the islands for several
years will be enough to meet the actual outgo,
but with a restoration of normal conditions—
speaking for myself alone—I hope that the
lands will sell for as much as we have paid for
them. Other members of the Commission do
not think so. It is to be noted, however, that
the insular government has not entered upon
the purchase of these lands with a view to a
profitable investment, but that it is knowingly
paying a considerable sum of money merely


ANNOUNCING OPERATION OF
BAAGOIO INGH ARAS


for
1929-1930 SEASON


WEEKLY SPECIAL SERVICE


First BAGUIO NIGHT SPECIAL will leave Manila at 11:00 p. m.
on Wednesday, November 27, 1929, for Damortis and San Fernando,
La Union.
This train will return from San Fernando at 8:35 p. m. on Sunday,
December 1, 1929, and will leave Damortis at 10:30 p. m., to arrive
Manila at 5:10 a. m. the following day.
For subsequent trips, the BAGUIO NIGHT SPECIAL will leave
Manila at same hour every Friday night, returning from San Fernando
and Damortis the following Sunday.
For trip on Friday, December 20, being the Christmas Week, the
Night Special will return to Manila the following Wednesday, December
25, and for trip on Friday, December 27, it will return on Wednesday,
January 1, instead of Sunday.
Connection with Benguet Auto Line at Damortis to and from
Baguio.
On northbound trip, passengers leave promptly after arrival of train
at Damortis and reach Baguio before 8:00 a. m. and from Baguio, first
class busses and automobiles leave at 8:00 p. m. and third class at 6:30
p. m., arriving at Damortis in time to connect with the Baguio Night
Special train.
RATES
1st class 3rd class
Manila-Baguio, one way................... ₱14.33 ₱5. 64
120 days, Manila-Baguio, round trip........ 23.32 10.28
Manila-Damortis, one way................ 8.88 3.14
120 days, Manila-Damortis, round trip...... 13.82 ....
10.64 3.76
Manila-San Fernando U., one way..........
120 days, Manila-San Fernando U., round trim1o. 46
Sleeper berth, each way........... 5.00 ....
Express rates on automebiles when owner holds first class ticket
to destination of the automobile:
One way Round trip
Manila-Damortis.......................... P32.20 P61.18
Manila-San Fernando U................... 36.60 69.54


M


ila


ailroad Company


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE ME TIR


  


  


November, 1929


22


The extract from Taft’s reports to Washfor the purpose of ridding the administration
of the government in the islands of an issue ington is an interlude in the Mission Trail
dangerous to the peace and prosperity of the excursions among the chronicles, another of
people of the islands.”
which will appear in an early number.


Browsing Among New Books
By GLADYS TRAYNOR


CYRANO, SWORDSMAN, LIBERTIN
AND MAN-OF-LETTERS. Cameron Rogers.
Doubleday Doran. A
biography.
To divest a loved
hero of some of his
most endearing qualities and leave him
still on his pedestal
is not an easy task.
NA
Mr. Clayton Hamilton, New York dramatic critic, has said that
the Cyrano of Rostand’s play, Cyrano de
Bergerac, is the most
contagiously and universally popular hero
in the history of the
stage. It is such a
character that Mr. Rogers takes out of a
fictional setting and reveals in less romantic
guise to thousands of readers who have undoubtedly never had an idea that there ever was
a real Cyrano.
If the reader never has had the good fortune
to see Mr. Mansfield in the play when he first
brought it to the United States at the close of the
gay nineties, or Walter Hampden in one of his
annual revivals, he will thoroughly enjoy making
the acquaintance of Savinien de Cyrano, Seigneur de Bergerac of the prodigious nose, who
strides self-consciously through the pages of this
new biography, a target for Fate’s buffets. He
who already knows and loves the proud Gascon
(though in reality a Parisian, he was to become
famous as le brave Cyrano, Gascon cadet, because
someone passing him in the street mistook him


to be of that company) will listen interestedly to
all Mr. Rogers says so entertainingly with that
indulgence one accords a stranger speaking of the
faults of a dear friend.
The author of The Legend of Calvin Coolidge
and Gallant Ladies is not a conventional biographer of the old school, but one of those modern
literary psychologists who have made biography
so popular. Human weaknesses are psychoanalyzed and facts interpreted by imaginary
conversations in a highly diverting manner.
Despite their methods some little glamour clings
to certain of their characters, like Cyrano.
Mr. Rogers has divided his book into three
parts: Part I, the Swordsman; Part II, the
Libertin; and Part III, the Man-of-Letters.
When he was only nineteen Cyrano set out to
make his fortune as a soldier and became an
expert swordsman. He did not return from the
wars with a marshal’s baton, as he had fondly
dreamed of doing, but instead through the rescue
of a young student, the bastard son of a literary
light of the day, his sword led him into the company of illustrious Libertins, 17th century intellectuals, and his sword kept both friends and
enemies at a distance when he later became a
man-of-letters. Here is an excellent picture of
the times and the life of those Freethinkers who
dared accept the heretical views of Theophile
de Viau. With the exception of Cyrano who was
temperate because former habits had begun to
pall as well as because he found thought more
stimulating than wine, and his friend Poquelin,
who, when he later became well-known as Moliere, plagiarized the work of his less successful
friend, they were all given to debauchery.
The author leads us to believe that if Cyrano
were living to-day and writing for contemporary


GLADYs TRAYNOR


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
BY RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


The October market
opened with all Banks
buyers of U. S. S TT
ready and forward at
5,8%premium, at which
point the rate remained
constant throughout the
month. During the
third week of the month
selling rates for U. S.
S TT eased slightly
but the prevailing quotation for the period under review was 1% premium.
The following purchapulses of telegraphic transfers have been madefrom
the Insular Treasurer since last report:
Nil
Week ending September 28th
US 8300,000
Week ending October
5th
Week ending October
12th
N
Week ending October 19th
As a result of rise in the New York-London
cross-rate sterling selling rates, which at the
opening were firm at 2,-7,16 for TT and 2,-172
for O/D were gradually lowered until at the
(Please turn to page 27, col. 2)


magazines, he might confess "How My Large
Nose Mitigated Against My Success in Life.
In truth, he seemed just to miss the world’s
applause in every undertaking. Certainly his
propensity for picking quarrels with all who
alluded even in friendly sport to the feature
about which he was so sensitive did not help to
establish him in popular favor. But when Death
comes to bear him away in his last defeat, Rostand’s Cyrano speaks of a certain compensation
on the subject of which the psychoanalyst is


SIZE
Length....... . . . . . ... 1.15 m.
Width.... 0.65 m.
Height.............. . 0.86 m.


This type is built especially to meet the constant demand for small, cheaper stoves. It is
very handy and appropriate for small families.
Its price is reasonable.


) SMOKELESS
AATOY ECONOMICAL STOTBS
PRHE “MAYON" COOKING STOVES are generally
A used in all parts of the Philippines, because they are
economical and can take easily the place of any other stove.
ACCEPT NO SUBSTITUTE
Buy a Stove WhichWill Last You a Life Time
Our stoves are patented in order to safeguard the public from cheap imitation.
We manufacture also different kinds of mosaics tiles,
cement pipes and gutters, roof tile, granite imitation,
balausters, flower pots and other articles made of
cement for ornamental and miscellaneous purposes.


O PUASOffice and Factory:
1174-1188 Agno, Malate


SOO, INO.
IXXD


Phone Off. 5-71-29


Res. 5-44-20


MMARE


JOCRNA


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLE.




November, 1929


  


23


silent.... What are you saying? That it is
no use? ... I know it! But one does not fight
because there is hope of winning! No! ... no!*
It is much finer to fight when it is no use!
This is the Cyrano, brave, witty, generous
and uncompromising, who has captivated imaginative youth in every country of the world,
the Cyrano who, impersonated by Mr. Hampden,
so carried away the forty-five year old Joseph P.
Tumulty that Mark Sullivan, Washington correspondent, discovered him in a public diningroom at luncheon the day after he had seen the
play in a 1924 revival, seated alone at a table,
totally unaware of the wonder and amusement
of the other lunchers, gesturing and declaiming
"in rapt and sonorous tones, louder than his
utter preoccupation realized't the following
lines in reply to his friend Le Bret’s criticism of
his disregard for his superiors who mighthelp him:
"What would you have me do?
Seek for the patronage of some great man,
And like a creeping vine on a tall tree
Creep upward, where I cannot stand alone?
No, thank vou!... Be a buffoon
In the vile hope of teasing out a smile
On some cold face? No, thank you!
Make my knees
Callous, and cultivate a supple spine—
Wear out my belly groveling in the dust?
No, thank you!”
The historical biographer’s picture of Cyrano,
howeverromantically conceived, is not the appealing figure idealized in the magic words of the
poet, but Mr. Rogers portrays him with enough
admiration and sympathy to permit thoughtful
persons often wondering at the discrepancy
between their finest possibilities and the limited
expression given to the world, the illusion of a
might-have-been.
All Quiet on the Western Front. Erich Maria
Remarque.
Translated from the German by A. W. Wheen.
Little Brown.
This realistic war story by a young German
* P. 222 of Vol. I, Our Times (The Turn of the Century)
by Mark Sullivan.


has had a phenomenal sale in both its English
and American editions. Critics have declared it
to be the greatest book on the war which has yet
been written. Not in the least suggestive of
propaganda, the book depicts the horror and
ghastliness of war for all soldiers, whether German, French or English. All's Quiet on the
Western Front was woven out of the fabric of a
sensitive, impressionable and thoughtful youth’s
disillusioning experience in the most inhumane
war of history. The skill and artistry of the
maturer man who writes with a comprehensive
understanding gives to the work a universal
touch.
Unfortunately the American edition omits
passages which censors think too frank. A
hospital incident relating how a wounded soldier
who had been looking forward to a little time
alone with his wife on her first visit after two
years of separation, outwitted the attendants
is left out entirely. The ways of the prohibitionists are indeed strange. In England
where The Well of Loneliness was banned they
found nothing objectionable in the literal translation from the German.
Not a little of the colorful vividness of the
work is due to the strong language, soldier language, employed by the author when he writes
of the daily routine of a common soldier’s life.
In his description of the terrors of the front and
his portrayal of the one fine thing which flourished during those dreadful years,—the comradeship of man—one glimpses the poet pitying man
for his inhumanity to man.
Under the shadow of war, boys just out of
school somehow learned to live, even to love,
steal, and, confronted with the overwhelming
instinct of self-preservation, to kill. One wonders
that lives so blighted ever returned to normaley.
Those who could not forget, like the gentle
farmer Diederich, went mad. Only brute instinct carried them through to the end to reenter an alien world. Mr. Remarque’s book is
intensely interesting and reads so easily that
you will finish it at one sitting. If you have
not yet read this splendid story do not fail to
get a copy.
Hunger Fighters.
Paul de Kruif. Harcourt Brace.
Thoughafew months
old this book is mentioned because it ought
to be of special interest to those contemplating or engaged in
the introduction of
new crops into the
Philippines. Paul de
Kruif has a flair for
dramatizing the sometimes dull and weary
work of those who cut
the first jagged steps
up the mountainside
toward the peak of
civilization. In Hunger
Fighters he has written
anotherinspiring story,
as absorbing as Microbe Hunters, of unsung scientists who
have contributed to
the world’s progress.
From Carleton, the
first of the men he
writes about, who
dreamed of bringing
the Kubanka wheat
from western Asia to
the American northwest, down to Joseph
Goldberger, a Jew
whom he calls the
soft-spoken desperado,
the man who for years
fought the dread pellagra, or the black
death, in its most malignant form in the
southern states and
discovered the importance of vitamin C
to good health, every


INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBERETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: “YPIL,” Cebu.


man’s story is fascinating.
Not all of them were trained scientists; many
of them just had a hunch which they clung to
doggedly through the years in spite of poverty
or dazzling offers in other fields. Many did not
live to see the revolutionary effect of their ideas,
but died miserably,—like Carleton who met his
end in an obscure pest-hole of Peru. Some
risked their lives again and again to prove
a theorv.
Mr. de Kruif writes intimately and stirringly
of men who are first of all individualists. He
gives the reader an account of the wheat finders,
the maize finders and the maize breeders as exciting to the imagination as any tale of old explorers. Indeed, one closes the book feeling that
adventurous modern youth can find the same
allure in research that his forbears found in
trekking westward.


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporation"


COPRA:—The Manila
copra market during
the month of October
has been devoid of interesting features. Arrivals at both Manila
and Cebu have been
far from satisfactory
and little improvement
is anticipated during
November, December.
Not with standing unsatisfactory production,
buyers have been unable to advance their
ideas of price due to the continued weakness in
the U. S. market. The continental market
although steady in spots registered a net decline
of approximately $l-10-0 per ton during the
month. Locally the Laguna-Tayabas market is
much above Manila and foreign parities, and it
is quite probable that prices will decline at these
primary points during the last half of November.
Total arrivals at Manila for the month of October were 404,880 bags as compared with 529,193
bags for October, 1928. Latest cable advices
follow:
San FranciscogF. M. M., 4-1/4 cents; London, Cebu Sundried, 221-7-6; F. M. M.,
E21-2-6 Manila Buen-Corriente, P9.00 to
₱9.25; Arrival Resecada, P10.00 to P10.25.
Coconut OIl:—Buyers of this commodity in
the U. S. market showed little inclination during
October to trade at September levels. Early
in the month, bids were decreased to 6-748
cents c. i. f. New York and 6-5,8 cents f. o. b.
tanks San Francisco at which figures the market
is quoted today. The coconut oil market is
entirely a buyers’ market and will so continue
until the new year when present large reserve
stocks will unquestionably have been reduced.
Latest cables follow:
(Continued on page 29, col. 2)


Healthful
DrinkTry it with
your meals
—a glass of
delicious cold beer. Ask for


Sanlhiquel
Daledilsen


Brewed by
SAN MIGUEL BREWERY


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


24


  


November, 1929


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, The Robert Dollar Company


Shipping during the
N   E
past month has again
been comparatively
quiet, altho in most
lines some improvement
was shown over the
previous month and
there is every indication

of increased offerings
for the balance of the
year. There is still
considerably more space
A
available than cargo offering, this being es
pecially true on the
Pacific Coast berth, which is over tonnaged.
Shipments to the Atlantic Coast have been fair,
with the exception of hemp, which is still very
dull, no doubt due to the continued weak prices
for this commodity. To Europe shipments have
been fairly good; copra cake being particularly
active, hemp shipments fair and lumber moving
in about the usual quantities.
From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines, there were exported from the
Philippines during the month of September.
To China and Japan ports, 11,336 tons with a
total of 50 sailings, of which 6,671 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 15 sailings;
to the Pacific coast for local delivery 20,582 tons
with a total of 16 sailings, of which 16,158 tons
were carried in American bottoms with 13 sailings; to the Pacific coast for overland delivery,
1,463 tons with a total of 12 sailings, of which
719 tons were carried in American bottoms with
10 sailings; to the Pacific coast for intercoastal
delivery, 2,295 tons with a total of 14 sailings,
of which 2,264 tons were carried in American


bottoms with 13 sailings; to the Atlantic coast
37,478 tons with a total of 18 sailings, of which
21,677 tons were carried in American bottoms
with 6 sailings; to European ports, 25,218 tons
with a total of 20 sailings, of which 318 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 2 sailings; to
Australian ports, 660 tons with a total of 1 sailing,
of which American bottoms carried none, or a
grand total of 99,032 tons with a total of 78 sailings, of which American bottoms carried 47,807
tons with 23 sailings.
The following figures show passenger traffic
moving during the month of October. (first
figure represents first class, second figure steerage): To China and Japan 164-257, to Honolulu
5-293, to the Pacific coast 63-146, to Singapore
and Straits Settlements 9-13, to Mediterranean
ports 20-1, to America via Suez 3-0, a total of
264 first class and 710 steerage passengers departing from the Philippines.
The next few months will show a very good
increase in transpacific passenger business, both
first class and steerage. “‘The route via Honolulu
is an exceedingly popular one, and it is safe
to say that the greatest movement to the Pacific
coast will be to San Francisco via Honolulu.
Steerage business has been greatly crippled in
the past few months due to very rigid quarantine
regulations with reference to this class of passengers entering the United States. Recently.
however, these regulations have been modified
and instead of steamers being allowed to carry
only 25% of the licensed berthing capacity,
they are now permitted to carry up to 50%. It
is hardly necessary to add that all of this space
will be taken indefinitely.
Practically all steamers arriving at Manila are
bringing large lists of first-class passengers, composed of tourists mainly, and commercial travelers. This will continue through the Winter
months and will serve to corroborate the contention that the Philippines should maintain a
tourist bureau as an aid to passengers arriving
at this port. A great many tourists arrive in
Manila, finding the facilities very poor for enabl

ing them to see the many points of interest over
the islands. If the plans of the Philippine
Tourist Association are carried out, this condition will be much improved and the islands will
greatly benefit by the large sums of money which
are spent annually by tourists.
The s.s. Malolo, with the States Steamship
company as agents and the American Express
company in charge of tour features, arrived in
Manila on October 28 with over 300 prominent
passengers from the United States on a trip
around the Pacific. This special tour is a
good-will mission to encourage trade between
the United States and the countries bordering
the Pacific.
Round-the-World passenger business for the
next few winter months will be extremely good.
Practically all lines from here to Europe via
Suez will be carrying large lists of passengers.
V. M. Smith, shipping-board representative,
arrived in Manila October 14 aboard the President Cleveland from the United States and
departed for the Homeland November 1 aboard
the President Pierce.
Ralph Johnson, assistant director for Orient,
United States Shipping Board, left Manila on a
business trip to Japan Octoher 18 aboard the
President Cleveland.
F. Danks, formerly connected with Smith,
Bell & Co, Ltd., Cebu, joined the L. Everett,
Inc., October 1 and is stationed at Iloilo.
B. F. Butler, formerly connected with the
American Mail Line, Seattle, arrived in Manila
October 24 aboard the Empress of Asia to join
the Manila office of L. Everrett, Inc
Theodor Meyer, local agent for the Norddeutcher Lloyd, returned to Manila October 17
aboard the Trier from a combined business and
pleasure trip to Europe, being absent only
few months.' Mr. Meyer’s niece, Miss Elfriede
Trumm, returned with him from Europe.
J. Wells, formerly Agent for The Robert Dollar
Co., Iloilo, returned to Manila October 28 aboard
the President Pierce from a five-months' pleasure
trip around the world. Mr. Wells has taken
up duties in the Manila office of The Robert
Dollar Co.
G. P. Bradford, general agent, L. Everett,
Inc., Manila, left Manila November 1 aboard the
Kinau for the southern islands in the interests
of his company.
Erwin Laspi, for several years assistant ship-¬
ping agent for Behn, Meyer and Company, left
Manila October 18 aboard the Vogtland bound for
Hamburg on vacation. Mr. Laspi has been relieved by John Steenhusen, who arrived in Manila
from the United States about five months ago.
H. M. Cavender, general agent for The Robert
Dolar Co, vith headquarters in Manila, departed for southern islands October 22 aboard
the Stuart Dollar and is expected back in Manila
around November 9. Mr. Cavender’s trip was
purely business, in the interests of his company.


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Oldl World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World.”
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig S von Knobelsdorff
Agents
90 Rosario, Manila
Phone 22324


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


November, 1929


  


25


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By L. ARCADIO
Acting Traffic Manager, Manila
Railroad Company.


The commodities received in Manila September 26 to October 25,
1929, both inclusive, via Manila Railroad are as follows:
1929
October
September
134,312 142,375
Rice, cavans..................
54,824
2,856
Sugar, piculs............. . . . . .
39,000
32,160
Tobacco, bales................
240,350 305,400
Copra, piculs..................
Coconuts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... 1,709,400 2,290,750
866,700 '835,650
Lumber, B. F.................
20,828 21,525
Desiccated coconuts, cases......
The freight revenue car loading statistic for four weeks endingOctober
26, 1929 as compared with four weeks of the same month of the year 1928
are given below:


It’s Really Socking!
An infant’s socks are dainty,
A flapper’s silken, small,
And why do women much too fat
Go round with none at all?
They say the fashion now has changed,
Nice women wear long skirts,
And while they’re maybe not so hot
It’s the humility that hurts!
A couple with mutual literary tastes planned upon a family of two
children, to whom they would give literary names. They named their
first child Preface, accordingly, and their second Finis. But a third one
soon blessed the union, and the literary tradition was kept up by calling
the child Addenda. In two more years, when a fourth child made its
appearance, the desperate parents chose the explanatory name Errata.


FREIGHT REVENUE CAR LOADINGS


COMMODITIES


MIN O9
FREIGHT CARS


MROIN
TONNAGE


INCREASE
OR DECREASE


1929


1928


1929


1928


Cars


Tonnage


Ha 


670


466


NOO


2N


ON.


3,100


Palay................ . ..


172


75


,309


684


97


1,625


Sugar.......... . . . . . . . .


61


50


2131


383
1


715


Sugar cane.............


144


361


,444


7,316 1


elbol


(,s72)


Copra........... . . . . . . .


1,150


1,197


12,075


11,408


(n


60


Coconuts...............


275


28


530


3,186


(3)


121


Hemp............. . . . .


15


33


oI


tiij


(69)


Tobacco...............


22


52


22


445


(30)


(218)


Livestock.......... . . . .


91


98


458


493


G5)


Mineral Products.......


435


314


4,117


2,938


E


1,175


Lumber and Timber....


200


268


4,614


4,495


(8)


119


Other Forest Products...


10


"I01


84


Manufactures........


317


396


4,528


4,880


(79)


(352)


All others including LCL.


3,427


3,867


26,571


31,111


(440)


(4,540)


Total


16,978


7390


71193


NOa


(412)


(2.443)


SUMMARY


Wan mailng Saumiol
October 5.............


1,744


1,705


17,456


15,856


39


1,600


Week ending Saturday,
October 12..........


1,729


1,763


17,349


16,832


(34)


517


Week ending Saturday,
October 19...........


1,710


1,817


18,018


17,787


aon


231


Week ending Saturday,
October 26............


11,795


2,105


18,370


123,161


(310)


la,79d)


TObekl..    


16,978


OI


11193


73,636


MIO IDAO


NoTE:—Figures in parenthesis indicate decrease.
As may be seen above the decrease in number of cars and tonnage may be attributed to the decrease of shipments of commodities transported in less than carload lots as well as to the
cutting of sugar cane products this year.


AMERICANN MALLERNNE
DOLLAR STEAMSAI LANNE
COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
SAILING
The "President” Liners Offer
ONCE A
ONCE A
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
WEEK
WEEK
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


TO SAN FRANCISCO
AND
LOS ANGELES
via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE FRIDAYS


24 Calle David
MANILA
Telephone No. 2-24-41


ROUND THE WORLD


President Monroe -
President Wilson
President Van Buren -
President Garfield
President Polk -
Jan. 15
Sailings every fortnight


- - Nov. 20
Dec. 4
-Dec. 18
Jan. 1


VICTORIA


AND


SEATTLE


NEW TRANS-PACIFIC SERVICE
To San Francisco via Hongkong and Honolulu
Pres. Hayes, Nov. 23 at 4 p.m.


via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


26


  


November, 1929


THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija.
Director, Rice Producers' Association


Prices for both palay
and rice have taken a
sag, the former having
much lower offerings
due to supply acquired
at high prices. Once
stocks reduced lower
rice prices will obtain.
Palay prices at terminals from P3.70 to ₱4
per cavan with rice

at consuming centers
MA
from P8.80 to PIO acf cording to grade. Stocks
ample to connect with
incoming crop offered within sixty days.
Estimates for the coming crop will be available within twenty days and will register an
advance over the crop of last vear in any event.
Holders of rice stocks in Manila are rapidly


disposing of same so as to acquire cash to purchase coming crop, as the warehousing law, is
simply a law—with no takers. Supplies will be
bought outright for milling and distribution as
with other commodities. The producer ineffect has lost his gain from the deposit function
thrown into the discard by a law passed without
consulting him as the one most vitally concerned.
Consequently we can expect a certain dislocation of the market due to this cause, not to speak
of the loss to the producer of a very large sum
that ordinarily would pass into the regular channels of trade and business. Furthermore, the
inability of the buyers and millers to mobilize
cash resources will further depress the market,
and in turn affect the producers of other crops.
This solving of questions by laws that will
not work is only another backward step in the
line of economics and progress. The rice industry for the moment is progressing backward.
Stability of supply is also thrown out of balance
for as we have stated the deposit function given
the producer by the Chinese buying interests
was not all in their favor but it did tend to stabilize market supplies. The supply hold back in
producer, camarins instead of being held at
terminals for immediate liquidation, will cause


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the
Manila hemp market
for the month of October with statistics up
to and including October
28th, 1939.
U. S. GRADES: The
first of the month found
the New York Market
dull with shippers apparently extremely anxious to make sales.
L
Nominal asking prices
were: E, 11-172 cents;
F, 10-548 cents; G. 8
cents; I, 10-1/4 cents; J1, 9-12 cents; S1,
10-348 cents; $2. 9-748 cents; S3, 8-1/4 cents.
For the first half of the month the market continued depressed and offerings were unusually
heavy. By the 15th prices had declined to:
E, 11-1,/4 cents; F, 10 cents; G. 7-778 cents; I,
9-172 cents; J1, 9-178 cents; $1, 9-748 cents;
$2, 9-1/4 cents; S3; 8 cents; with very little
business passing. The remainder of the month
was extremely quiet with manufacturers showing
very little interest in fiber. A few sales were
made of the lower grades but high-grade hemp
was practically unsaleable. At the end of the
month shippers were offering at: E, 10-1/2 cents;
F 9-344 cents; G, 7-748 cents; I, 9-172 cents;
J1, 9-1/8 cents; S1, 9-548 cents; $2, 9-348 cents;
S3, 8 cents. These quotations were purely
nominal and reports indicate that shippers would
have shaded these prices from 1,8 cents to 1,4
cents. The usual premium enjoyed by Davao
hemp disappeared entirely and in some cases
sales of small quantities of Davao grades were
reported at prices below the same grades from
other districts.


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - WALTER E. ANTRIM


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


October transfers of
Manila property were
less than in recent years,
with the one exception
of October 1926, as
shown by the following:


OCTOBER


1924..... ₱1,543,486


1926....


₱ 752,130


1925..... 2,358,825


1537....


1,311,380


1928....


₱1,110,22


1939....


1,003,124


Sales City of Manila


Sept. 1929


Oct. 1929


Sta. Cruz............


₱ 145,463


₱ 171,44


Binondo.............


282,403


61,441


San Nicolas..........


17,399


432


Tondo...............


98,547


154,743


Sampaloc............


152,489


108,017


San Miguel..........


35,000


Quiapo........... ...


43,000


114,921


Intramuros...........


48,500


35,500


Ermita..............


54,398


65,000


Malate......... . . . . .


98,909


192,757


Paco................


20,534


57205


Sta. Ana....... . . . . . .


19,762


19,014


Pandacan............


150,561


Sta. Mesa............


1,000


16,350


Singalong............


12,000


a loss to the producer of at least P0.20 a cavan,
by shrinkage only, lot alone possible inability to
bring it to market later in the season. To date
we have seen nobody willing to embark in the
warehousing business in the rice provinces.
However, now is the accepted time for others
than Chinese to enter the game if they choose
to do so. Conditions are in their favor, assuming they have both the ambition plus the ability
to compete.


In Manila the market was rather quiet with
exporters buving on a basis of: E, ₱25.50; F,
P23.50; G, ₱17.25; I, ₱22.50: 31, P20.50;'81,
₱22.75, 82, 21.50; 83, ₱17.75. The market
here for high-grade hemp declined in sympathy
with the consuming markets and by the 15th
exporters were paying: E, P24, F P22: G,
₱i7.25; I, P21, JI, ₱19.50; 81, P21, $2, P20;
S3, ₱i7.50. There was very little change
throughout the balance of the month and on the
31st, sales were made at: E, P24; F, P22, I,
P2l, J1, ₱10.75 G. F17.25, 81, ₱21.50; '82,
P20225;83, ₱17.75. Buyers in this market


THE YOKOHAMA SPECIE BANK
 LTD. E
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
100,000,000.00
Capital (Paid Up) -
108,500,000.00
Reserve Fund
10,420,920.97
Undivided Profits
MANILA BRANCH
600 DASMARINAS, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager
12-37-58—Export, Current Account, Cashier
PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER PHONE(2-37-55—Import, Accountant


₱1,179,905 ₱1,003,124
IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNA


November, 1929


  


27


were not at all eager and a good deal of the hemp
has gone into store awaiting higher prices. Reports are current that a good many provincial
dealers are storing their hempin anticipation of
better prices later on. There are persistent
reports to the effect that production is falling
off owing to low prices. However, receipts continue very full.
U. K. Grades: The first of the month found
the London market steady with sales being made
on the basis of: J2, 236; K, 230.10; L1, E30.10;
L2, E27.5; MI, E27.5; M2, 224.10; DL, 224.10;
DM, 221. The consumers bought a fair quantity during the first fortnight and prices on a
good many of the grades moved up. The middle
of the month found buyers paying: J2, 35.10;
K, 232; Li, 231.5; L2, 228; MI, E27.15, M2,
225.10; DL, E25.10; DM, E20. Toward the
latter part of the month the demand eased off
and the market closed rather quiet with shippers
offering on the basis of: J2, 235.10; K, 231;
Ll, E31; L2, 227; Mi, E27; M2, 224.15; DL,
E24.15; DM, E19.10; with very little business
doing.
The Manila market for the lower grades was
fairly steady throughout the month. At the
opening shippers were buying on the basis of:
J2, ₱16.75; K, ₱13.50; LI, ₱13.50; L2, P11.50;
MI, ₱11.50; M2, ₱10; DL, ₱10; DM, P7.75.
Prices moved up in sympathy with the U. K.
market and by the 15th shippers were paying:
32, ₱16.50; K, ₱14; Ll, P13.75; L2, ₱11.75;
MI, ₱11.75; M2, ₱10.50; DL, Pi0.50; DM,
P8. There was a slight reaction and the market
closed slightly easier with shippers paying: J2,
₱16; K, P13.75, Ll, ₱13.25; L2, ₱11.50; MI,
₱11.50; M2, P10; DL, P10; DM, P8.
JAPAN: This market continues to pursue the
policy of buving from hand to mouth and they
are taking full advantage of the low prices in
both the U. S. and U. K. markets. It is believed
stocks in Japan are gradually being reduced and
that they will require a fair amount of hemp
before long.
Maguey: Production of Manila Maguey
has not yet started. There is still a small
amount available in this market and also a
fair quantity was carried over from last year in
the provinces. Cebu Maguey has been practically unchanged throughout the month. Most
of the buying was done on the basis of ₱11.75
for No. 2 and P10 for No. 3. At the present
time buyers are paying P0.25 less. Supplies
exceed the demand and stocks are gradually
accumulating.
Propuction: Receipts continue full and the
total for the year will reach at least 1,500,000
Bs. of Abaca and there will be more than
150,000 Bs. of other fibers produced. If low
prices continue, the production of high-grade
hemp will unquestionably decrease but this will
have a tendency to increase the number of bales
as a greater quantity of low-grade hemp can be
produced in a given time than of high-grade
fiber.
Frelgur Rates: There is no change in rates
on hemp since last report.
STATISTICS: The figures below are for the
period ending October 28th, 1929.


1929


1928


Manila Hemp


Bs.


B..


On hand January 1st..


176,301


135,624


Receipts to date.......


1,327,553


1,141,282


1,497,854


1,280,906


1929


1928


Shipments to—


Bs.


Bs.


U. K................


280,994


291,851


Continent............


 148,990


175,388


U.S.................


474,806


312,842


Japan................


306,045


266,831


All Others...........


67,090


88,674


LNIDN IIONS


Review of the Exchange Market
(Continued from page 22)
month end sellers were quoting 2/-5J16 for TT
and buyers were offering 2/-172.
On September 30th the New York-London
cross-rate closed at 486 and was low for October
at 485 23432 on the 3rd of that month. A
spectacular and rapid rise followed, the high
point reached being 488 1,32 on October 24th
from which level the rate eased slightly and
closed at 487 29,32 on October 31st.
London Bar Silver was quoted at 23 3416
ready and 23 1,/4 forward on September 30th,
touched a high for October on the first at 23


5716 ready and 23 348 forward, dropped to a
low of 22 15716 ready and 23 1/16 forward on
several occasions and finally closed at 23 ready
and 23 3,16 forward.
Bar Silver in New York stood at 50 1/4 on
September 30th and fluctuated between the
limits of 50 144 and 49 5/8 during October, closing at 49 778.
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on October 31st:
Paris, 12.40; Madrid, 146 144; Singapore,
115 344; Japan, 98; Shanghai, 89 1,8; Hongkong, 88 5)8; India, 134 3,4; Java, 122 172.
November 2, 1929.


CHARTERED BANK


OF INDIA, AUSTRALIA
AND CHINA
Capital and Reserve Fund..................... E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor....... . .. ........ 3,000,000
MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.
Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
MAmi.



Limitea


NTOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between the
AN
North Pacific Coast and
Chicago! Leaves Seattle at
111:00 A. M. for all the principal
cities of the United States. Two
days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel
is its diner service.


Travel
East
via the
(6
‘North
Coast


The luxurious, new Observation-Club car with its deep, restful lounge—cushioned chairs—
library—writing corner—club
rooms—showers—and maid and
valet service—affords many
hours of pleasure.
New-type Pullmans and powerful, new locomotives.
You will find unusual travel comfort and courteous, personal service aboard this fine
train. The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos. Cook & Son,
Shanghai Commercial & Savings Bank or any trans-Pacific steamship company, will
gladly furnish additional information.


Stop off at
Yellowstone Park
Season June 15-Sept. 20
Without exception this is the most unique
outdoor playground in all the worid2.30
square miles of geysers in eruption—hot colored pools—boiling lakes—the deep, brilliant
gulr or tne Grand Canyon-and bie, huienaly
bearn to amuseyen.


Oswald Crawford, G. A.
s01 Granville Street
Vancouver, B. C.


R. J. Tozer, A. G. P
RCoL. C. Smn Bids
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.


E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
912 Government Street
Victoria, B. C.


Northern Pacific Railway
308)


N RESTONDNG TO ADVERIISEMENTIS FEEASG MENIION THE AMERICAN CRAMBER OT CONMENCE JOURVAL


28


  


November, 1929


OCTOBER SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


New York Market:
—Few transactions were

reported during the first
weck of the month since

buyers generally would
3 9
not pay more than
2-5416 cents c. and f.
(4.08 cents l. t.) for
prompt shipment Cubas. Although a small
sale was made on the
3rd of the month by the
Single Selling Agency

at 22l cents f. b. D.
(4.13 cents l. t.), this
spurt in the market was temporary since free
sugars were obtainable at 2-5,16 cents c. and f.
Business was practically at a standstill during
the second week owing to the disagreement as to
values between buyers and principal holders and
the reduced opportunities for business on the
Exchange. Although it was reported that the
Agency had fixed 2-3/8 cents c. and f. (4.14 cents
1. t.) at which to begin its operations, there were
no buyers for prompt shipment Cubas on the
10th even at 2la cents c. and f. (4.02 cents
I. t.). In the third week substantial offerings
were made on the basis of 2-5,16 cents c. and f.
(1.08 cents 1. t.) at which price no buyers could
be found and at the close of the week only small
transactions had been made at 2-9/32 centa
c. and f. (4.05 cents l. t.), the market developing a downward tendency. The weak tone of
the previous week was accentuated during the
fourth week resulting from pressure to sell.
Large quantities of Cubas were offered on the
24th in all positions which did not attract buvers
and at the close of the week there were sellers
but no buyers at 2-3/16 cents c. and f. (3.96
cents l. t.). During the last week the lowest
prices for the month were recorded as a result
of the crash on the Stock Exchange and the oversupply of sugar in the United States and the
offerings by the “Pool” on a weak market.
Small sales were made by the Single Selling
Agency on the 25th for December shipment
at 2.21 cents c. and f. (3.98 cents l. t.), after
which the market became nervous until at the
end of the month there were sellers but no
buvers of Cubas at 2-1432 cents c. and f.
(3.80 cents l. t.) and of Philippine centrifugals
near arrivals at 3.77 cents l. t., equivalent
to about P8.75 per picul ex godown Manila.
The latest estimate of the hext Cuban crop,
the milling of which it was reported may not
begin until February Ist., was placed at 4,495,000
tons, although this figure is generally considered
to be a minimum one.
The latest visible world stocks were 2,038,-
000 tons as compared with 1,572,000 tons at the
same time last year and 1,548,000 tons at the
same time in 1927.
Futures: Quotations on the Exchange during
October fluctuated as follows, the lowest figures
having been registered at the end of the month:
Low Latest


-December....


Hifh
.. 2.34


2.01


2.01


January......


.. 2.31


2.62


2.02


March.......


... 2.33


2.08


2.08


May.........


... 2.35


2.15


2.15


July.........


.. 2.42


2.22


2.22


September....


.. 2.48


221


2.27


Philippine Sales: During the month under
review, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the
Atlantic Coast were reported as follows: 3,125
tons, afloats and for future delivery, at prices
ranging from 3.83 cents to 3.90 cents l. t. as compared with sales amounting to 14,500 tons during
the same period last year at prices ranging from
3.80 cents to 3.93 cents landed terms.
Europe:—Although the latest estimate issued
by Licht as to the next beet crop in Europe was
placed at 8,174,000 tons, which was 20,000 tons
in excess of his previous estimate, it is 194,000
tons less than last year’s outturn."
LOCAL MArRET:—The local market was firm
during the first week, exporters’ nominal quotations being Fo.3757F9.50. New-crop Philippine centrifugals for immediate delivery were
sold in the second week to a local refinery at


₱9.75. Small quantities have changed hands
in the third week at unchanged prices, but in the
fourth week most of the new-crop sugar were
bought by Chinese dealers and the local refinery
on the basis of P9.50/₱9.80 per picul ex godown Manila. During the last week, however,
in sympathy with the decline in prices in the
United States, local values dropped when a local
refinery bought small parcels at P9.00 per picul,
while exporters were quoting only P8.754 ₱8.875.
Crop Prospects: Weather conditions during
the month under review have been favorable to
the growth of the young cane and the harvesting
of the 1929-30 crop, the milling of which has
been commenced at many of the centrals. The
estimate of the 1929-30 crop released last month,
placing it at approximatelv 727,375 metric tons
as compared with approximately 700,000 tons
for the previous crop, remains unchanged.
Philippine Exports: Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for the 1928-29 crop from November 1, 1928, to October 31, 1929, amoupted
to 669,909 tons, segregated as follows:
Metric tons


Centrifugals.... 639,764
23,735
Muscovados.......
Refined........... 6,410


Total........ 665,900


JAVA MARKET:—The Java market was practically firm throughout the month under review
at substantially unchanged prices. During the
last week, however, it became dull on the basis
of the following (second-hand) quotations for
superiors (plantation whites):
November....... Gs. 12-344— P6. 89l per P. I.
December.......Gs. 12-778—
6. 96) picul
Jan., Feb., Mar...Gs. 13-178— 7.09lf. o. b.


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


MA Lag INO MAMa MA Aa Ma a
export grades showed no change during October.
Comparative figures for October shipments
abroad are as follows:
Rawleaf,
Stripped Tobacco


and Seraps
192"
Australia............... . .
1,750
China.............
France................... 1,040,77a
487
Great Britain.............
5,444
Hongkong................
42,120
Japan.............. . . . . . .
106,704
Korea............ . . . . . . .
52,146
North Africa.............
14,640
North Atlantic (Europe).
481,045
Spain........... .. . . . . . . .
77,699
United States............
24.035
Uruguay............... . . .-


1sI7o35
September, 1929.......... 248,701
730,451
October, 1928............


CIGARS:—Conditions in the United States
continue rather unfavorable for Manila cigars.
While the American machine made cigars, nationally advertised, are ever gaining more
ground, the position for Manila cigars becomes
the longer the more difficult. Statistics of cigars
shipped to the United States compare as follows:


Cigars
October, 1929........... 16,311,308
September, 1929......... 15,477,900
October, 1928........... 16,110,715


Manila ROre Manila-Made
An American Manufacturing Concern, pioneers
in the industry, established in the home of
Manila fiber, the best cordage material known.
CORDAGE—TWINE—YARNS
Johnson-Pickett Rope Company
Telegraphic Address
Phone 2-23-11
PICKETROPE, MANILA
P.O. Box 1457


The
Phippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS
SURETYSHIPS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
Eoans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest
Call or write for particulars
Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
Box 128
P. 6.
Manila, P. I.


THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINE
ISLANDS


DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COMMUNICATIONS


BUREAU OF POSTS
MANILA
SWORN STATEMENT
(Required by act 2580)
The undersigned   OF
COMMERCE OF THE PHILIPPINES, owner or publisher of   OF COMMERCE
JourNAL, published monthly in Manila, P. I
after having been duly sworhin accordance with
lawherebysubmitsthe followingstatementofownership, management, circulation, etc., as required by Act 2580 of the Philippine Legislature:
Editor, WALTER J. RoBs, P. O. Box 1638,
Manila.
Business Manager, WALTER J. Ross, P. O.
Box 1638, Manila. Owners or stockholders holding one per cent or more of interest, stock, bond
or other securities: Nons.
Bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders of one per cent or more of total value: None.
Manila, P. I., October 18, 1929.
WALTER J. Ross.
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 18th
of October, 1o29 the declarant having exhibited
his cedula No. F-4266 issued at Manila, P. I.
on January il, 1925."
TEODORICO BOLAONG,
Notary Public.
My Commission expires Dec. 31, 1930
Page 23, No. 110
Senes 7, 1929.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


November, 1929


  


29


LUMBER REVIEW
By ARTHUR F. FISCHER
Director of Forestry


The present lumber
review deals with the
lumber industry for the
last seven months covering the period from
February 1 to August
31, 1925.
Lumber production
during these seven
months continues normal, compared withthat
of the month of January, 1929, but exceeded by about 17,000,000
board feet that of the
corresponding period last year, based on reports received from 39 important sawmills in
the Islands. The mill production during the
period of February to August, 1929, is 145,765-
264 board feet as against 123,835,792 board feet
for the same period last year. This increase
production which is expected to continue thruout the year is due to improvements made in the
old mills which brought about increased efflciency and also the construction of new mills.
Incomplete reports show that about P500,000
worth of equipment, calculated to increase the
efficiency of the mills and bring about increased
production, was invested during this period.
There has been increased business transactions
of the different mills during this period as shown
by the lumber deliveries from mills totalling to
146,203,015 board feet as compared to 128,795,-
517 board feet for the same period last year, or
an increase of over 17,000,000 board feet during
the seven months covered by this report. Of
the total lumber deliveries from mills about
88,075,000 board feet were stocked by local
markets ornearly 12,500,000board feet permonth.
The above lumber deliveries from mills of
146,203,015 board feet does not include the logs
exported during this period which amount to
15,178,776 board feet valued at P589,848 as
compared with 8,798,424 board feet of logs
valued at P301,484 exported during the same
period last year.
The lumber inventory for the period of February to August, 1929, gives a total of 255,604,310
board feet as compared with 230,879,412 board
feet for the same period last year, an indication
that there is considerable stock of lumber in the
yards of the different mills in the Islands.
Export shipment records during the period
of February to August show that there had been
active business transactions with foreign markets. There had been a total export of lumber
alone during the period an amount of 58,128,-
704 board feet valued at P4,098,242 as compared
with 48,930,896 board feet valued at P3,565,692
for the same period last year, or an increase of
about 2000-
Except for the month of March when Japan
led in the volume of export, the United States
continued to lead in the volume of export trade
both in lumber consumed and in value during
the period covered by this review. Practically
all the exports to Japan are round logs.
Lumber prices abroad seem satisfactory,
except in Japan towards the middle of the year.
A slight decrease in lumber prices in Japan is
attributed to the money market and the retrenchment policy of the Imperial Government which
partially suspended building construction thereby decreasing the demand. It is hoped that the
decrease of lumber prices in Japan will not last
more than nine months. Local prices have been
stationery during the period with a slight decrease during June and July due in part to
overstocking and slowing up of construction work
on account of the advent of the rainy season.
From tables furnished by Director Fischer
come the following:
Values of lumber exported by 39 mills reporting for the months February to August inclusive
are, February ₱463,209 March P524,741,
April P613,200, May ₱480,693 June P529,375,
July P651,532, August P435,510, total P4,098,"
343 Total mill production of the 39 mills
during the same period was 145,765.264 M board


Copra and Its Products
(Continued from page 23)
New York, 6-748 cents c. i. f.; San Francisco,
6-548 cents f. o. b. tankers; Manila, 31 cents per
kilo in drums.
COPRA CAKE:—October demand for copra
cake on the continent has been the worst the
trade has known for the past several years.
With lack of demand resellers were forced to sell
the market down to ES-0-0 for shipments
afloat. Our advices indicate small stocks in the
hands of consuming buyers but it seems that
the day-to-day offerings by Hamburg and
foreign mills plus the selling pressure of resellers
Nag MMENg IAg IASA Ng N banl Pa.
during the same period of 1928. In addition
there were shipments of 15,178.776 M board
feet of lumber in the log, valued at P589,848,
comparing with 8,798.421 M board feet shipped
during the same period of 1923, valued at
₱301.484. Japan and the United Stafes were
the big customers for lumber and logs alike.
Take the NEW


)JITH either Seattle or San
Francisco as your Port of
Entry into the United States, you
can take the smartly appointed
and serviced no extra fare New
Empire Builder, conpanion train
to the Oriental Limited, to eastern
America. From Seattle or Portland, it reaches Chicago in o1l4
hours. Follows the courses of ten
great rivers and traverses over 1200
clean, cinderless miles behind
giant electric and oil-burning


are more than sufficient to take care of present
demand. Latest cable advices follow;
Hamburg, E8-0-0 afloat, ES-5-0 futures;
San Francisco, no quotations; Manila sellers,
P60.00 per metric ton ex-godown with little
buying interest.
The above is the last of Mr. Seidenspinner’s
reviews of copra and copra products in his capacity with the Copra Milling Corporation,
which has become a property of Spencer Kellogg
& Sons, Inc., of Philadelphia, and is operating
since November 1 under their management.
When Mr. Seidenspinner writes the November
review, for December publication, it will be in
his new capacity as President of Manila Export
Corporation. This company is devoted almost
exclusively to trading in copra, copra cake and
coconut products and has in Mr. Seidenspinner
one of the leading experts in the business. It is
a particular pleasure to state that our readers
are to continue enjoying Mr. Seidenspinner’s
painstaking accuracy and conservatism in reviewing this important industry.—Ed.


locomotives, through mountains,
forests and prairies.
Enroute you will see the electrified
New Cascade Tunnel, longest in
the Western Hemisphere—8 miles
through the Cascade Mountains
—shortening the distance across
America on the Great Northern
Railway. At Chicago make connections with fast de luxe trains
for Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburgh,
Philadelphia, New York, Boston,
Washing ton, D. C., and other
American cities.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


CLEAN. CINDERLESS, LUXURIOUS, SCENIC ROUTE


Apply to Tourist Agencies orTrans-Pacific
Steamship Lines or write
J. Wesley Young, Gen’l Agent, Pass’r Dept., 1400 4th Ave., Seattle, Wash.
A. H. Hebb Agent Si6 Government St., Victoria, B. C.
Edw. A. Dye, Gen l Agent, 607 Hastings St.. Vancouver, B. C.
C. A. Gerken, Gen’l Agent, 679 Market St., San Francisco, Cal.
M. J. Costello, West. Traf. Mgr., Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hilirail


A Dependable Railway


EIVHA RREBOMLEE
Companion train to the
OPRCAEIAAD
EANAAALD


Across America


30


  


November, 1929


Luzon Stevedoring
Co., Inc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Phone 2-16-61
Port Area


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of MCCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.
MCCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY
(A Division of Philippine Education Co., Inc.)
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


The snake-skin business, about two years old in Manila, is thriving
well enough to have attracted three exporters to it, besides the men who
buy skins for local use in making shoes and novelties. The business runs
by seasons. Sea snakes are caught abundantly in fish traps during the
season from November to March, or until typhoon weather compels fishermen to remove their traps from the water and store them; hundreds of seasnake skins are daily on the market. Lizard skins are also more abundant
during the dry season, when the reptiles gravitate to the water courses,
lakes and standing ponds and are more easily caught than during the
rainy season when they easily obtain water and scatter everywhere to do
their foraging. Pythons are not plentiful to supply export demands, but
quite a number are caught during all months of the year; they come from
Intramuros, Fort Santiago, lumber yards along the esteros, and other
places where rodents and chickens, their favorite provender, may be plentiful. Prices for pythons vary of course with the size of the reptiles; baby
pythons bring Pl each; python skins, 6 inches or more in width, bring from
Pl to P5 a meter. Lizard skins, S inches wide, bring from P0.75 to ₱1.50
each, and sea-snakes from P0.12 to P0.25 each. Holland, Germany,
England and the United States are customers.


One Outstanding
Fact
Sift the Bunk from present day Tire Advertising
—more miles, better made—purer rubbersecret processes, and so forth. Generalities
anyone may claim!
In paying out money for tires, you want Facts.
One is so overwhelmingly outstanding no intelligent buyer can overlook it:
MOREPEOPLERIDEONGOODYEAR
TIRES THAN ON ANY OTHER KIND
Goodyear Tires have been proved best by millions
—proved best on the road where claims are
judged by results.
A proof of Goodyear popularity is that Goodyear
makes more tires by many thousands each year,
than any other concern.
Mere luck had nothing to do with this supremacy,
Goodyear Tires had to be good to make good.
Our Service is on a par with Goodyear quality.
We help you get 100 % usefulness from your tires.
The secret of Goodyear leadership is known to
millions who ride on Goodyears. Let us help
you discover it.
HOUSTON RUBBER CO.
548 Rizal Ave. MANILA Tel. 2-21-22


S EEN O N IEENE EN ENLA NE ENN TNN O IANEN INIA


November, 1929


  


31


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


August, 1929


August, 1928


Monthly average for 12 months
ending August, 1929


Quantity


Value


75


Quantity


Value


0


Quantity


Value


5





23,882,853


P3,588,628


16.9


10,849,564


₱1,734,995


8.7


55,772,963


₱9,021,525


31.


BIIID.


16,164,718
...


5,031,04


23.8


12,014,231


3,648,2


3.2


15,625,691


,806
o6"


Coconut Oil
. *.. . *..... *..... .. *.... .. ... *



13,510,73


3,948,12


18


10,719,336


3,524,72


7.6


16,039,662


3,


Copra..
......... . . .. *... .. ...


10,880,9
..


873,85


21,482,446


4,203,7.


21.0


7,933,281


3,52:


(Number).
Cigars


..... . . .. ... 17,124,982


696,953


2


21,084,735


4,840


4."


2,152,335


0


Embroldery....


*........


.293,406


e2


92,55


1


, 344


Maguey..
*   ...... ... * ... . ......................... * *


1,552,285


309,174


820,103


164,9.


O.8


1,334,759


7)


1.0


Leaf Tobacco.......
* * * * * * * . *  . . . .... ..........6


3,690,744
... . .. * * *


1,065,615


1,847,5


557,339


2.9


,961,496


Dessicated and Shredded Coconuts ................
*. .


2,139,181
.. ..


75,77





2,611,890


964,405


1,728,179


612,0


Hats (Number)..


59,8:
*.....


255,9


14,068


78,696


35,615
A


624,06:


Lumber (Cubic Meter).............. . .. . . . . . . . .


1,26
*.......


108,437





7,02


582,501


5,041


23,19


Copra Meal.....


11,302,18
* ..........


712,23





7,799,80


565,66:


2.9


8,890,675


638,887





Cordage.
* ......... * .. .. . . . . ....... * *.* . *. *


576,92
 ...


313,653


1.3


594,377


3;
45
4,1


.7


369,435


319,630


Knotted Hemp...
*....... ..........4


77,019
*.......


246,23.


.1


21,132


294


0.4


65,654


231,967


Pearl Buttons (Gross)....
* *........ ..........


54,146



59,068


,554


90,035


0.5


59,374


66,846


Canton (low grade cordage fiber)........................


454,899
 .. .... 4


5
0,399


.4


679,440


24,613


O.7


578,176


108,138


All Other Products..............................


 *..


808,412


3.8


803,984


4.1


2,093,836


Total Domestic Products............................ . . .


₱21,200,273



99.8


₱19,525,575


99.2


₱28,577,831


99.2


United States Products....................... . . . . . . . . . .


*.... 


62,258


0.2


119,633


0.6


140,368


Foreign Products.......................................


* * * ..


14,385


35,511


0.2


35,727


0.2


Grand Total. ..


₱21,276,916
* ..........


NOD5


₱19,680,719


100.0


P28,753,926 1


00.0


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


CARRYING TRADE


Monthly average for
g
August, 1928 12 months ending
Articles
August, 1929
August, 1929


Value


7


Value


3


Value


9


Cotton Cloths..........


₱ 2,866,504


10.0


₱ 3,046,87


13.3


₱ 3,697,057


15.2


Other Cotton Goods....


1,409,229


4.0


1,233,233


5.4


1,211,126


4.9


Iron and Steel, Except


Machinery ...........


3,504,578


12.2


2,394,103


10.5


1,922,538


7.9



Rice....


1,584,33


3.6


71,678


2.1


849,621


3.4


Vheat Flour..........


1,274,038


1.5


905,739


4.0


902,36


3


Machinery and Parts of..


1,921,89


6.


29,854
1,


7.2


1,432,09


5.8


Dairy Products.........


716,527


.6


759,304


4


613,3:


Gasoline...............


749,40


2


511,515


716,852


Silk Goods.............


8
711,4:


2.5


650,687


741,496


3.1


Automobiles...........


1,607,254


729,095


3.2


255
o


Vegetable Fiber Goods...


407,675


1.5


7
315,76


084


1.5


Meat Products..........


596,313


545,365


2.5


526,06:


Illuminating Oil.........


304


166,624


O.


369,730


4


Fish and Fish Products..


318,109


423,34


Crude Oil..............


136,20


O


52
322,15


143,108


.5


Coal......
 .
* 
* 


385,288


1.5


531,151


2.3


481,437


3.9


Chemicals, Dyes, Drugs,


Lo.


498,287


461,831


2.0


414,738


1.6


Fertilizers..............


8,589


0.2


45,030


0.2


374,358


1.4


Vegetables.......


390,073


1.4


416,143


1.8


389,119


1.6


cept
Paper Goods, Ex


Books.....


551,799


2.0


454,730


1.9


426,196


1.7


Tobacco and Manufac

ures of......



1,245,508


420,258


395,804


1.6


Electrical Machin



917,419


44


314,165


14


403,789


1.7


Books and Other Printed


Matters
.* ...


195,9


22
368


221,266


Cars and Carriages.....


250,394


333,228


1.:


5,797


32


Automobile Tires. .....


301,35





1.


305,806


Fruits and Nuts........


320,6


225,927


1.O


306,247


Woolen Goods..........


18,868


.8


3,5


O.


128,934


1.0


Leather Goods.........


198,944


0.8


270,767


1.2


236,129


Shoes and Other Foot

ware................


467,040


170,963


159,619


Coffee...


124,408


0.5


124,792


0.5


174,623


O.7


Breadstuff, Except Wheat


Flour................


270,30:


210,612


.8


196,645


0.8


Eggs
  *. **..


157,742


32


196,800


0.8


207,854


0.8


Perfu
and Other


Toilet Goods.......


139,315


147,527


140,544


O.6
0.8


Lubricating Oil........


134,122


2


166,646


83


187,254


Cacao Manufactures, Ex


cept Candy..........


76,925


133,261


132,703


82


Glass and Glassware...


186,551


0.6


218,091


33


171,769


Paints, Pigments, Var

nish, Etc.....


239,300


0.8


185,186


146,908


Oils not separately listed.


176,940


0.6


118,156


68


121,729


0.5


Earthern Stones and


Chinaware..



158,059


138,901


136,962


Automobile Acc
ssories..


146,915


8.


175,131


38


177,47


64


Diamond and Other Pre

cious Stones Unset....


75,338


0.3


87,003


0.4


121,374


0.5


Wood, Reed, Bamboo,


Rattan...



303,11-


105,729


0.4


128,275


1.5


India Rubber Goods....


139,249


0.5


1


0.5


26,943


0


155,104


HE


1.1


78,010


6


Matches............ . . .


198,944


o3


270,767


72,393


0.3


Cattle.................


63,168


O


31,516


Explosives............ .


85,472


.3


64,441


0.3


42,489


lement....



1,88


o.3


201,18


O


99,763


il


Sugar and Molasses....


31,541


Q.1


59,648


0.2


24,793


0.1


otion Picture Films...


24,391


0.1


24,025


0.1


31,428


).1


Other Imports..........


1,885,672


6.5


1,646,431


7.2


2,448,941


10.2


Total.......... P


29,039,000


100.0


₱23,107,017


100.0


₱24,011,367


100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNIZED STATES AND FOREIGN


COUNTRIES


Ports


Monthly average for


August, 1929


August, 1929


12 months ending


August, 1929


Value


75


Value


70


Value


75


Manila................


₱37,503,905


74.9


₱31,313,432


72.9


₱35,722,717


67.5


Iloilo....


4,139,319


,363,760


,274,816


13


BbI.


6,348,981


12.6


5,514,081-


12.9


6,471,497


12


Zamboanga.............


533,074


'38,624


600,038


1.2


Jolo..


104,462





46,702


0. 2


84,026


.2


Davao........


1,335,459


2.6


1,285,953


3.1


,434,562


2.7


Legaspl................


349,816


0.6


525,184


1.2


1,260,219


2.4


Total. T30,315,916 100 0 ₱42,787,736 100.0 P52,847,878 100.0


IMPORTS


Monthly average for
Nationality of Vessels
August, 1928 12 months ending
August, 1929
August, 1929


Value
Value o
% Value
0


American.............. ₱14,817,501 51.2 ₱11,050,904
47.9 ₱10,356,221 40
3.4
7,397,28
7,169,677 31.,
8,768,357 30..
British................
954,555
1,310,456
4.5
1,121,519
Japanese...............
675,580
745,884 2.6
533,040
Dutch.................
1,916,089 8.3
1,660,466
1,192,138
.1
German...............
1,412,543
350,458 2.2
1.4
14,631
Norwegian.............
8,698 0.4
226,174 1.
113,101
'hilippine..............
54,70
190,241
316,170
ipanish............... .
1.1
173,454
38,675 1.2
hinese..............
94,30
13,235 O
5,027 0.1
49,060 0.2
Swedish................
291,98
248,308 0.9
Danish................
45,622 0.2
56,277 0.4
French.................


98.6 P22,623,447 97.9 P23,357,068 97.
By Freight............. P28,622,67
By Mail...............
416,328 1.4
483,570 2.1
654,300 2.9


Total.......... P29,039,000 100.0 P23,107,017 100.0 P24,011,367 100.0


EXPORTS


Monthly average for
Nationality of Vessels August, 1929
August, 1929 12 months ending
August, 1929


Value


75


Value


75


Value


22


American.........


....₱ 9,032,088


42.8


₱10,581,216


52.1 ₱13,450,722


46.


British........... . .


1,364,270
* .


34.8


,319,767


31.8


,387,015


3


apanese...........


1,120,857
*


5


52,43


4.4


3,229,538


German............


822,356
*.


3


725,628


3.8


76,562





Norwegian.........


506,351



2.3


952,840


Spanish............


* *


1,280


107,765


Dutch.............


683,078
*.


3.2


225,782


1.3


778,561


Philippines.........


*


34,020


0.3


6,88


Chinese............


37,656
*.


8.


Swedish............


156,848
*..


75


1.2


French.............





4,88


Danish............


498,000
* ..


2.3


931,309


3.1


By Freight..........


... ₱20,221,504


95.0


₱18,840,225


95.7


VA MEIIO


96.6


By Mail...........


1,055,412
*


5.0


840,594


4.3


1,015,329


3.4


Total......


.... ₱21,276,916


100.0


₱19,680,719


100.0


₱28,753,926


100.0


TRADE WITH


THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN


COUNTRIES


Monthly average for


Countries


August, 1929


August, 1928 )


12 months ending


August, 1929


Value


75


Value


5


Value


25


United States......


₱34,278,14



68.6


₱27,839,529


64. 9


₱35,826,378


67.;


United Kingdom....


2,541,48-
*


5.1


2,337,774


5


2,167,3


Japan.....


3,256,573
.


3,384,676


3,284,202


China.......
* *


671,38a
.


3.3


1,627,964


3..


1,762,55


French East Indies.


1,581,643
*..


3.


80:25
A


51,5


Germany............


1,178,68



3


1,381,928


12


1,319,029


Spain.................


1,466,97


2.9


1,005,723


2.4


1,131,28


Australia....


120,416
*....


667,4:


1.6


487,815


British East Indies..


351,70.



660,2


1.6


764,95


Dutch East Indies...


517,58
* 


499,0:


1.2


560,2


France.............


382,786
 *.


O


638,10


784,85


Netherlands.......


433,952



0.8


146,


3


Italy



555,759



1.1


511,582


01,32


Hongkong..........


205,729
 ..


121


O.?


362


8-


Belgium...........


127
*




6


509


37,2:


O.


Switzerland........





359


33
2,98
75


o.


Japanese-China.........


122


0.1


117,627


0.3


15,4
36,36


O.


Siam.............


1,611
*


10,40


Sweden............


197,572
*


0.4


80,519


0.2


568
117,


Canada............


104,705



0.2


140,344


0.3


34
19,t


Norway.............


88,012



O.1


36,349


0.1


89,54


0.2


Austria............


15,530
*.


8,9


9,108


Denmark........... . . .


O,810


7,528


,479


Other Countries........


219,87o


0.4


246,804


0.6 1,764,841


2.


Total.......


130,315,916


100


TINI


78


32


November, 1929
  


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents

“SILVER FLEEIExpress Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Chaco Bldg.
Phone 2-14-20
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigcrated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Calle Echague
Manila, P. I.


* *P TP
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18


BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida

Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


THOMAS BRESLIN
MINING ENGINEER
Qualified Private Surveyor


Room 6, Borromeo Building
157 Calle Norte America, Cebu
Residence: Mabolo, Cebu
Tel. 372-L


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery



LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
P. O. Box 1423
Manila, P. I


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: "SALEFIBER”


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers










E A


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
₱26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE


110 P. Faura


Tel. 5-69-44


Telephone 22070
P. O. Box 1394
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Collections
Investments
Income Tax
121 Real, Intramuros Manila, P. I.


XLA
S
TAIORINe ce Ine



73 Escolta 73


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


MR. MANUEL VALENTIN
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.
244 Plaza Sta. Cruz
Manila, P. I.
Phone 2-61-30


EE O NEN E EENE NO CO O  


-ESCOLTA-623
RIU HERMANOS


Manila Wine Merchants
Limited
174 Juan Luna Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributers in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho u s e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


Recommended By Leading Doctors


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in Journal subscriptions for your friends in the
United States—men who are
(or out to be)) personally concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!



SHALL YOUR EXECUTOR BE A BANK?
You make a Will so that the needs of your dependents may be
adequately provided for. You make it now because you know the
uncertainties of human life.
These reasons argue forcibly for the appointment of a corporate
Executor under your Will. A bank does not become ill, die, or move
away. It does not go to the United States or to Europe on an
extended vacation. Its facilities do not become impaired by time or
accident and its decisions are the result of collective judgment.
This Bank makes a business of managing estates. Its fees are
the same as would be paid any other executor.
INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION
TRUST DEPARTMENT


TON O IEONNN DAN TENIEN TE MNN CEANEN O ONENI


The 1930 CARNIVAL


FROM FEBRUARY 15 TO MARCH 2

COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL FAIR


—has in store
for YOU
An Oriental Commercial and
Industrial Fair—with
China and Japan participating.
Many attractions never
before seen in the Philippines.
Special Features in the
line of Rides and Side-shows.


BE A HOLDER
OF PRIVILEGES


THE 1930 Carnival, Commercial and IndusItrial Fair, will be “bigger and better than
ever”. You will want to enjoy it to the fullest. You can do so and save money at the
same time, if you will be a holder of Carnival
Stockholders’ privileges—which are many. See,
telephone or write the Secretary-Treasurer of
the Philippine Carnival Association, Wallace
Field, Manila, telephone 2-38-91 and verify for
yourself the amount of money you will be saving by being a HOLDER OF PRIVILEGES!


N EARENO NO AMAINg MENO MAETAN NA MENON MAMEN a MMMa MaO


Reverie in a Governors Study.—The Fairies
of Mount Banahaw: by Alfred Worm.—Britain
at The Hague: The Right Honorable Philip
Snowden Talking.—Tropical Landscape Gardening: by P. J. Wester, who is rebeautifying the
grounds of Malacanang.—Editorials—A Christmas Message to the United States—A Christmas
Message to the Philippines—The Rice Industry
and the Warehouse Law: by Percy A. Hill.—
The Ikugan, of The Men with Tails: by Ivon
Gruner Cook.—Little Biographies of Men of
the Crowd.—The Barber Who Buys a Farm,
being a friendly rebuttal of Speaker Roxas.—Insurance Trusts, data from the Philippine Trust
Company. —When Japan Shut Herself from
the World, Sir Rutherford Alcocks Account.
Another Bit of Gibbon.—Usual Reviews
by Experts on Our Commerce and Industry.
For Students of English:
Sixth Installment of Farquson Johnson
on the Language and How to Use It.


TRULY A MAGAZINE—PREEMINENT IN THE PHILIPPINES


Tobacco Gifts That Carry The Real Spirit Of
FHerrp Cbristmas


A Style and Flavor
to suit every taste,
each one a perfect


ABIAUADLRA ROuuOS


THE STORY OF THE GOODRICH AIR CONTAINER—


When a nail punctures the Air
Container it is tightly gripped by
the compression member. When
the nail is withdrawn compression
instantly closes the opening.


The tread surface of the tire,
down to this point on either side,
is reinforced by a pliable bridge
of compressed rubber similar to
an arched bow of sprung steel.


During inflation the stretch in an
Air Container is confined to that
part supporting the lower side
walls of the tire and extending
down around the beads and flap.
Another Success by
the Producers of


SILVERTOWN TIRES


Strong compression is created by
building the compression member
upon the OUTSIDE of the tube,
and then turning the tulg INSIDE OUT before splicing.
Side wall blows delivered at either
edge of the compression member
are resisted, just as the sprung
bow resists further bending; and
side wall breakdown is retarded.


All inflation stretch in the Air
Container is at an approximate
right angle to the compression
member, keeping it "live” with
every flex of the tire while in
service.


THE GOODRICH INTERNATIONAL RUBBER COMPANY, INC.
DERHAM BUILDING, PORT AREA, PHONES 5-69-42 AND 5-69-43
P. O. BOX 1482
L. A. COOPER, Branch Manager
MANILA, P. I.


V ESNG O EEAO EEN TETEN TE EEAN GANOO GO OAANT AIA


December, 1929


  


A
TILL SLHOR SIA
by Dodge Brothers


Spectacular


in all those things that measure
Fine Performance


No matter how expensive a car you are accustomed to driving,
the Dodge Senior Six will prove a rare revelation in easy
effortless travel.
Nothing you have ever experienced in riding luxury can equal the
performance of this car on the road.
Nothing the fine car field has ever offered can match its smooth,
swift, aggressive power.
SOLE AGENTS:
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE


ILOILO


LEVY HERMANOS, INC.
536-568 GANDARA
MANILA


CEBU


E TEENUNG TO METEEIEO MLAN MEMREN TEE ENEAN CEAEEN O EEME ME


2


  


De, ember, 1929


TO ALL PATRONS
of the Manila Electric Company we
extend hearty and sincere Christmas
Greetings.
That the New Year
will continue to
express in increasing measure the
good-will which
has been evidenced
between Patrons
and the Company
Ein the past is our
most sincere desire
and wish.


Manila Electric Co.
134 San Marcelino
Telephone 2-19-11


YOUR LOGGING PROBLEM


can be solved readily by some type of
WASHINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
The Washington Simplex Yarder above leads
aiyadauitacoterakiandliwantorikay
Washington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Islands
The Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


Y
M



CORONAS
DE LA
ALHAMBRA
EXCELENTES
—ANDE
ESPECIALES


NOW
INDIVIDUALLY
WRAPPED
IN
HYGIENIC
CELLOPHANE
POUCHES


ALHAMBRA CREATES,
OTHERS WILL IMITATE


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Single Ccpies:
35 Centavos


WALTER ROBB
Editor and
Manager


Reverie in a Governor’s Study
Stuffy in here, but at least a fellow can loosen his collar.—
The same old routine, dinner over and another half-night’s
work ahead. Whew, what a mess of work! The clerk is so
nonchalant about it, piles it a yard high, as though he were
dusting off or readying up, as though it were something to put
on his time card—then hurries off to his university lectures,
his stunt done for the day !—Is it passing the buck? Anyway,
there’s a lot of buck-passing in this stack of bills.—Oh, well...
It’s buck the line, a fellow must suppose—play the game.
Does that calendar lie? No? November’s gone, then.
November!
If a fellow were home there’d be something to do, something besides unvarying routine. Fall’s well advanced; gone,


The American Chamber of Gommerce


OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
(Member Chamber of Commerce of the United States)


DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
P. A. Meyer, President
H. M. Cavender, Vice-President
John W. Haussermann, VicePresident
John L. Headington, Treasurer
H. L. Heath
W. L. Applegate
J. C. Rockwell
Kenneth B. Day


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
J. L. Headington
A. B. Cresap
Wm. H. Rennolds


John R. Wilson, Secretary
E. E. Selph, General Counsel


EXECUTIVE
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
E. M. Cavender
H. L. Hicath


RELIEF
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Carl Hess
John Gordon


MANUFACTURING
. A. Meyer, Chairman
Al. Walaya
E. A. Seidenspinner


LEGISLATIVE
P A. Meyer, Chairman
Frank B. Ingersoll
 E Wlan


COMMITTEES
FINANCE
W. H. Rennolds, Chairman
E. M. Gross
6. M. Schuman


FOREIGN TRADE
H. B. Pond, Chairman
L. L. Spellman
M. M. Saleeby
PUBLICATIONS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
Roy C. Bennett
BANKING AND
CURRENCY
Stanley Williams, Chairman
W. J. Shaw


RECEPTION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
J. L. Headington, Chatrtan
F.
W. Butler
J. R. Wilson
HOUSE
, Chairman
IR. WIloN
LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chairman
SHIPPING
H. M. Cavender, Chairman
Eradiora
6. P
L. E. Nante
INVESTMENTS
P. A. Meyer, Chairman
H. M. Cavender


in fact. Maybe there was snow on Thanksgiving. Even
here in the subtropics there is a grateful change—nights are
cool. But home! Crisp mornings, bracing days, real winter
on the night and a sharp ring in the air. Snow, brushed off
the streets by day, is back again the next morning—with
motors crunching through it, trams shrieking on the rails,
sounds rollicking out to great distances. Windows, curtained
in frost, are pretty of an evening, red beacons casting fanlike
glows upon the outside bleakness, garden and sidewalk vistas,
etchings in black and white. Winter’s on the land, battling
with the cities, conquering the countrysides. The folks are
joyous, friendly; they’ve holed-in, as it were, like squirrels
in their hollow-tree pantries, awaiting spring.
Only the people aren’t hibernating. They’re out against
the storm. Great!
It’s stuffy in here. Guess a fellow might as well turn
on the fan. Must be careful, though, not to catch cold.
Varsity days these, at home. Looking upon the young
folks at play gives the old a perennial delusion of youth; their
sallowing cheeks burn red with the cold, they step quick to
the tunes the radio and the talkies bring into their parlors.
Winter in America—winter at home! Varsity days—football.
One’s own college, Harvard, off to New Haven to best Old
Eli—the fellows getting roudy, maybe, as they did last year,
and yanking up Yale’s goalposts. Then the big dinner, old
times recalled by the friends with whom one sits.
It’s winter in Washington, too; it’s the season there.
Drifts in the Potomac woods, ice on the river, the chances
are—at least by Christmas. Social luxury and brilliance all
about one . .. the architectural beauty, the grand manner,
the life of one’s own country’s capital, taking on the fame of
a fine city. Not Paris. .. well, she doesn’t have to be—just
let her be what she is, Washington, distinctive and distinguished in her own right. Gee, four years there! Baltimore near by,
and Philadelphia—often a chance, too, to get to New York
for a round of the shows. Even the routine of Washington
not at all bad—grand soirees, colorful receptions, genteel
dowagers, some of 'em really expert with their affairs; younger
mesdames, the season’s debutantes, and men who have to be
honored to keep up, and other men whom honoring can’t
keep down. Anyway, lions among them, and as a whole a


Ford Prices Reduced!
Effective Noverber 11, 1929
Ford again passes on to you the saving
in manufacturing cost made possibly by
high efficiency and tremendous production.
Look over the new list—decide to buy a New Ford now!


Easy Terms May Be Arranged
“After We Sell, We Serve”
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY COMPANY
Iloilo
Manila
Bacolod
Cebu


Phaeton....... ₱1,550.00 Roadster...... ₱1,540.00
Business Coupe 1,800.00
Tudor Sedan.. 137539
Sport Coupe... 1,920.00 Standard Coupe 1,865.00
.... ₱2,090.00
Fordor Sedan. ...
Complercly cquippel—no catvay Gbay.
Commercial Chassis with front bumper and
extra wheel...................... ₱1,150.00
1L4-Ton Truck Chassis with front bumper
and extra wheel................. ₱1,575.00


NIESLO O METNNN AO LAOO O NOO GNN O NN D


4


  


December, 1929


moving, fascinating scene always, this
Washington. No dull hours; on the
contrary, many vitally interesting things
to do and frequent nation-wide notices
of a fellow’s work—the fourth estate
manned by the best men in it.
Winter days—varsity days. Political
days. .. Washington in winter. A nice
billet, accessible to places. With the
boy in Harvard, a fellow could be up
there now and then. It’s nice to visit
boys in college; they lay it on naively
thick, advertise the fact they’re proud
of you. Yes, America is wintered-in
now; it has buttoned up its overcoat and
gone to shiver in the stadiums and cheer
the lads at their jousting; and it is
having evenings at the shows, and opening its comfortable homes to friends.
Friends... once it had less of an academic significance, this word friends.
Well, a chap can have friends: a few
do no harm.
Oh, hum! what a mess of work! Bills,
bills, bills—new embryonic laws, nearly
two hundred of the pesky things!
The crop of 'em this year is unusually
heavy, they say, but maybe it’s just soso in quality. A fellow has to see; and
it’s all dumped on him late, very late,
when he has only a few days in which
to dispose of it, and while he’s still new
and it’s a lot of Greek to him in lots of
cases. Almost, they seem to have said,
“Let him work late, every night. Let
him drudge like a stodge. We’re
through!'
Well, he does it—drudges like a stodge
every night. So he does tonight. So
he is doing right now, trying to find head
and tail to nine score new laws, mostly
the prodigious output of a style committee after the session was over. A
new game, a ticklish new game; a
fellow must dig in and learn the rules
of playing it. And it’s winter, varsity
days at home. .. the boy’s in school, up
at Harvard. And Washington, one of
the world’s best shows. Raucous sometimes, gentle sometimes, but ever fas

cinating. Prairie senators, industrial
senators, the whick-whack of parlous
debate. ... and little parlors, and big
salons, with large interest in parleurs
and public affairs.
Friends...
What? Midnight? Well, it’s time to
knock off, laws or no laws.... Why,
out here on the verandah it’s even
starlight! This verandah is all right, big,
quiet and cool, here by the river—if a
fellow had time to enjoy it. Ugh! those
bills! The moral of that episode—Don’'t
turn back for cigarettes on a work-piled
desk! The bills are waiting, and they'll
be waiting tomorrow night, too.' Anyway, it’s downright lovely out here—the
moonlight, the nearing stars, the river.
A stately river, this old Pasig. If there
were friends...if—
Boats go nuzzling by, there’s a bit
of traffic all night. A fellow might
think, if he were tired, that the boats
were bringing ghosts to this echoing old
barn, and taking them away again—
sated with the wine of weariness; sated
at one’s very veins. He might imagine
them annoying him with welcomes,
interrupting him with their departures.
Bienvenidas, despedidas!
If a fellow dwelt on these things very
much, he’d be overwrought. It’s just
a ghostly lonesome hour, that’s all.
Let 'em come, let 'em go. It’s time to
knock off and get some sleep.
Down the river there, through the
shadows, on the island midstream, is the
Hospicio de San Jose. They used to use
it for political purposes, sometimes;
they kept a governor general there five
years, once—in oldtime Spanish days.
Well, at least they called him a prisoner:
he knew his status. The leg-irons of
the office are upon one, and the searchlight of international scrutiny. It is
news if one’s lamp burns late—news if
it is turned out early. News hounds
one—“the little lions of the press,”
Taft said—ready to bare its teeth.
“Why did you do that?” “When will


you do this?” “Or will you do it at all?”
"Ifnot, why?” Constant seal hingabout,
ceaseless importunities; little news, puerile news, but pricking, persistent, vigilant news—dogging news!
But it’s quiet now, maybe a fellow can
get some sleep. There’ll be no news
till morning.
Waning November... winter time at
home, varsity days—the old folks watching the young grow up, and learn the
rules of the game. Maybe there was
snow on Thanksgiving, maybe Washington will have a white Christmas!
A fellow 'Il just have to cable the boy,
and grab something in the stores and
get it off in the mail to him, probably
late. Well, it’s all he can do. Those
bills! embryonic new laws by scores!
Days given to babbling conferences,
evenings just so long. Oh, well—it’s
all in a life-time: a fellow has to play
the game. He’ll get through somehow,
get through or break. .. Anyway, he'd
like to see the boy.—W. R.
Written on Thanksgiving, '29, in
appreciation of the splendid spirit of
self-effacement in which His Excellency,
Governor General Dwight F. Davis, is
conducting his administration, and at a
time when he had about two weeks, including his Thanksgiving holidays, in
which to study and dispose of the nine
score measures passed by the legislature,
some of which had not reached him yet
and most of which had reached him
after half his time, thirty days from the
close of the session, for considering them
had elapsed. Though Governor Davis
never suggests in manner nor word anything other than official alertness and
eagerness over his exalted duties and
unceasing obligations, still even public
men have their personal side and are in
fee to natural human emotions. The
Journal is sure that everyone in these
islands hopes Governor Davis’s first
Christmas here willbe a very happy one—
compensatory to him as a man, our
neighbor on calle Aviles.


Retail
Importers


ebilppine


American Drug


Wholesale
Agents


BOTICA BOId


MANILA
Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
We have been selling drugs for 98 years


n SEnG I APgaang Run EETE TE EEEN EEERE O GNENO DEEE


December, 1929


4
  


The Fairies of Mount Banahaw
By ALFRED WORM


Tucked away in the virgin jungle high up on
a slope of extinct old Mount Banahaw is the
cottage of Juan de la Cruz, the rattan-cutter.
For miles around there are no other habitations.
Juan’s son, Alejandro, aged three, and his daughter, Silva, aged five, have never visited even the
nearest village. Also, they have seldom seen
a strange face, as visitors come to their cottage
on the mountain only rarely and by sheer
accident.
Juan has been a widower since Alejandro came;
the death of his good wife in childbirth took the
joy out of his life, except that he now lives for
his children and finds contentment in their happiness. Daily, in the morning and at evening,
Juan takes the children to the four big pili-nut
trees in the center of the little mountainside
clearing, where is their mbther’s lonesome grave.
But is this grave really lonesome? 1s it more
lonesome than those of city folk, visited only on
All Saints Day or Decoration Day, when etiquette demands of the living that they don
appropriate garb and visit the cities of the dead?
These occasions are sometimes ostentatious, and
some of the mourners wear their costliest jewels.
In contrast, never once has Juan failed to
bring home daily, from his rattan-cutting excursions through the forest, some beautiful wild
flower or rare orchid, and to plant them round his
wife’s grave; so that now the spot is a collection
of rare flowers and plants, some of them still
unknown to science, which would delight the
botanist and cause him to proffer Juan a fortune
for them. Oh, no. The grave of Maria de la
Cruz is not a lonesome one, but a shrine of natural beauty.
It is but natural that such a place should
attract the creatures of the jungle. So it has.
They find shelter and protection there, the children treating them, according to Juan’s teaching,
as the Lord’s creatures. Juan himself has never
killed an animal in his life, save baboy, the wild
boar; the children have learned his gentleness
with living things and the animals that haunt
the bower beneath the spreading pili-nuts have
become quite fearless. They amuse the children, whose playmates they are.
When the sun nears the western horizon and
the evening shadows grow long in the clearing,
Juan tells the children stories of the birds and
animals that come to nibble bits of food from
their hands.
"Anloague, the woodpecker, acrobat of the
forest, who can go upside down over a tree’s
bark as well as any other way, is often among the
birds.
“Why does he have a red spot on his black
head?” Silva once asked.
“Because long ago,” said her father, "Banahaw, the blacksmith who keeps his forge burning hot far down in the depths of our mountain,
wished to send a very important letter to his
cousin Sinukuan, the spirit of Mount Aravat,
in the valley of the Pampanga. When he had
finished the letter, he wished to seal it securely
and called upon Anloague, then a plain black


bird, to fetch him some resin with which to make
a taper to melt the wax. Anloague brought the
resin, but while he held the taper to melt the
wax, some of the wax dropped on the back of his
head and he was never able to get it off."


IS THERE A SANTA CLAUS?
Once a little girl wrote this letter to
the editor of the New York Sun:
“Dear Editor:
“I am 8 years old. Some of my friends
say that there is no Santa Claus. Papa
says, 'If you see it in the Sun, it’s so.”
Please tell me the truth. Is there a
Santa Claus?
“VIRGINIA C. Hanlon.”
And the editor of the New York Sun
made this reply to Virginia and to all
true believers everywhere:
"Virginia:
“Your little friends are wrong. They
have been affected by the skepticism of
a skeptical age. They will not believe
except they see.
‘Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus.
He exists as certainly as love and generosity and devotion exist, and you know that
they abound and give to your life its
highest beauty and joy. Alas! how dreary
would be the world if there were no Santa
Claus. It would be as dreary as if there
were no Virginias. There would be no
childlike faith then, no poetry, no romance
to make tolerable this existence. We
should have no enjoyment except in sense
and sight. The eternal light with which
childhood fills the world would be extinguished.
"You might get vour papa to hire men
to watch all the chimneys on Christmas
Eve to catch Santa Claus, but even if
they did not see Santa Claus coming
down, what would that prove? Nobody
sees Santa Claus. The most real things
in the world are those that neither children
nor men ever see. Nobody can conceive
or imagine all the wonders that are unseen
and unseeable in the world. You may
tear apart the baby’s rattle and see what
makes the noise inside, but there is a veil
covering the unseen world which not the
strongest that ever lived could ever tear
apart. Only faith, fancy, poetry, love and
romance can put aside that curtain and
view the picture—the supernal beauty
and glory beyond. Is it all real? Ah,
Virginia, in all this world there is nothing
so real and abiding.
"No Santa Claus! Thank God, he lives,
and he lives forever. A thousand years
from now, Virginia —nay, ten times
10,000 years from now—he will continue
to make glad the heart of childhood.”


The sun had set. Darkness enveloped the
clearing and Juan and the children went into the
cottage and had their supper—- oiled tubers,
wild berries and honey, and delicious wild herbs
and vegetables. All their meals are very frugal,
they never have any meat unless a baboy falls
victim to Juan’s traps. Juan traps him because
he is the outlaw of the jungle and destroys the
nests of ground-breeding birds and eats or roots
up with his snout and saber tusks, everything
wild or planted.
Once each month Juan carries his rattan to
the town far below, in the foothills of the mountain. The way being long and Juan’s load
always very heavy, the trip requires two days
and the children are compelled to spend a night
in the cottage all alone. As they have never
known anything else, they are used to doing this
and are not in the least afraid. Juan always
makes one special trip to town just before Christmas.
Once he went down the mountain trail just
the day before Christmas, telling the children he
should surely bring Santa Claus back with him
that very night, Christmas eve, with a pack of
toys and dainty sweetmeats. He had toiled
unusually hard during the month, and his burden of rattan was heavier than usual; he wanted
enough money for all that he had promised. He
mused along the trail over what he should buy.
For one thing, he would buy the big vase he
had seen in the store of the Chinese trader; this
he would bring back and place at the head of
Maria’s grave, where he could fill it with fresh
bouquets every day. There would, from such
an extra quantity of rattan, be plenty of money
left for the tovs and candies. He bent under
his load, but kept plodding happily on. The
vegetation changed as he descended, and the
footing on the trail changed from dry rocky
formation over which he could make good time,
to slippery mud through which he tramped
only slowly and difficultly. It was hours later
than usual when he reached the town, and before
he had sold his rattan and made his purchases a
storm came up and delayed his departure for
home; he had to remain in town much longer
than he had planned.
But the children were all right at home.
Toward sunset they made the pilgrimage to the
grave alone, but of course unafraid.
“Father will be home soon," said Silva, "with
Santa Claus.” Her large lustrous eyes spoke
the ioy she had in the thought.
“Well, it has been raining very hard and I
hope Santa Claus has an umbrella so he can
keep the candy dry,” said Alejandro, being just
a little disturbed over the weather.
It grew dark in the bower, and a strange spell
came over the children. Yet they thought
nothing strange of it, since it was nearly bedtime
and natural for them to feel drowsy. Cradled
in a fork of one of the pili-nut trees, they fell
asleep. Around them the gentle beasts of the
forest were asleep too, and the birds among the
foliage; but tinier life was awake and foraging.
It was Christmas eve at last! and two little
children slept in the bosom of the forest, by the
(Please turn to page 12)


UNDERWOOD REVOLVING
DUPLICATOR


Underwood machines are preferred because they embody
every worth-while feature


UNDERWOOD STANDARD
TYPEWRITER


UNDERWOOD ELLIOTT. FISHER SALES AGENCY
19 ESCOLTA, MANILA
TELEPHONE 2-31-71


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


6


  


December, 1929


Britain at The Hague
By the RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP SNOWDEN
From the Times, London, Independent Conservative Daily


Even in the extended time for a wireless talk
which has been kindly offered to me it, will be
impossible to do more than give a scanty outline
of the momentous happenings which have taken
place at the Hague Conference during the last
four weeks. Perhaps I had better begin with a
brief statement of the events which led to the
calling of the Conference. Ever since the end
of the War the questions of reparations and
kindred debts have caused considerable trouble.
A great many international conferences have
been held on these matters, but hitherto no final
conclusion has been reached. The Peace Conference met at Paris after the War in an atmosphere still charged with War passions. Fantastic ideas were then entertained as to the
possibility of compelling the defeated nations
to pay the whole cost of the War. These ideas
were soon found to be impossible, and successive
conferences made efforts to reduce reparations
to the limit which might be found to be within
Germany’s capacity to pay. Each of the successive plans was soon found to be impracticable.
Three years after the end of the War some
wiser heads began to realize that the whole idea
of receiving reparations and discharging interAllied debts was financially and economically
impossible without inflicting injury on debtor
and creditor alike. The British Government
made the proposal that there should be an allround cancellation of debts, but this proposal
did not meet with approval from the other
powers concerned. Practical experience has
proved the soundness of the belief that the
receipt of reparations and the payment of debts
have disastrous consequences on the financial
and economic systems of debtors and creditors
alike. Reparations were finally paid only in
goods, and the payment of reparations to Britain
by Germany immediately after the War in the
form of ships inflicted a most serious injury on
the British shipbuilding industry, from which
it has not yet recovered. Payment by Germany
of reparations in kind likewise did grave injury
to the British home and export trades, particularly our coal exports.
Five years ago a strong effort was made to
place the reparations question on a more satisfactory basis. A Committee of Experts was
appointed to devise a scale of payments by Germany which might be found within her capacity,
and which might be expected to inflict the minimum of disadvantages on the recipients of the
reparations. The report of this Committee,
which is known as the Dawes Committee, was
considered at an international conference held
in London when the Labor Government was
previously in office. The plan was finally put
into operation. It involved serious interference
by the creditor powers with the economic and
commercial affairs of Germany. And even those
who fixed the scale of annuities to be paid had
grave doubts whether it would be possible to
transfer the payments to the creditors without
seriously upsetting the international exchanges.


Five years of experience of the Dawes Scheme
have shown the need for a drastic revision of its
provisions. At the Assembly of the League of
Nations last September the Germans raised the
question of the evacuation of the Rhineland, and
the French Government insisted that this matter
could not be considered apart from the final
settlement of the question of reparations. It
was then decided that another expert committee
should be set up charged with the duty of preparing a plan for the final settlement of German
reparations and the liquidation of all financial
matters left from the War. This Committoo
of Experts had been four months in Paris discussing this difficult matter and finally presented
a report which has become known as the Young
Plan. The Hague Conference was called for the
consideration of this report. It is important
to bear in mind that, so far at least as the British


Is peace more difficult than war? Four
years of tussle kept Germany from winning the war, and ten years of international diplomacy have not made it sure
that she will not win the peace.—The
Dawes plan of reparations is scrapped for
the Young plan, to run 59 vears, a period
too long to be a good gamble, and in the
preliminaries of ratifying the Young plan
England is placed in the position from
which Sir Philip Snowden has to extricate
her in the way he tells about here—and
tells very vividly. All the nations involved are nominally devoted to the doctrine
of peace on earth, good will to men, save
Japan; and Japan’s envoy is a mediator!
While this goes on, they are voting in
Germany on a project to renounce all
reparations and have done. The reader
will see that this would have been England’s will, and, very interestingly, for
enlightened selfish reasons.


anaa Ma aaiag Mang ag O E
gation to accept the recommendations of this
Committee, but the other principal creditor
powers—France, Belgium, and Italy—gave their
unqualified adhesion to the report, because
each gained very considerably at the expense
of Great Britain. I will now try to make as
plain as possible the objections of the British
Government to the proposals of the experts’
report. It is a very difficult and complicated
matter, but I will try my best to make it clear.
The experts’ report fixed the amount of payments to be made by Germany at an average
of $100,000,000 a year for the next 59 years.
This was a very considerable reduction from the
annuities under the Dawes Plan. I made it
clear in my first speech at the Conference that
the British Government not only accepted, but
welcomed, the proposed reduction in the amount
of the scale of the reparations and annuities


which Germany under that plan would be called
upon to pay. We welcomed also the proposal
to abolish the system of control of German
internal finance by the creditor powers. But
the experts had gone beyond their terms of
reference and made proposals which altered
the agreed percentages in the distribution of the
annuities between the creditor powers. Though
the British Government would welcome a
proposal, if it were accepted by all, to wipe the
slate clean of reparations and debts, we took up
the position that, so long as reparations are
paid, they must be fairly distributed between
the different creditor powers. This question
of distribution was hotly debated by the creditor
countries for two years after the War. At the
conference at Spa in 1920 a scale of distribution
was agreed upon, and at all subsequen revisions
of the amount of German reparations this scale
of distribution has been maintained until the
Young Committee proposed the altered percentages, to the grave disadvantage of Great
Britain. The distribution proposed by the
Young Committee would have reduced Great
Britain’s shares by #2,400,000 a year for 37
years: Great Britain’s loss was to be distributed between France, Italy, and Belgium, the
major part of the advantage going to Italy.
There was another feature of the Young
Report to which the British Government took
strong exception. It was proposed to divide
the German annuities into two classes, called
conditional and unconditional annuities. About
one-third of the total annuities was to be placed
in the category of unconditional and was to
take priority of payment over the other twothirds. Five-sixths of this priority was allocated
to France; Italy was to take two millions or so;
and the remainder, amounting to less than two
millions altogether, was to be distributed between
the other creditor powers. These were the two
principal matters to which the British Government took strong exception. The purpose of
dividing the annuities into two categories,
giving absolute security for the receipt of the
unconditional part, was to enable the countries
receiving these pavments to mobilize or find them
into a capital debt against Germany. France
would be able to capitalize each portion of her
annual claims upon Germany by transforming
them into an international loan.
At the opening of the Conference I stated
the British objections to these two proposals,
and gave reasons why we could not agree to the
adoption of the report unless the percentages of
the annuities which it was proposed to alter
to the disadvantage of Great Britain were
restored.
The objections of the British delegation
appeared to come as a surprise to the Conference. It certainly came as a surprise to me that
the other delegates to the Conference should
have been so ill-informed as to what the attitude
of the British Government was likely to be.
Indeed, it came out in the later stages of my
innumerable interviews with the heads of the
other principal delegations that they had never
fully realized what Great Britain was expected
to sacrifice. The great sacrifices which Great
Britain has made in the various debt settlements


“Look For The Blue Tin"
LONG LAFE
O1L 3
Make Any Motor Car Give Better Service


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Deeeiibei, 1343


AKIE MIVILIMoR CrlaldErr Or Eoltiva


uo


JEN


Britain at The Hague
By the RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP SNOWDEN
From the Times, London, Independent Conservative Daily


with Continental debtors had never been adequately appreciated. I told the Conference,
when the foreign delegates talked of the sacrifices
they were making, of the burdens which the
British taxpayers were bearing for their benefit.
As a matter of fact, there is not a single one
of the countries that were engaged in the War
that has made anything at all approaching the
financial sacrifices which Great Britain has
made. We have a War debt now of 27,500,-
000,000, which is more than double the War
debt of any other nation which was engaged
in the War. The taxation of our people is
about double, per head of the population, that
of any other country. We have to provide,
I told them, 125,000,000 francs every day of
the year for the service of our War debt.
I had to remind them also of the generous
and magnanimous character of our debt settlements with our late Allies. We had settled a
debt owed to us by France of 2600,000,000 for
E227,000,000. In the case of Italy we settled
a debt of 2500,000,000 for a present value of
#78,000,000, and, if the proposals made in the
Young Report were carried into effect, we should
have to sacrifice to Italy another 230,000,000.
In addition to all these sacrifices, which placed
a permanent burden of E60,000,000 a vear on
the British taxpayer, we were now asked by the
terms of this Report to sacrifice a further E2,-
The limit of concession has
400,000 a year.
beenreached,” I said. “I am as anxious as any
member of this Commission to come to an agreement which would be mutually satisfactory,
there can be no settlement unless it is a settlement based on justice. It is not merely a question of some E2,000,000 a year. It is more than
that. It is a claim for the maintenance of international agreements for fair dealing between
nation and nation. We have been asked to
look at this question from the wider view of the
pacification of Europe. We do that. Great
Britain has made unparalleled sacrifices for that
purpose, but the time has come to say that
other nations must make their contribution to
this desirable object, and we cannot any longer
agree that every step forward in European reconstruction should be made at the expense of
the British taxpayer.”
This frank assertion that Great Britain was
determined to assert her just rights fell like a
bombshell on the Conference, and at the conclusion of my speech it was moved that we should


adjourn for two days to enable the delegates
to recover from the shock. After two days it
was realized that no agreement was likely to be
reached by formal debates. We refused to
agree to the setting up of formal committees
until we had received satisfaction on our three
main points. It was agreed to set up a formal
committee of Treasury experts. For three
days during the next week-end these experts
met, but made little progress. At no stage
did the representatives of the other creditor
powers make any offer.
After a week of this futility I addressed a letter


On the first Sunday of October, Gustay
Stresemann, Germany’s foreign minister,
was accorded the honors of death; at 51,
his incessant efforts during seven years to
rehabilitate his country and its industries
and establish practical permanent relations with her wartime enemies and her
oldtime provinces and neighbors, had
killed him. Hindenburg, at 82, marched
in the funeral procession; and Clemenceau,
France’s outstanding hero of the war, was
still alive to read the mourning reports in
the quietude of his retreat at Vendee.
Men give their lives for their countries
in peace as well as in war; and they have
theirvictories, as Stresemann did—for out
of the ashes and ruin of remorseless campaigns he made another and a better Germany rise Phoenix-like, and proved the
experiment in republicanism to be sound.
He joins the shade of Bismarck, Disraeli
and Alexander Hamilton—the stalwarts of
the Meiji movement in Japan, too—the
builders of nations from the vestiges of war.


to M. Jaspar requesting that a definite decision
on the points I had submitted to the Conference
should be reached at an early date, and that the
matter should be placed in the hands of the other
creditor powers, and I promised that, if they so
desired, I would submit my proposals to them.
Isaid, "The time has come for a definite decision;
I expect this within the next two days.” The
representatives of the other creditor powers
went into conference, and two days later we
receivedfrom them a letter setting forth their offer.
In the meantime, many conversations had


taken place between myself and M. Jaspar, at
which tentative proposals were made. When
we received the offer of the creditor powers it
was found to be so meagre as to be wholly unacceptable. This I communicated to M. Jaspar,
and from that time onward the meetings became
hectic. The meetings of the Conference were
still suspended, but informal meetings of hourly
occurrence were held.
Mr. Adatci, the principal Japanese delegate,
was very active in the offers of conciliation. He
arranged a tea-table interview in his room between M. Briand and M. Loucheur, the principal
French delegates, and myself, at which we had
a very friendly talk over the situation. Immediately after this conversation M. Loucheur
called on a member of the British delegation
to say that M. Briand had been gratified at the
friendly character of the conversation and deeply
impressed by the determined manner in which
the Chancellor had insisted that he must have
satisfaction as regarded the Spa percentages.
M. Loucheur intimated a concession which
indicated an advance, but did not guarantee
to Great Britain more than one-half of the loss.
For days things dragged on. Private interviews continued, and occasional meetings of
the heads of the principal powers. On Thursday, the 22nd, a meeting of the other four creditor
nations was held, at which it was decided to
make a fresh offer. Toward midnight M.
Jaspar called on me to communicate the nature
of the new offer. It showed practically no
advance on the offer we had already rejected,
and M. Jaspar was informed that it was quite
unacceptable. The possibility of a dead-lock
seemed now more likely than at any time since
the Conference began. I asked M. Jaspar if I
must regard his latest offer as the last word
of the other creditor powers. While not committing himself to that conclusion, he expressed
grave doubts as to whether any more substantial
offer would be made.
The British delegation came to the conclusion
that it was necessary to take steps to bring
matters to a final issue. I addressed to M.
Jaspar a communication asking that we should
have the proposals of the other creditor powers
in a final definite form in writing without further
delay. The next two days were spent by the
other creditor powers in constant session, and
at the end of their deliberations we received a
memorandum. We considered it, and it was
decided that I should write a short note expressing our regret that it was altogether inadequate.
It seemed in the interests of the Conference asa
whole to send a short reply and at once.
An interesting sequel to the receint of this
last offer was a call upon me from Mr. Adatci,
the head of the Japanese delegation, who in his
quiet and plaintive voice came to explain that
he had attended the discussions of the other
creditor powers as an observer, and had offered
his advice, but did not take part in sending the
memorandum, nor did he associate himself
with it. He had explained this to the other
creditor powers, and had obtained their consent
to making this declaration to the British Government as a matter of loyalty. Matters had now
apparently reached a complete deadlock again.
Substantial progress, it is true, had been made
on the political side, the agreement to which
was almost complete, provided a settlement
could be reached on the financial side. The
matter of deliveries in kind, which was in the
very able hands of Mr. Graham, had also made
some progress, though our requirements had not
been completely met.' On the financial side,
however, the position was the same as it had
been for two weeks. Nothing approaching
an adequate advance had been made toward us.
In these circumstances, the British delegation
decided to ask that afternoon for the summoning
by the six inviting powers of a plenary conference
on the following morning. When this request
was presented to the other delegations we found
that the French, Belgian, and Italian delegations
had just made a similar request. The French
delegation had actually reserved accommodation on the Paris train.
This meeting, which marked the decisive
turning-point in the fortunes of the Conference,
assembled at five o’clock. Each delegation


BANK OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
THE OLDEST BANK IN THE PHILIPPINES
(Established 1851)
 ₱10,000,000.00
Authorized Capital
 
6,750,000.00
Paid-up Capital -
GENERAL BANKING OPERATIONS
Telegraphic Transfers, Commercial and Traveleis' Letters
of Credit, Travelers' Checks, Drafts, Collections, and
every description of exchange and banking business.
All kinds of administration, fiduciary and trustee business.
Safe Deposit Boxes for Rent
Interest is Also Allowed on Current Accounts,
Time Deposits and Savings Accounts
Correspondents:
Branches:
Thruout the World
Iloilo, Cebu and Zamboanga
Head Office:
No. 10 Plaza Cervantes, Manila
Cable Address: “BANCO”
P. O. Box 777


(Please turn to page 12)
IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Tropical Landscape Architecture
By P. J. WESTER, Horticulturist


The tropies more than any other part of the
world is the paradise of the naturalist and plant
lover. Nowhere else do we see such exuberant
growth and such lavishness of foliage and flowers
except in the conservatories in the temperate
zone, and there the marvelous effects attained
under good management are created by the aid
of Flora’s tropical children transported from
their far-away native homes. Some traveler
and naturalist has remarked upon the poverty of floral displays in
the tropicsin contrast to
the wealth of flowers
that adorn the meadows
of England. If he referred to the herbaceous
flora of the two zones,
the temperate and the
torrid, we may concede
the truth of this statement. However, this is
a one-sided comparison.
The flora in its entirety
should be considered;
and who will then deny
the blue ribbon to the
tropies? Where in the
temperate zone does one
see such magnificent floral displays as a group
of fiamboyants, Colrillea, Banaba, the Barbados “flower fence,” the
oleander? Many of the
water lilies are of tropical origin, including the
most famous of all, the
Victoria regia. A field—
or shall we say a lake—
of water-hyacinths in
bloom is not likely to be
soon forgotten; what
temperate aquatic can
compete with the royal
lotus? and again, are
not the tropics the
home of the most gorgeous of those blue-bloods
of the vegetable kingdom, the cattleya, the laelia, the dendrobium, the vanda, the phalaenopsis? As if she were not satisfied with having
scattered with the utmost lavishness brilhant flowers in the tropics over the two
kingdoms of the earth—land and sea—
nature has further endowed the leaves of
many of her children among the crvptograms
with iridescent colors, not to speak of the opulent
wealth of color in some of the herbaceous shrubs,
such as the codiaeums, certain pandans and the
heliconias. Lofty palms, unsurpassed in stateliness, the willowy bamboo, and the majestic
forest trees, to the shrubs and herbaceae, with
an opulence of foliage to satisfy the most exacting, and to the humble ferns yet unsurpassed in
grace and loveliness—not to forget the tree ferns,
many of which are the ne plus ultra of all that is
at once stately and graceful, nor the innumerable climbers that are perpetual sources of delight
to the plant lover because of their habit, flowers
and foliage—there are a few of nature’s prodigalities in the tropics.
With all this vegetative wealth at home, in
usually rich soil, with abundant rainfall and
ample natural heat, what remains is merely the
tasteful arrangement thereof by the horticulturist and landscape architect, and subsequent
care in order to obtain and maintain the best
effects.
In the ornamentation of parks, squares, streets,
and avenues of a city, or in the laying out of an
estate or a small city lot, utility and appropriateness of every object created should always be
obvious; there should always be a reason for a
walk here, an open vista there, or a group of
shrubbery yonder. It should be remembered
that an object that serves no purpose is out of
place and that the saying that that woman is
best dressed of whose apparel one can recollect
no detail, applies in no inconsiderable measure to
an ornamental ground. If all is harmoniously


and tastefully arranged, no single feature should
glare us conspicuously in the face, and the whole
should give an impression of completeness that
would be disarranged by the removal of any one
part.
The first requisite of an attractive park or
garden, be it large or small, is a good lawn. The
lawn is for the park what the background is for
a beautiful picture. A good, ornamental garden


An effective use of a wistaria vine
without a good lawn is as inconceivable as a
picture without a background.
Next cofies the laying out of the road and
paths. In this the width of the road should be
considered in connection with its purpose, the


greater the traffic the wider the road. A winding road is more attractive and pleasing as a rule
than the straight line; but care should be exercised in its design, or it may border on the ridiculous.
In the planting of trees due discrimination
should be made in order to attain a certain object. Shade should ever be the watchword when
trees are selected for the street and avenue in
the tropics, while there are also other points to
be taken into consideration. There are many
exceedingly attractive trees that must be discarded as shade trees and relegated to the park
alone because they are
deciduous during the
dry season, when shade
is most needed. In the
park the selection and
grouping together of
trees should depend
upon their ability to
supplement and enhance
the beauty of each other
whether in habit, flower,
or foliage.
Do not crowd too
many plants together in
a small area. In an
effort to have a “little
of everything," sight is
frequently lost of the
appearance of the whole,
with the result that the
garden becomes a “curiosity shop” as it were,
instead of a garden. Not
only is it necessary for
a tree or plant to have a
certain space if it is to
attain its proper and natural development, but
additional space is required to "set off” the
object, or in other
words, a background.
Frequently the best effect is obtained by a solitary specimen tree on
the lawn, but if the
grounds are ample, a
group of trees may be
planted to advantage. The ultimate size of a
tree or plant should always be considered at the
time of planting, remembering that too close
planting is not conducive to the attainment of
the best effects.


Atantie Gun ard raeiie Co.


OF MANILA


ENGINEERS


MANUFACTURERS


CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


  


9


Palms! This single word instantly conjures
up visions of the tropics. As a matter of fact,
this distinct family of plants seems to be more
used for decorative purposes in the temperate
zone than in its native home. Many millions
of palms are annually propagated in greenhouses
in the temperate zone and used to adorn houses
the year around, and the garden and park during
the summer. They are perhaps more in demand
for this purpose than any other group of plants.
According to their habit and behavior, palms
may be used in a variety of ways for decorative
purposes. Because of their slow growth and
comparatively small spread of crown which
gives but little shade, they are not as frequently
planted for street trees
as they deserve from a
purely ornamental point
of view. This is a matter for much regret because no shade tree can
s 
approach a well-devel
oped palm of certain
species in clean-cut
knightly beauty. A tree
may be the most majestic or the most graceful,
but the palm is, nevertheless, distinctly in a
class by itself.” “The
princes of the vegetable
kingdom,” so were the
palms termed by the
great Linnaeus, and
there seems to be no reason for a revision of that
expression. And vet
Linnaeus received his
impressions of the palms
from descriptions by
others, from herbarinm
specimens, and from
what must have been
but poor specimens
found in the crudelyconstructed greenhouses
of his day. We can but
conjecture his expressions if he had seen
palms in their native
habitat. One cannot but
regret that the great
plant lover and botanist never saw the real tropics. If palms are unsuited to line the wider
streets and thoroughfares of a city or the country, they should be planted 'along paths 'and
walks in parks and plazas wheneverithis can be
done so as to conform to the general design.
For avenue purposes only, species having a


straight trunk and a fairly well-developed crown
should be chosen, such as the Canary Island
date, the royal palm, Oreodoxa, the California fan
palin, Cocos plumosa, buriand Corypha elata. Tho
date, Phoenia dactylifera, makes a very satisfactory avenue tree, though it has a rather "stiff'
and ungraceful appearance. For narrow walks
and the "patio" the Bonga de China, Normanbya
merrilli, is excellent. As an all-around avenue
tree perhaps no species surpasses the Canary
Island date. The royal palm is indeed excellent
when from 5 to 10 meters tall, but it unfortunately grows so rapidly as to lose its greatest
charm while it is still comparatively young. For
the best effect palms should never be planted so


close in the avenue that the leaves interlace.
For massing, as solitary specimens on the lawn,
or in the shrubbery, all palms may be utilized
more or less. For a grove, particularly near
water, nothing is more appropriate than the coconut palm. In planting a grove for ornamental
purposes, be sure not to plant an orchard, else


much of the charm will be lost.
The bamboos are of unique beauty. Greatly
appreciated in far-away countries where they
are introduced with difficulty, they are here so
common that few stop to appreciate how beautiful they really arc.
Shrubs are probably the most abused of any
one class of ornamental plants. Who has not
seen solitary shrubs standing in line along roads
and paths like so many sentinels, prim and stiff,
not to say grotesque, and trimmed up like feather
dusters from which most of the feathers had been
clipped? Sometimes the attempt is made to
train a shrub into a tree or some other fantastic
shape —with the inevitable result. A man may
confess that he is ignorant of other forms of
gardening, but he is sure
that he knows how to
make a hedge and he
labors under the delusion that the hedge is
the sine qua non in landscape arch ecture.
As a matter of fact, a
hedge is a very serviceable and attractive object in its place, and it
is sometimes far from
unattractive in itself out
of place if it is properly
attended. However, the
would-begardenerusually cultivates it so assiduously with knife and
shears that whatever
potential beauty it
might have is utterly
destroved and made
into hard, ungraceful
lines and corners.
The hedge is essentially a windbreak and
may be used as a fence
or to hide unsightly places, but used on both
sides of a road or path
it is an abomination,
and as unattractive and
out of place as a wellarranged border of fliowers is attractive and
appropriate.
In order to obtain compactness and impenetrability it is necessary every now and then to
prune back the hedge; this should always be
done with the thought in mind of preserving the
natural habits of the plant constituting the
hedge as much as possible and yet make it serve
its purpose. Among plants eminently well
adapted to hedges that also will serve as windbreaks are the oleander and hibiscus; for a low
hedge, the rioleta is very good.
In most cases shrubs produce the best effects
when they are massed; most suitable for solitaires are those of a drooping habit or semiscandent
and well covered with foliage from the ground
up. Dama-de-noche, Cestrum nocturnum, Russelia juncea. Acalypha, emarginata, Pandanus
baptisti, and P. veilchit are good examples of
shrubs adapted to solitaires; the two last-mentioned species are indeed not shrubs, though for
ornamental purposes they are used as such, and
they may, of course, also be used in massing,
either in clumps of one species or intermixed
with others.
The best effects in massing shrubs, are usually
obtained by grouping foliage plants and flowering
shrubs in separate clumps instead of mixing them
promiscuously. Always place the tallest and
most robust-growing species in the background
and the smaller ones in front. Especially in a
group of shrubs with ornamental foliage avoid
planting them in tiers, or the planting assumes
an artificial aspect, something that is always to
be guarded against.
In making a flower bed, avoid intricate and
curious designs. A long rectangular bed bordering a walk or a simple circle or an oval in a lawn
and triangular beds at the intersection of roads
and paths are the most appropriate designs.
Whatever the center of the bed may contain, a
border of some dwarf plant with white flowers—
(Please turn to page 13)


THE YOKOHAMA SPECIE BANK


LTD.:


(ESTABLISHED 1880)


HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN


Capital (Paid Up) -
Reserve Fund
Undivided Profits


Yen
100,000,000.00
108,500,000.00
10,420,920.97


MANILA BRANCH
600 DASMARINAS, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager


PHONE 2-37-59—MANAGER


2-37-58—Export, Current Account, Cashier
PHONE
12-37-55—Import, Accountant


Banking the borders of a driveway,


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


10


 
  


December, 1929


A CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO AMERICA
This is the thirty-second Christinas your national colors have been at
the masthead over Fort Santiago. That is about a generation, and beyond
comparison it is the most fortunate period the Philippines ever had: you
have sent great men here to govern, according to the doctrine written for
MCKinley by Elihu Root, a man who continues to honor you in world
affairs: you originally sent soldiers who lent force to your overtures for
peace, which was soon established, and then, by thousands, found places
in the ranks of peace where their energies were devoted, for personal gain
not altogether wanting in idealism, to the up-building of the country: these
old soldiers, in business and industry, were the first employers to open
wide the doors of opportunity to the young Filipino, whom they took green
of all experience and patiently trained—meanwhile paying him in accordance with what he was able to do.
You have sent teachers by thousands, men and women bearing the
torch of learning to the multitudes in the villages and towns of these islands
and helping the merchant, the industrialist, the miner, the planter and the
drover found the new era of democracy and equal opportunity upon the
stubborn traditions of privileged feudalism. You have not wholly succeeded, in so short a time, with such a tremendous task; yet you have not
wholly failed, you have much to be proud of and very little to regret:
your sons have served you well and the people of these islands have been
peculiarly responsive, if not actually appreciative.
You have not taxed these people, but twenty years ago you established
between these islands and yourself that free trade which by the Constitution prevails everywhere under the Flag. The people of these islands,
guarded by your arms, travel on your passports and avail themselves of
your consular and diplomatic agencies in the same manner and to the same
extent as your own citizens do, who pay the bill; and the people of these
islands serve your arms, drawing compensation therefor and pensions
upon disability-discharge or age-retirement.
The benefits, tangible and obvious, which you have conferred upon
these people are innumerable, and you approach by the best means you can
a definite basis of your relations with them, which it seems destiny will make
permanent. If propaganda had been as busy instructing the people as to
what you have been and still are actually doing in their behalf as it has been
in alleging things you have failed to do, a better understanding of you would
prevail; in the way of going farther ahead stands a good deal of popular
ignorance, some of it in the United States and some of it here, as well as
the aims of selfish men. This can not be helped. You are doing well by
these islands and in their heart of hearts the people know it.
Misgivings here as to what you may do, whether you will radically
alter your policy, are really not profound. Above all, have no qualms
of conscience: no sound indictment can be drawn against you.
Over here we are able to behold you in the midst of a broad perspective;
we who are your sons think you did nobly in the World War, and, while
less well in the World Peace, probably the best you could. You had then
hardly begun to peek over your continental boundaries and truly realize the
fact of your world-wide responsibilities beyond them, and you were dealing
with European powers steeped in querulous traditions and theories—dominated by the Bismarckian doctrine balancing states off against one another.
The compromises of Versailles will long arise to plague you, and you
have ideas, novel to you, to digest at home. You will not erect tariff barriers against the Philippines, you will follow President Hoover and lower the
tariff walls you already have—for you are a great world-trader, now, and
the tariff bothers you exceedingly. You will discard, in the fullness of
time, your naive estimate of your so-called balance of trade; and a huge
residue of cash, the difference between what you have bought abroad and
what you have sold abroad, will come, not to make you confident, as now,
but to alari you, as it should—for it all represents trading you might have
done yet didn’t do. It makes home credits too liberal and elastic, induces
the making of more goods than can be sold, and, despite the Federal Reserve
System, causes periodical smash-ups o potentially good stocks. Long
ago, at the feet of Hamilton, you learned that, as to domestic trade, you can


not have your cake and eat it, too; and soon other great sons of yours will
teach you the same lesson concerning trade overseas. You are a great
mother, adaptable, responsive to the legitimate demands upon you—a
leader toward the light. One institution you have is a fumbling affair,
the four-year presidential term, making the president’s first term devoted
to the winning of a second and making fixed policy, particularly fixed
overscas-policy, difficult. Nevertheless, you are getting along; you have
not always wisely amended your Constitution, and this change, which
would seem to be indicated by your brief experience as a nation, may be
effected any time within the next fifty years. Republics are long-lived.
You are young, just entering your maturity. God bless you!
A CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO THE PHILIPPINES
Pursuit of your natural aspirations has made you appear to be willing
to take advantage of any predicament America may find herself in, to the
end that you may be separated from her. A factitious situation has been
created, which is an abnormal condition adversely affecting the islands.
Why not, then, facing facts squarely, give official promulgation to something on the lines of the following?:
“The United States has been a liberal and enlightened mother-nation
to the Philippines for nearly a generation, a period which might be defined
as the islands' golden era. She has granted every request short of setting
the Philippines up as an entirely independent nation, a goal toward which,
however, we believe her unvaried policy leads. We have faith in her, she
has given us no cause not to have. We are eager for the time when our
aspirations may be realized in full, but we recognize one obstacle to that
end within the islands, and two without. We feel it our own peculiar
obligation to remove the internal obstacle, backward economic development, with which is inevitably associated an inadequate insular income
from taxation; and we feel that America, in association with other nations,
will cope successfully with the external obstacles, as she is trying to do.
We see danger in the present world situation not only to small nations,
but to the largest as well; we applaud every effort being made to effect
adjustments insuring world peace.
"We realize that the situation in China, a nearby nation of great
potencial power, makes the integrity of her bond as a nation questionable,
and that only when she shall have set up a responsible government will it
be prudent to rely upon her international agreements; nonaggression on
her part, as well as that of other nations, is essential to our liberty when
it may no longer be a national concern of the United States.
“China is one external obstacle to progress with America’s plans for us
“We also realize that since the World War, peace has not been permanently established throughout the world, and fears of the possible outbreak of another devastating conflict—of which a free Philippines might
be the innocent cause—are justifiable in the minds of statesman. We
realize the need of nations, small and large alike, for new institutions of
world-wide scope and power, to effect: first, services which have grown
beyond the resources of mere national and seaboard-city agencies; second,
decisions of international disputes which are of a nature which in the past
has given rise to wars; third, accords regarding the inviolability of the
liberty of small nations which are still, in the final arbitrament, at the
mercy of great armed powers.
“This is the second external obstacle to the fulfillment of America’s
intentions toward us.
“In view of all this, and emphasizing the fact that we have not the
slighest cause to doubt America, we are resolved to cease importuning
America for separation from her until time and our own and America’s
efforts have removed the obstacles to our request. We make this frank
declaration so as not to appear to annoy America in the grave tasks she
has undertaken in behalf of the lasting peace of the world, which, transcending all other matters, have confronted her ever since the Philippine Act of
1916 became our organic law. These tasks, we are aware, are not yet fully
discharged, but time promises that they will be in the not distant future.
“On our part, meantime, we shall devote ourselves with single purpose
to our domestic welfare. Our population, doubled since America came
to the islands, will double again within twenty years, and the character of
our trade will change from that chiefly of foreign consumption to one chiefly
of domestic consumption. Our institutions will strengthen and our position become assured. That is to say, in the day of which we are warranted
in expecting the dawning within a few years, nations will neither be independent nor dependent in the old sense; there will be a progression, just
as there was in the past from the absolutism of kings; nations will be mutually defended and the small ones will be in no jeopardy of their freedom.
During the difficult intervening period, we do not feel called upon even by
our aspirations to hasten America into another concession in our behalf."
Perhaps none will dare say such a proposal from the proper source
would not be heartily welcomed here and in the United States.


December, 1929


  


11


Rice and the Warehouse Law
By PERCY A. HILL


Prices offered for the new crop have registered
a substantial decrease being from P3.50 to
P3.70 per cavan of palay with a tendency to
further decrease. Rice prices at consuming points
are slightly lower than last month’s, but as
soon as stocks acquired at high prices are disposed of they should be better. It is expectec
that there will be little fluctuation in prices
this vear, in spite of the dislocation of the market
by the warehousing law and the holding back
of supply in producers’ camarins.
Estimates of the coming rice crop are very
favorable. The Central Luzon provinces which
supply interprovincial requirements are analysed as follows:
The 1929-1930 arca planted was approximate
ly 622,800 hectares of which some 45,000 registered a decline in yield due to plant pests. The
very favorable season since July and the ideal
pollenization conditions more than make up for
any loss. Rainfall was well distributed, averaging some 25% more in volume than last
year’s, or in the ratio of 62 to 87 inches approximately.


Province


Towns


Cavans


Nueva Ecija........


....... 27


8,686,000


Pangasinan..........


....... 46


7,774,000


Tarlac...............


....... 1"


2,531,000


Bulacan.............


....... 23


2,088,000


Pampanga...........


...... 20


1,674,000


Totals...........


...... 133


22,753,000


This gives us approximately some 2,000,000
more cavans than last year. Requirements
for the above five provinces is placed at nine and
a third million cavans, the balance being available for sale. Imports, as a consequence, will be
slight—unless undue dislocation of the supply
is forced upon the distributors. Yields are
spotty but in the aggregate should come close
to those of 1927, the greatest crop ever produced
in the islands.
Part of the increased area was due to favorable
price offerings of last vear, but offerings this
year will in all likelihood be reduced by 25%, thus
making a much smaller volume of money available to the producer and falling into the normal
channels of trade. The question of price is
always important to both producer and consumer, but lack of warehousing at terminal points,
forfeited by legislation, will work adversely to
the producer this year.
Beginning with January, business interests
engaged in the rice industry find that profits
accruing to them are so small that they are
unwilling to add unnecessarily to the burden.
The law goes into effect on January first. Boiled
down, the filing of bonds to cover deposits in the
amount of P2.50 per cavan, with the idea of
protecting palay depositors, has resulted in the
loss of the entire deposit function, the millions
of pesos of credits normally extended the producer, the sacks delivered to him free, and his
consequent price enhancement. In this case
business which supplied all these things free to
the producer has decided that the burden is too
great and they will therefore simply buy outright,
mill and sell rice to the consumer.
A depositor was of course not protected by
insurance, but this could have been accomplished
by extending the insurance, the depositor paving
the premium, which is the way it should have
been done. The deposit function, built up with
great care during the last fifteen vears, was a
godsend to the producer. He paid no fees or
shrinkage, if the crop was sold before October.
He was given the privilege of storing bis surplus
in warehouses close to terminals. A large credit
was supplied him on his deposit, without interest
of any kind. Sacks were supplied him free,
and money advanced him on his promisory note—
in advance of the delivery of his crop.
There is
not a single entity governmental or philanthrophical, which would do this, and no other industry enjoyed like benefits. The only gain
the highly competitive Chinese interests obtained was the stabilizing of supply to fill their


milling contracts, which in turn supplied interprovincial requirements.
The way the warehousing law reads may
sound good, but in its attempt to cuff the ears
of a few reckless warehousemen in Bulacan, it
landed a knockout blow to the producer. As a
consequence, the greater part of the crop will
be bought up at market prices, which generally
register low at the time of deposit. The other
portion will remain in warehouses on the farms,
awaiting demand. This demand will not materialize if high prices are requested, and imports
will be utilized to meet the demands of the consumer. All the blah-blah about the Chinese
fixing prices is merely bunk.
At times business cannot be done at a profit
under laws which penalize it. In this case the
road is open to everyone who desires to enter
the warehousing business under present conditions. If this is favorable they should immediately embark in it, without further chestthumping, scarehead propaganda, or begging
the question. As to success, let us say nothing.
As to the ambition, it is legitimate. If profits
are to be forthcoming, now is the time, as the
crop is good and conditions favorable. They
need fear no competition under the present law
as to date we have heard of no one who cares
to embark in the business of storing palay.
But there should be less careless talk and more
action. The rice producer in general holds no
brief for either. All he wants is a fair price for
his product and the enjoyment of as many favorable mechanisms as are reasonable. Like
the consumer, neither race nor color bother him,
if he gets the price So far we have not heard
of any bouquets to be presented to the chap who
has deprived them of some millions of pesos, but
they are beginning to think.
No matter how we deplore the inability of the
producer to enter business, through cooperatives,
we must admit that his function lies and will lie
in production and its consequent yields. Anyone
with a third grade knowledge of arithmetic
can see by the daily papers exactly the spread
between the raw and processed material—palay
and rice. This should be enough to terrify the
ordinary individual, but we have the unterrified
with us as of yore. The idea of the cooperative
is to control supply with an idea of collective
bargaining. What about the other end of the
business, the consumer? . He will not be happy
if he has to pay the price saddled upon him b.
monopolies, in addition to the tariff which itself
is ample protection.
Cooperatives have not always been successful,
and most certainly not in the daily food require
ments of peoples. The pool is entirely a different proposition dealing not with domestic
supply, but with export surpluses, and not all
pools are successful. Those familiar with cooperation know full well that if applied to cooperatives, it requires a business man to head
it, and we have no better business men than the
ones who have built up the rice industry, who
extend credits without interest, who distribute
efficiently and cheaply. There is nothing happening in the dark as regards the rice industry
except, perhaps, legislation, which never understands business. The idea of scrapping a
perfectly good machine for an inadequate one
is nothing but pure unadulterated foolishness.
If cooperatives are desired, why not concentrate on lines which show a profit, rather than
on those which show such small spreads, and
then hire a business man to run the business.
If they can compete with present mechanisms
there is no law stopping them. As for the rice
industry, there would be no bond required of a
cooperative; instead, they would have to build
their own warehouses, invite deposits, pay a host of
ignorant operatives and take a chance on collective bargaining. If they went into the processing
of their product it would mean a high capital
investment without an adequate outlet. I
they extended it to take in the distribution
function, they would face an impasse. If they
expected to advance credits to the depositors
they would have to look up a banking connection,


and they could not distribute to their patrons
the profits until their entire stock had been
disposed of for the year. With these requirements in mind, the way is open for cooperatives!
No cooperatives we know of have ever flourished if built from the top, or if forced upon
producers against their will. The mere registration of firms makes little difference if they
cannot function at a profit for business is not
built that way. Nor can it be said that one
man or any group of men have the ability to
outguess the market every time. The Chinese
here in the business for centuries have not been
able to do that, nor anyone in the United States,
either. As a matter of fact producers have only
one way to seek solid gains, and that means
higher yields from the lands they own. It means
concentrating on production rather than on
distribution, a very different thing. The processing of their produce has been the rock upon
which far too many have been wrecked,
for generally speaking producers are not business
men.
The whole trouble in the Philippines is the
urge to build from the top. Too many movements are in their infancy, desiring to run
before they can walk. Too much ignorance
prevails as to just what business is, and too much
enmity prevents a cool consideration of actual
facts. It may not be known to our Patrick
Henrys that many firms are now liquidating
rice at a loss of thirty centavos a sack, to enable
them to mobilize cash for the new crop and to
clean off the old crop accounts. We can imagine the howl of a cooperative faced with this,
but we cannot imagine them doing it. The
way, however, is open to all who desire to enter
the business.
With regard to the irrigation facilities supplied by the government, we may say, taking
into consideration present projects functioning,
annual crops, and ordinary increase of population, that a limit has been reached. It is true
that a certain amount of irritation exists against
these projects but this urge is due in part to illconsidered estimates, the annual payment of
irrigation fees and, last but not least, the hope
held out by politicians of exempting beneficiaries
from payments altogether and saddling the
government with the cost—as in other countries.
Irrigation increases yields by approximately
8% but its function is crop insurance, a much
more important phase of production from a
national standpoint. The amount of fees
collected is small as against the benefits received. As no government is stronger than its
producers, it might be that a way out would be
to make a flat rate per hectare, under the name
of service, that would repay over a long period
the costs and interests, collected with the ordinary land tax. Where the land is so poor that
the growing of rice rarely pays, the extension of
irrigation to that area is not feasible. Furthermore, as in good years we are practically selfsustaining as to rice, any further extension is
simply forcing the rice industry into the status
of the sugar industry, with the exception that
sugar has a market and rice has none, being a
protected crop.
The above is worth while thinking over,
before raising any more bonds for irrigation,
as further expansion is approaching the danger
line.


Short Short Short Story
Once there was a clever little girl named Susie
Scrugs. Well, Susan Scrugs learned to dance
and so Suzanne Scrugs went to New York. And,
happy to relate, Suzanne Swan made good.
So a rich old millionaire married Mlle. Suzanne
de Swan and now Mrs. Harry Smith lives
abroad.—Life.


I have never jumped out of an aeroplane
with a parachute that was slow to open, but one
time I returned from a week-end trip and saw
a telegram under my door.—Life.


I know why auto drivers are always in such a
big hurry. They are speeding up to get in
front of you so they can slow down.—Life.


12


  


ecember, 1929


The Fairies of Mount Banahaw
(Conlinued from page 5)
grave of their mother, waiting their father’s
return with Santa Claus! The blankets of the
night wrapped them round, perhaps God shielded their innocence and helplessness.
Near midnight, deep sounds emerged from the
crater of the volcano, like the first notes of
solemn sacred music, the sounds gradually
changed into a soft melody, as of a Christmas
anthem sounding low and far away. The children dreamed. From the blossoms at the grave,
and the blooming orchids swinging from the
tree branches, emerged a troupe of gayly tripping sprites not larger than a man’s finger.
They are the fairies of Mount Banahaw, and
they formed a circle round the sleeping children
and danced their fairy measures with gayety
and grace. The tempo of the crater’s music
quickened, and the fairies changed their step
with it; they danced rigodons and quadrilles,
then they had a flower dance and threw handfuls
of fragrant roses over the children—never once
waking them.
So the night passed.
At the false dawn, just before Aliwayway,
goddess of the rising sun, heralded the morning,
the mountain hushed its music and there stepped
forth from the grave of the children’s mother a
figure all of loveliness and young beauty—clad
in white, with flowers in her hair and a girdle
of orchids round her waist. Halting momentarily at the edge of the grave, which closed
behind her, she gazed tenderly upon the children,
then stepped softly toward them. Bending
down, she kissed them on the lips; and then the
fairies came and danced once more and sang a
beautiful song; the shrouded lady wept as she
took the children in her arms and carried them
into their father’s cottage.
It was past sunrise when Juan, all anxiety and
solicitous concern, at last reached home. But
could it really be home, his home? He stopped
in astonishment when he reached the clearing,
for the rambling thatch cottage, no more than a
rude mountaineer’s hut, was gone, and in its
place stood a neat little wooden house—as good
as a rich man’s in town. Juan rubbed his eyes
vigorously, to make sure he had not fallen asleep
and to dreaming, then hurried on across the garden and into the house. He expected it to
fade into the unseen things of hope, but lo, it
remained just as it was! And in a clean new
white bed Silva and Alejandro were fast asleep.
Toys, candies, and clothing for both boy and
girl were spread upon a fine table in the center
of the room, under a Christmas tree brilliant
with candles aglow and burdened with garlands
of fruits and nuts.
A sob escaped Juan. Sinking to his knees and
leaning his tired head low, he kissed the branches
of the tree. For he had recognized it—the little
pine sapling he had found on the very crest of
Mount Banahaw and had brought down and
planted at the grave. He realized that Maria
had returned from Eternity that night, and made
the sapling into this radiant Christmas tree.
At the head of the grave, where the pine had
stood, Juan set the vase from the Chinese trader’s store, and no day passes that the children
do not fill it with the choicest wild flowers the
forest knows. As he gathers rattan for their
wants, Juan wonders at the mystery. He is
sure it was Maria who visited their lonely children that night, and he thinks perhaps she will
come again—perhaps at some other Christmastide.
Perhaps she will.


Britain at The Hague
(Continued from page 7)
outlined its own point of view at some length.
For a time it looked as though the breakdown
of the Conference was inevitable. M. Briand
made an impassioned plea to put the interests
of Europe before any paltry financial considerations. I said that I agreed, and that, so long
as conciliatory measures were likely to be fruitful, we had been willing to continue. We had,
however, waited three weeks. There had been


no progress, no decision. The British delegation had been most anxious to give every opportunity for conversations that might be fruitful
of results. All through the British delegation
had manifested great patience. For days we
had had to sit idle, and now, as a final offer,
we were asked to accept one-half of our legitimate claims. The end of the Conference seemed
at hand, but developments were imminent which
showed once more that the darkest hour is that
before the dawn.
The room was insufferably hot, and it was
suggested that we might adjourn for ten minutes
to get some fresh air. We split into little groups,
and then the bargaining process began. The
British delegates remained in one room, while
the others went into another room. M. Jaspar
acted as intermediary. M. Jaspar returned
within five minutes to say that his friends would
advance only sixty-six per cent. I at once
rejected this, and at eight-forty-five I described
on half a sheet of note paper the five heads of our
minimum demands, and this I handed to M.
Jaspar.
Half an hour later he returned with an offer
which showed some advance but was still unacceptable. I begged him to continue his
efforts, and pointed out that in half an hour he
had advanced $100,000 a vear, and at the same
rate he would come up to the minimum demands
before midnight. He returned in a quarter
of an hour with a further advance of E50,000.
“You are doing first rate, M. Jaspar,” I said.
“Be not weary in welldoing.” In the next two
or three hours further small advances were
made, and by eleven-thirty they had come within
E240,000 of the British claim. M. Jaspar was
in despair. “I cannot do more,” he said. “You
have emptied all our pockets."
"Go through
vour pockets again,” I said very kindly, "and
I am sure that you can find enough to cover what
remains between us."
“You told me you had
a very kind heart,” he said, "but we have never
met a man like vou.” I assured him that it
was out of the kindness of my heart that I
wished him to continue his efforts, as I was sure
that he would succeed. Then someone had a
brain wave, and the hitherto undiscovered means
of giving us the sum we needed was discovered.
At midnight our demands were accepted, and
the Conference was saved. At 2 o’clock in the
morning we left the conference hall. Outside
were hundreds of journalists, who had been
waiting all through those hours and had enlivened the tedium by making a bonfire of the
Young Report in the square.
I had now better explain just what our persistency has gained. We claimed, in addition
to our annuities of E2,400,000, a fairer share
of the unconditional annuities and some substantial improvement in regard to deliveries in
kind. The agreement we reached on the first
of these claims gives us an increase in our guaranteed annuities of E2,000,000 a year for 37
years. This is guaranteed to the extent of
E990,000 by the French and Belgian Governments and #450,000 by Italy. We receive in
addition at once a lump sum of E5,000,000,
which is equal to an additional annuity of
E360,000 a year. In addition, by the rearrangement of the dates at which debt payments are
to be made, we gain an additional sum of
2200,000 a vear. This brings the total gains
under this head to 2,000,000 a year. And
there is the further advantage of considerable
value that, of these sums, ninety per cent are
guaranteed and are therefore placed in the category of unconditional annuities, and we should
continue to receive them in the event of any
postponement. This may be regarded as full
compensation for the small sacrifice we made in
the total of our original demands.
In regard to the second point, we obtained a
larger percentage of unconditional annuities.
Under the Young Plan there was available for
us a share of the undistributed unconditional
annuities which would not have amounted at the
outset to more than E850,000 a year. We are
now receiving, in addition to the guaranteed
annuities, a further unconditional payment
of E2,750,000 a year. On the third of our claims
—namely, delivery in kind—a very substantial
improvement was secured by the agreement
with Italy. They have undertaken to buy


1,000,000 tons of coal a year for the next three
years. These three matters constitute our gains
in the financial and commercial sphere, but the
British delegation has been equally successful
on the political side. Agreement has been
reached between France, Belgium, and Great
Britain on the one hand, and Germany on the
other, by which the evacuation of the'Rhineland
is to be effected by the end of next June. The
withdrawal of the British troops will begin at
once, and it is expected that our evacuation
will be complete before Christmas.
May I now briefly summarize the results of
our four weeks’ strenuous efforts? It has been
commonly asserted in the foreign Press that the
British delegation were fighting only for some
sordid material gains. It is quite true that we
were determined that our just rights in the matter
of the distribution of reparations should be
respected. These were by no means unimportant, although a sum of E2,000,000 a year is an
infinitesimal part of the enormous financial
sacrifice which this country has made for the
benefit of our Continental debtors. When
we decided to resist the call for further sacrifice
we desired the world to know that we had reached the limit of our generosity and that we could
not allow England any lo nger to be regarded the
milch cow of Europe.
But beyond this, and of far greater importance,
was our assertion of our international rights and
our determination that international agreements
should be respected. I am convinced that our
stand will make a profound impression on our
future relations with the other countries of
Europe. The rights and the influence of Great
Britain in international diplomacy have been
reasserted, and there will be no reversion to the
spineless policy of recent years. We have won
the respect of the nations with whom we have
been in acute, but friendly, controversy in the
past four weeks. I made it a condition at the
outset of the Conference that Great Britain
would not accept any concession to her just
claims at the expense of the smaller powers or of
Germany. This condition has been maintained.
After the final agreement had been reached I
voluntarily sacrificed some share of the unconditional annuities to which we were entitled in
order that they might be divided among the
smaller nations, and this concession has won for
us their ardent gratitude and respect. Throughout the Conference the personal relations between
the British delegates and those of the other
powers have been of the most cordial and friendly character—a striking contrast with the bitterness of the personal attacks which have been
made on me in some of the Continental newspapers. One of the mildest characterized myself as the reincarnation of the man who burned
Joan of Arc, beheaded Mary, Queen of Scots,
and banished Napoleon.
I cannot conclude without paying a warm
tribute of respect and admiration to the leaders
of the other delegations. M. Briand’s wise
statesmanship and conciliatory spirit have contributed much to the success of the Conference.
Animated by an earnest desire to bring the Conference to a successful end, he made concessions
which I am sure his own countrymen will on
consideration heartily approve. Herr Stresemann, the leader of the German delegation, who
has his own internal political difficulties, showed
a willingness to co-operate which was highly
commendable. M. Jaspar, the Belgian Prime
Minister, filled the difficult and often very
unwelcome task of negotiator between the
parties. His tact, his humor, and his patience
were in a very large measure the means by which
a satisfactory outcome of the Conference was
achieved.
I would just like to make one further acknowledgment of our gratitude, ad that is to the
unanimous support of the British Press and of
British public opinion. Without this it would
have been quite impossible to achieve our object.
At twelve o’clock on Saturday the Conference
ended amid universal congratulations and satisfaction. It was the birthday of the Queen of the
Netherlands, to whose Government the Conference was deeply indebted for its hospitality.
As the delegates finally left the conference hall
the band assembled in the square played the
stirring old hymn, "Now thank we all our God."


December, 1929


  


13


It was a fitting end to the Conference, which
I am sure has done much to liquidate the legacies
of the War, to liberate the countries of Europe,
and to enable them to pursue more actively
their economic reconstruction. Above all, I
believe it will be seen that it has brought a new
spirit into international policy which will help
to bring that peace so abundantly desired by
the people.
Tropical Landscape Architecture
(Continued from page 9)
for instance, sweet alyssum—is singularly effective. Pilea may be used for this purpose, and
Alternantera is also frequently employed in a
similar way.
Climbing plants may be divided into three
classes: the woody semibush form (requiring a
wooden frame upon which it is trained), of which
the bougainvillea and allamanda are good examples; the herbaceous, twining, or tendril-bearing climbers, such as the many species of Ipomea,
Convolvulus, and granadilla; and the climbers
that attach themselves to the object upon which
they climb, such as Bignonia venusta, Pothos
aurea, and several species of piper.
The first-named class can be used to the best
advantage in screening unsightly objects. A
frame should be built upon which this class of
plants may climb. The more vigorous species
of the second class may be used in a similar way
and those of medium vigor are particularly well
adapted as porch climbers; the third class is


particularly useful in covering walls or the trunks
of old trees; they succeed best in shade.
A very attractive form of gardening is the
rockery, which may be built over a heap of refuse and rubbish in a shady situation with enough
good soil in the crevices between the stones on
the surface to support and nourish the plants.
Ferns and Selaginellas, begonias, tradescantias,
various aroids, and similar plants, as well as
terrestrial orchids, are particularly appropriate
in a rockery. If water is available for a small
pond, the rockery as an island in the center with
a simulated ruin can be used with telling effect,
the pond being planted to water lilies and lotus,
with here and there a clamp of Cyperus on the
shore. Bamboos, coconuts, reclining palms,
plants of weeping habit, and tall grasses may be
planted in the proximity of a pond.
Hanging baskets always add distinction to a
house, be it large or small; and every house
should have a few, either of the bird-nest fern,
orchids, or combination baskets of ofchids and
various ferns. Fern baskets made of strong
galvanized wire are most satisfactory and lasting. Coconut husks make very picturesque
receptacles for ferns and orchids, and securely
wired with copper or galvanized-iron wire last
a long time. For small plants, split bamboo
joints are attractive and serviceable, but they
decay rapidly.
Neglect to utilize native plants in connection
with ornamental gardening is not confined by
any means to the Philippines or the tropics, but
(Please turn to page 25)


The Ikugan or The Men With Tails
BY IVON GRUNER COOK


Since, in this modern civilized age surgeons have occadonaly cuna the spinalbone ol han lelstnenci into a
tail-like appendage; and Darwinian theories as well as
missing links have caused many heated arguments, it is
not surprising to find among the Manobo tribes of the
upper Agusan near the mountain fastness of Mount Apo
Mones ol mea vitha tang."
The old warrior, Amay, hunched closer to the
fire as the chill night air swept down the valley
from the mountainside. Flames threw into
relief the wrinkled face with its prominent cheek
bones, its high forehead, small black eyes that
glittered like iridescent bits of coal, and lips
reddened from the juice of the betel nut chewed
by filed teeth which had been darkened to an
inky-blackness.
The sun had only a little while ago dropped
behind Mt. Apo and children were still playing
and laughing together. Several of the boys
resting from a strenuous game kept glancing
toward Amay, and whispering among themselves.
Amay, though now an old, old man, was a
Bagani lipus; that is, one who had killed innumerable men (more than one hundred) including other Baganis, with his own hands.
He commanded great respect not only for his
deeds, but also because he was still a fierce
man in spite of his age. He alone of the whole
tribe was entitled to wear the costume of black,
embroidered in red, and the magenta kerchief
turban with the yellow spots.
Finally one lad, bolder than the others, crept
near to his side and questioned him: “Tell us,
Oh, great Amay, why the earth and trees swayed
and shook yesterday, until I felt a great fear in
my heart and a strange sickness in my head and
stomach."
The others drew closer.
The warrior sat stern and silent and no one
moved. Suddenly Amay shot a gory spurt of
betel juice into the fire, which flickered and
sputtered from the deluge. Then he began to
SD
he earth is as square and as flat as the
floor of yonder house; beneath it are four great
columns which hold it in the air. Sawa, the
great snake-god, lives between those supports.
When he shakes and twists against the posts,
the earth trembles.”
“But why does he shake and twist?” the boy
questioned.
NWhen the blood of men is spilled upon the
earth, Sawa smells it, but he cannot reach it
on account of his position beneath the earth, he


becomes infuriated and lashes his great tail with
violence until sometimes our houses fall, trees
crash, and even the earth cracks open.
“In his anger, he orders Makabuntasay, who
lives beside him and governs the fields of the
earth, to create a famine so that people may
suffer as he has suffered. To appease him the
goddess casts a spell upon the earth so that
neither pili nor camotes will grow, and the
people of the world must live on such roots as
they can dig from the ground.
“Busao, the God of War, lives at the side of
Sawa also. Greatly to be feared is Busao for he
can take the form of any animal, fish or tree and
thus learn which men are cowards, which stir up
mischief, and which are brave. Watch, too,
the birds that fly by night, because, though you
may not dream of such a thing, one of them may
be Busao."
A solemn hush fell over the group as the old
brave’s voice fell silent. Gradually they began
to whisper to each other in wondering tones.
Finally one vouth, who had remained on the
outer edge of the groups, sidled nearer to the
veteran.
“Sumagayan says that there were once men
with tails.” His voice trembled at his own
daring.
“Sumagayan! Huh!” grunted the old man,
with a disparaging shrug. Sumagayan was
only a Bagani ayo-ayo, one who had killed not
more than eight persons, and who was entitled
to wear only the red kerchief turban. Why. 1o
did not amount to as much as a Bagani hanagan,
or a Bagani tinabugan who had killed fifteen and
twenty-five men respectively. What right had
he to tell ancient folklore to these boys? That
was the duty of the prophetic dancer. This
must be corrected at once.
“For the present, no more! Tonight when the
moon rises high in the sky you may sit in the
rear of the warriors’ circle and listen to the
dancer’s tale. Go now to your homes."
He dismissed the boys and with a jubilant shout
they rose to their feet, and rushed to tell their
parents the glorious news.
The hour was late when the moon finally
reached the highest point in the heavens and
flung her misty robe over the dark forms of
motionless trees. Houses built among the
branches cast weird, incongruous shadows; the
figures of men and women were like sable silhouettes until they moved into the campfire’s


WAy LCOKATOUnd?
There Isn't
Anything The
Boy Wants More
Than This

PORTADLE
An ideal Christmas
gift to be had on the
monthly payments with
reduction for cash.
Acme of Good
Typewriters


For the
Student
Business Man
Typist
Physician
Dentist
Engineer
Architect
Club Woman
Stenographer
Salesman


Our terms place
The Royal within
the reach of all.
Looks Good—Is Good
Noiseless and Durable


Camera Supply Co.
P. O. Box
110 Escolta


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


14


  


December, 1929


circle of light. The warriors seated themselves
in the foreground while the woruen and wideeyed boys remained in the background.
Slowly the steady boom of the agongs began,
and as the notes became swifter, rising and
falling in cadence, a dancer holding palm leaves
in his hands leaped to his feet. Gracefully he
swayed back and forth, like flowing water, as he
took weaving steps in first one direction and then
another, the palin leaves oscillating with the
plastic movemengs of his body. The hills
seemed to vibrate with the music; then, as the
drums gradually grew silent and the dancer
swayed in one spot as a flower bend’s in a gentle
summer breeze, the clear high notes of the
sabay, a bamboo flute, were projected into the
air, and the dancer-prophet began his tale in a
half-chanting tone:"
“Our fathers were brave men who lived deep
in the primeval forests at the head of the Agusan
river. None was more powerful than they, for
their word was law throughout the valley, from
the moutainside to the seashore, until one day
there came swarming over the mountain top,
through the overhanging foliage, those fierce
war-like creatures, known as the Ikugan or the
men-with-tails. In these days one never sees the
Ikugan, and whither they have gone, or from
whence they came, only Magbabaya, the All
Powerful, knows. They were colossal creatures whose skin was covered with long, soft
hair; they walked with a stooped, swinging gait,
and though their hands and feet were huge they
made very little noise as they moved through
the vast woodland. Most inconceivable of all
was the elongated tail with which they did
startling things, such as reaching out withit and
choking a warrior who was about to attack
them from the rear, at the same time mowing
down another in front; or they hid themselves
in trees, waiting until a war party passed beneath,
then suspended themselves over the group by
their tails, and quickly overpowered the unfortunate people who were thus placed at a
disadvantage. In such a manner, this war
continued for nearly fourteen years.


“At the time the Ikugan first made their appearance, one clever woman took flight when
her tribe was attacked and hid herself in a ragged
swamp, shielded by tigbao plants. During the
interval that she was hidden, she amused herself
by dyeing all sorts of fibers and weaving them
into various kinds of cloth. It is because of her
diligence that the Manobo women of today are
excellent weavers.
“One day as she sat weaving, her eyes were
attracted by an indistinct object which glistened
each time the wind riopled the bushes in front
of her. Intrigued, she rose and parted the
bushes.
“Aha!' she said to herself. "A limokon egg.
Now when I am hungry I shall have a feast.
Lest a wild animal should take this unexpected
wind-fall I shall hide it within this hollow tree.
“Having concealed the treasure she returned
to her work. Strange to say, for many days
she forgot all about the egg; one day, suddenly
remembering it, she hastened to see ifit were
still within the rotted tree trunk.
“Her surprise knew no bounds when she beheld
the broken shell and its contents. Instead of
a limokon she found a beautiful girl. Delightedly,
she gathered the infant in her arms, and
from then on, until the end of the war, she
gave the lovely child every care. Each year as
the child grew older, her beauty became more
radiant. Strands of wavy black hair, scintillating gleams of blue in the sunlight, hung far below
the flawless, gold-tinted face and shoulders.
Her dark brows were straight and narrow
over widelv-placed, almond-shaped eyes, the
depths of which sparkled like the stars of night.
The grace and swiftness of venados, the small
deer, was not to be compared with the litheness
of her dainty body. Her laughter was as the
cool breezes which blow from Apo’s crown, while
her voice throbbed with a sweetness like the
song of the thrush.
“One morning, nearly fourteen years after the
discovery of the limokon egg, just as Helios
parted the foliage of the forest with his rosetipped, silvery arrows, three Ikugans crept steal

thily upon the old woman and the girl sleeping
deeply on beds of boughs. The leader immediately signalled to his followers to bind the
sleepers and taxe them to the king. As the
huge, hairy hand touched her, the child screamed
and struggled to reach her foster mother, but to
no avail. Both women were quickly overpowered and hastily carried away.
“Now when the king beheld the girl he fell
passionately in love with her and felt that he
could not live unless he could have her for his
wife.
“'Old woman, if you will give me your daughter
to wed, I will grant you any request you may
make."
“‘Tell me first, oh, king, what you have done
with my people.”
“‘Your people are no more. From the mountain top to the level of the sea, we have fought
with them and have killed them; saving only
these men and women you sec here.' With a
wave of his hand he indicated a sullen group of
oners.
pr
““These,’ he continued, 'I shall use as slaves
and for sacrifices."
“The old woman stood quietly before him.
She knew that she was powerless to refuse him
his desire, and her heart was heavy with grief.
Then a great light seemed to flood her mind...
did he really mean to grant her request? ...
she could no more than try...
¡“Sire, if vou would wed my daughter, you
must first place a married couple from these
captives on each of the streams which feed the
Agusan."
“Only the finest specimens of each tribe had
been taken captive. At first the king hesitated,
but he had given his word, and moreot r such
a wondrous maid was worth twice as many
slaves! He was indeed enamoured of the beautiful girl.
“And so he ordered bancas to be prepared, and
in each one placed a man and woman with food
enough to last them for a week. Instructions
were given them to turn off, one at each trib(Please turn to page 17)


New
buperior
Whippet


With the convenience
of the “finger tip control" that all WHIPPETS possess the
pleasure you get from
a WHIPPET will
lead you to eventually decide to own one
of these exceptionally easy riding cars.


MANILA OVERLAND SALES COMPANY, INCORPORATED
Tel. 2-12-88
805 Echague
P. O. Box 459


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929



YE
  


15


Little Biographies of Men of the Crowd
Speaker Roxas, commendably leading his people to reflect upon the economics of their present situation, said something to the effect that the masses in
the Philippines now are no better off than they were when the American period
began, and the half-truth of this constitutes a challenge. The whole philosophic truth is that the masses everywhere and at all times have only a livelihood
for their toil, but that the American plan permits a great many individuals to
lift themselves out of the masses and better their economic lot. To illustrate the
way in which Filipinos of today, who never become widely known, are throwing
off the bonds of oldtime feudal aristocracy and succeeding in bettering their
material condition, the JourNAl begins a series of true narratives under the
heading, Little Biographies of Men of the Crowd. It will pay for authenticated
data when the stories written from the data are printed, and it would appreciate
such cooperation.—Ed.


I: The Barber Who Buys A Farm
Valerio Bulanan, a barber in the new shop
next door to the Savoy theater, is just one of the
crowd; barbers who are very much of a success
financially are not numerous in any country, and
conditions that enable a barber here and there
among the crowd to lift himself into the propertied class are surely not below par. So let us
learn a little of the life history of Valerio. He
is, of course, a first rate barber.
He is 33 years old; he attended the public
schools of San Isidro, Nueva Ecija, his native
town, until, when in his third year of high school,
in 1914, he began teaching country school at
₱18 a month. He taught school five years,
reached a salary of P28 a month, and came to
Manila in 1919 to try to better his fortune. His
father, a worthy peasant, is poor, having six
children living and only three hectares of land;
Valerio has had to make his own way, and it was
his father’s inability to help him that caused him
to quit studying and commence earning money.
Arrived in Manila 10 years ago, he found a
low-pay job at the customshouse. He worked at
this job during the short government hours;
he made his home with a relative in Tondo,
who is a barber and has a little shop, and
this relative taught him barbering. Valerio


soon quit his job as a workmen and took up
his trade as a barber. He was determined to
get ahead; his oldtime classmates were going on,
some in one profession, some in another, and
natural pride impelled him to ambition. He left
the shop in Tondo and came downtown to one
on calle Carriedo owned at that time by Eugenio
Sevilla, another San Isidro man. Custom here
was more lucrative, many sailors and soldiers
patronized the shop, and Valerio, pleasing them
and being rewarded with liberal tips for good
service, made as much as P300 a month. He
married and began rearing a family.
He was also a little gay of evenings; he
squandered a good deal of his money—as he looks
back ruefully now—but he also saved a good
deal of it. One thing he did was to hire a lawver and go into court in a vain effort to establish
his mother’s rights in a rich rice farm of 50 hectares. The title had got into the hands of a
cousin, and the land had been finally registered in
the cousin’s name, the deal beginning at the time
of the insurrection. Valerio failed of establishing
his mother’s rights, so she never received the
inheritance to which she believed herself entitled.
The experience was expensive all round, but the
law suit contributed to Valerio’s wisdom; he
knows what registered title means!


The money he saved he, of course, put into
rice lands in San Isidro; he bought three hectares for about P1,000, another four hectares
for about P1,500; so he is now the owner of
seven hectares, and a low price for his holdings
would be P600 a hectare. What the three
hectares brought him helped to buy the four.
Immigration into Nueva Ecija has been such
from the llokano provinces that good rice lands
have materially increased in value during the
past five years, for they are scarce.
Valerio can raise corn, yams and tobacco on
some of his land, as well as rice. He raises all
he can, and finds ready transportation for it to
market. It is truck service over the new roads;
for a few pesetas a peasant rides anywhere he
may wish to go; formerly, carromatas charged
₱3 for taking one from the railway station in
San Isidro to Cabanatuan, and now a truck will
pick you up at your door in San Isidro and drop
you anywhere in Cabanatuan for P0.40, while
the railway fare has been lowered to P0.65, or
about 30%. The new transportation has much
to do with the increasing value of the land.
While he has done comparatively well, Valerio is still ambitious. He has his own shop
in Paco, employing eight barbers, and himself
when he is not busy downtown; he has also
formed a partnership with a master tailor recently and opened a tailor shop which is paying
a satisfactory profit. He has the idea of saving
more money, selling his San Isidro land and
buying farther up the valley where prices are
lower; he has a chance to participate in the
ownership of a 200-hectare tract in Tarlak, or a
120-hectare tract in northern Nueva Ecija.
In a word, he is following the route of the extending transportation lines and buying land
for a rise of values that will make hir well-to-do.
There are special reasons, with wi th he has
familiarized himself, why lands are cheaper at
some other points than they are in San Isidro;
and yet the cheaper lands will produce just as
good crops.
One reason, it seems, is that the Ilocano
settler is often willing to abandon his land quite
(Please turn to page 17)


A
AEN
Healthful
Drink—
Try it with
your meals
—a glass of
delicious cold beer. Ask for
Sanilliquel
Palepilsen
Brewed by
SAN MGUEL BRENERI


FIRST IN 1888-
FOREMOST EVER SINCE


FA
FA


years of tire makingyears of progress—


have made


the standard by which
all tires are judged


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


16


  
Life Insurance Trusts
trust.


The year 1920 marks the beginning in carnest
of the life insurance trust movement in America.
A tremendous increase in this class of business
is shown from the years 1923 to 1927 when an
increase of 856 per cent is recorded. Between
1926 and 1927 a 200 per cent increase is reported,
and today there is said to be more than $750,000,-
000 (U.S. Currency) of insurance payable to
trust companies and banks in their capacities as
Trustees under Life Insurance Trusts.
Not only are men of modest means putting
in trust their ten, twenty or thirty thousand
dollars of insurance but also men of wealth are
putting in trust their insurance policies in
amounts of $250,000 and even 51,000,000.
This business could not have grown to such
proportions if there were not sound fundamental
reasons for business men to avail themselves of
such service. There are such reasons and as
business men learn of them, either from their
business associates, attorneys, or advisors, they
join with the others to swell the rising tide of this
class of trust business.
The average man in any community whether
he be a professional man, a business executive
or a workman, seldom fails, from the time he
enters business until he dies, to consult his
banker in almost every business venture. He
will not purchase real estate until he obtains an
appraisal of the property. The same is true
with his stock and bond purchases. It is more
true with respect to his searchings concerning
the credit of the business houses or individuals
with whom he comes in contact.
Yet many of these men die leaving their affairs
in the hands of those who, both by environment,
temperament and financial experience, are unfit
to care for his dependents. Often after a generation of time used in the amassing of material
wealth, and of constantly making use of the
advice of his banker in the transactions involved
in accomplishing this end, he too frequently is
so short sighted as to fail to avail himself of the
ultimate means of protection for his family by
placing his accumulated wealth in Trust with
his banker.
The life insurance trust, simply explained,
is a written agreement generally executed in
duplicate between a person owning certain life
insurance policies and a trust company as trustee, wherein it is stipulated that at the time of
the insured’s death, his policies which are deposited with the bank or trust company will be paid
over to that institution. The trust agreement
recites that the trustee thus designated will
invest and reinvest the proceeds of these policies


over a period of years and will collect and dissribute the income to definitely designated peroons or institutions in such amounts and at such
times as set forth in the agreement.
There is little difference between this arrangement and that of the "Annuity Contract,"
“Installment Policy” or the “Monthly Income
Policy” which one may secure from a life insurance company with the exception that when the
trust company is made trustee of these funds
it is possible to grant it discretionary power as
to the distribution of the earnings or principal.
This is the one big feature of life insurance
trusts that appeals to the business man. The
life insurance company, in making payments


under an “Annuity Contract,” “Installment
Policy” or “Monthly Income Policy,” is bound
by hard and fast rules to pay only the amounts
called for in the policy at the times stipulated,
no matter what the emergency might be. No
discretionary powers are possible, with respect
to payments of the proceeds of life insurance
policies after the death of the owner of such poli

December, 1929
cies,unless there has been created a life insurance
In setting up or creating life insurance trusts
it is the usual custom to make provisions for
the trustee to pay a stated income to the beneficiaries, with authority to use additional amounts
cither for unexpected happenings, such as sickness or for specific contingencies such as the
education of minor children, to be paid when
they arrive at a certain specified age. Provisions are often made for birthday presents,
christmas presents, anniversary presents and
for wedding presents to the children at time of
their marriage. 'Careless tendencies of thoughtless children may be curbed by authorizing the
trustee to use discretion as to the amounts they
shall receive (over and above their actual re

quirements) holding back, if necessary, certain
major sums until they arrive at an age of greater
discretion. Many men have certain forms of
charity which the desire to continue supporting
but time and circumstances may alter the status
of some such favorite charity and discretionary
power to change the beneficiary under certain
conditions is often desirable.
A well known general agent for one of the
large life insurance companies had the following
to say in an address made before the trust division of the American Bankers’ Association:—
2
There are many reasons for the existence
of trust companies as we see it from a life
insurance standpoint. We realize the flexibility in the trust, the change in the economic
conditions of life.
“Suppose a man had made a will and created
a trust in 1900 and should have passed away
within the last ten vears. The standard of
living which he might have set for his family
at that time would be wholly inadequate and
embarrassing. Therefore discretionary power
is necessary.
“The contacts which are formed with successful and painstaking business men are
worth much to a widow and growing children.
I am glad to know that my only son, through
my creating a trust, will be able to have contact, if anything should happen to me, with
such institutions and such men as are at the
head of our fine banks and trust companies.”
One other very important point in favor of
creating a life insurance trust is the safety afforded the beneficiaries from the possibilities of litigation. The life insurance trust takes the place
of a will, in so far as the proceeds of the insurance policies are concerned, but has the added
advantage of not being subject to the Probate
in the Couris and it can not be contested.
While no courts of the Philippines have as
yet passed upon questions that may arise with
respect to life insurance trusts, we are advised
by competent legal counsel that when a life in

The insular Life Assurance Co., Lta.
MANILA, P. I.





ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans onrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
low interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family
FOR ABOUT P31.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of P1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


HOME OFFICE


Call or write for particulars to:


4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 11
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


The West Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
contracts designed to meet every need
of business or personal protection.
For particulars and quotations consult the
Philippine Branch Office
West Coast Life Insurance Co.
Kneedler Building
Manila, P. I.
Telephone 2-36-74


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


uwN


COMMIVEROL JOORIAL
TAVABEI
OI"


11


surance trust is created, the money (principal
and income) may be made payable by the person
executing the trust to any person or persons
desired and the "laws of succession" would have
no application. We are also advised that life
insurance trusts are not subject to inheritance
tax.
Little Biographies of Men of the
Crowd
(Continued from page 15)
as casually as he homesteaded it; the land not
having come to him in the customary way, he
does not look upon his patent from the government as a genuine title, and for a modest remuneration for his labor in getting the land
under cultivation he will pass title and move
off. He likes to be among his people, and an
infiltration of Tagalogs from the south—a process
which never ceases—disgusts him and inclines
him to move away.
Valerio is a Tagalog. What of his brothers
and sisters?
There are four boys living, and two girls.
One of the girls is still in school, the other is
married to a man of her own class, a tenant
farmer. But this tenant has saved money
and bought himself a farm of four hectares; a
new crop is coming on, too, and if Valerio sells
his land his brother-in-law will buy it. Valerio’s
three brothers are tenant farmers of San Isidro;
one of them works Valerio’s land, and another
helps their father, now too old for all the work of
a three-hectare farm. The married sister has
six children, with good prospects of being able
to put all of them through school. As for the
old father, the boon of rapid transportation
into Manila benefits such old men as he, and the
young as well. It has become a very profitable
and easy avocation to grow mangoes; twenty
years ago this fruit brought almost nothing in
San Isidro, but last year Valerio’s sister sold the
crop from one tree for P150 without the trouble
of leaving her house to do so. The crop of a
single tree has sold for P200; the buyers motor
up from Manila, and bid for the crop, which they
gather themselves, when the fruif is well set;
and the new immigrants from Baliuag have
taught the San Isidro growers how to smoke the
trees to stimulate early bearing, while a method
of fertilization sometimes induces two crops a
year.
Valerio’s wife has borne him two children.
In reality, however, he has three; for one of his
brothers has, according to ancient customary
law, given him a boy now thirteen years old and
in grade VI, Valerio’s own boy being under
nine and in grade III. The elder boy, as much


Zamboanga Building
A committee designated by the provincial
governor has been busy during the past week
studying the proposition to build a hotel or inn
at Pasonanca and develop the park as a pleasure
resort in cooperation with the Philippine Tourist
Association and the Manila Hotel Company.
A prospectus has been prepared and will be
submitted at a meeting of the officials and businessmen of Zamboanga to be held in the Zamboanga Club next Wednesday afternoon at
5 o’clock, and all interested in the progress and
welfare of their city are urged to be present.
As outlined in the Herald last week, the
Manila Hotel Company proposes to supply
half the capital necessary for the erection and 
operation of the inn and the Dollar Steamship
Lines propose to bring the tourists to Zamboanga. 
Realizing, however, that such an enterprise
could hardly pay dividends for some time to
come if entirely dependent upon the tourist
trade, it is intended to make Pasonanca park
and inn so attractive that local patronage will
pay all running expenses and leave a safe margin
of profit. The tourist business will be "velvel”
The bungalow arrangement, with numerous I
small cottages adjoining or in the immediate
vicinity of the main building, will appeal espe

Valerio’s as if born to him, was a dreamy herdboy
when his father and uncle discovered that he had
a mind good enough to deserve schooling; so he
was given to his uncle and put to school in
Manila. He sketches with skill, Valerio hopes
he may become a painter: he will be given a
chance in the fine-arts school.
“I live in Manila in order to have the advantage of the best schools,” says Valerio. “It
is hard to find money here, but I am doing my
best. We don’t own our own home now; we did
have a house on leased land, rent P8 a month,
but we sold it when we could make P250 clear.
Now we wish we hadn’t; the new owners get
₱40 a month from rooms rented to students, and
live there besides. We may buy in one of the
additions, but not until after I do something
about the new land; we are saving everything
for that and the tailor shop because they will
make us money. We have cut our expenses
5066-
Remember, Valerio is a barber.


The Ikugan
(Continued from page 11)
utary of the Agusan. Everyone rejoiced as the
flotilla sailed out of the harbor.
“The king’s marriage to the lovely maiden
was celebrated for several days amid great feasting, after which the king, his bride and the
Ikugans passed on over the mountain and were
never seen again. The old woman remained
in the upper Agusan teaching the new tribes the
art of dyeing and weaving.
“Some say that the lovely maiden was
Tagabayo, the Goddess of Love, who assumed a
human form to aid her brother, Busao, in overcoming the war-gods of the Ikugans, who were
greatly weakened after her marriage to the
Ikugan king.
“However that may be, thus it was that all
the tribes in the upper and lower Agusan, after
being nearly exterminated, once again populated
this fertile valley.
The voice of the dancer died away and the
slow, explosive boom of the agong commenced
once again, gradually growing faster and faster.
In like manner, the dancer at first moved solemnly and with slow deliberation to the rythm of
the music; then as it accelerated, he stiffened
his body and whirled and leapt with ever-quickening movements until at last he fell exhausted.
Softly the tribe crept from the dying fire to
their tree houses. Sleepy-eyed boys stumbled
along beside their parents. Another day would
find these youths fighting the battles of the
Manobos.


Villa Tourist Place
cially to the local people, many of whom will
make their homes there; and the golf course,
tennis courts, auditorium, swimming pools and
other attractions will make the park the recreation center of the community, all to the financial
benefit of the company operating the inn.
The prospectus prepared by the committee
provides for the organization of a corporation
to be called “The Zamboanga Inn and Resort
Go.” (or any other name that may be chosen).
The corporation to have an authorized capital
stock of P200,000, divided into 4,000 shares of
P50 each. At the present time it is proposed
to sell not more than P50,000 of this stock to
local people. The Manila Hotel Company will
take P50,000. This will give the company
₱100,000 with which to construct and furnish
the inn, with an ample surplus for operation
and new development.
As a cold business proposition the plan should
look good to investors, and in providing an ideal
place for the local people to live, healthful
recreation and entertainment, it cannot be surpassed anywhere in the Orient. The support
and cooperation of all elements in Zamboanga
is assured.—Mindanao Herald.


It Kills—
Malaria Germs
MALARIA APPETON is
a combination curative and
tonic, easily digested, and
quickly effective.
MALARIA APPETON
is composed of quinine, organic iron, and arsenical
acids, the result of many
years of medical research.
If your druggist can not
supply you, write us.


Quinine.......... 20 %
Fer. Citr. Ammon. 10 %
Acid Arsenic...... 0. 5%
Cacao and Mass.. 69.5%


Distributors
BEHN, MEYER & CO., H. Mij.
227 David, Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


18


  OF COMMEROE JOURNAL


DCecilidel, I


When Japan Shut Herself From The World


When the three Portuguese adventurers,
under the guidance of their Chinese-junk captain
without any credentials, and all of doubtful
antecedents—first made their appearance, driven
by stress of weather, rather than their own good
will, to an unknown coast, it proved to be that
part of Japan owning the sovereignty of the
Prince of Bungo; and we find the Japanese,
though vigilant, manifested no reluctance to
admit the strangers. They showed them much
kindness even, and no obstacle was interposed
to a free trade with the inhabitants, in the interchange of such commodities as they had with
them. The natives and strangers were ultimately so well pleased with each other that, by
an arrangement with the Prince of Bungo, a
Portuguese ship was to be sent annually, laden
with woolen cloths, furs, silks, taffetas, and other
commodities needed by the Japanese.” This was
the commencement of European intercourse and
trade, carrying us back to 1542-5.
A few years later, Hansiro, a Japanese noble,
fled his country for 'an act of homicide' (having
run some fellow-subject through the body, no
doubt), and took refuge in Goa. There he was
converted and baptized.
This proved the second link in the chain; for,
being enterprising and shrewd, and animated
probably with the hot zeal of a new convert, he
soon persuaded the merchants of Goa, nothing
loth we may imagine that they might establish
a profitable trade with Japan, while to the Jesuit
fathers he promised a rich harvest of souls. He
obviously preached to willing ears in both directions, and foremost among his listeners was the
Jesuit apostle of the East, Francis Xavier, who
had recently arrived.
A ship was forthwith loaded with goods and
presents wherewith to commence a permanent
trade. For the accomplishment of spiritual
objects, Francis Xavier himself embarked with
the Japanese refugee, and a number of his order
as missionaries. A goodly freight—Jesuit fathers,


to win souls—merchants to make money: merchandise for the people and their carnal wants—
presents to propitiate the authorities—all were
duly provided; and thus auspiciously began this
second chapter.
On arriving at Bungo they were received with
open arms, and not the slightest opposition was
made to the introduction of either trade or religion. No system of exclusion then existed; and
such was the spirit of toleration, that the Government made no objection to the open preaching of
Christianity. Indeed, the Portuguese were
freely permitted to go where they pleased in the
empire, and to travel from one end of it to the


The accompanying article is an excerpt
from that book now Very rare, The Capital
of the Tycoon, by Britain’s first representative to Japan, Sir Rutherford Alcock
the editor’s copy being a Harper edition of
1863. The article shows how and why
Japan was closed to commerce and communication with the outside world for
two centuries, save for the Dutch trading
post of Decima, in Nagasaki harbor, where
the Dutch lead lives of prisoners and their
trade steadily declined. Now, of course,
as ever since the international treaties
were effected, Japan once again tolerates
all religions; there may be 200,000 or
300,000 disciples of the Christian faith in
Japan, including eminent men and women,
but new creeds affect but little the deep
philosophical bent of the country.
Next month we shall have Alcock’s
vivid description of the plight of the
Dutch at Decima, and in February his
account of the manner in which Japan
received the Perry treaties. This preMeiji period is a most instructive
one.—ED.


other. ‘The people freely bought the goods of
the traders, and listened to the teachings of the
missionaries."
And a little later we find it said that 'if the
feudal princes were ever at any time ready to
quarrel with the merchant, it was because he
would not come to their ports'. Passing onward a few years, we find the Christianity of the
Jesuit fathers spreading rapidly and universally;
princes and rulers, nobles and plebeians, women
and children, of all ranks and in large numbers,
embraced the faith. Churches, Hospitals, Convents, and Schools, were scattered over the
country. Intermarriages between the Portuguese and wealthy Japanese were frequent. So
little had Christianity to fear from the disposition of the governing powers, or the temper of
the people, that the only opposition they encountered in these early years of promise and
fruitful labor came from the Bonzes or native
priesthood; and they seem to have been powerless. For we read that, feeling their religion and
influence discredited by the rapid adoption of a
rival and hostile creed, they appealed to the
emperor to banish the Jesuit and Romish monks;"
and it is related 'that, annoyed by their importunities, he asked them how many different
religions there were in Japan.’ They answered
‘thirty-five.' ‘Well,’ said the emperor, 'when
thirty-five religions can be tolerated, we can
easily bear with thirty-six: leave the strangers
in peace."
After forty years, the Roman Catholic faith
was in such high esteem, and had such undisputed possession of the field (no Protestant element
having at that time appeared on the scene), that
a Japanese embassy, composed of three princes,
was sent to Rome to Pope Gregory XIII., with
letters and valuable presents. Their reception
at Rome was not only magnificent, but their
whole progress through Spain and Italy was one
continued ovation. 'A nation of thirty millions
of civilized and intelligent people had been won
from the heathen!' Great indeed was the joy
and triumph; and this was the culminating point
of the Church’s success..
In that same hour, while the artillery of St.


“From the top of the Desk to the Waste-Basket”


New Office Supplies for 1930
With the New Year you will want new supplies
for your office. Let us furnish you from our big
and modern stocks.
Ink Wells Desk Sets
Envelopes
Paper
Writing Fluids
Pencils
Paste
Filing Supplies
Blank Books Loose Leaf Systems


Philippine Education Co., Inc.
101-103 Escolta
Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


  


19


Angelo, answered by the guns of the Vatican,
was thundering a welcome to the Japanese ambassadors, an edict had gone forth from the
Kubo-sama, or sovereign lord of Japan, banishing all Catholic missionaries within six months,
on pain of death; and ordering all the crosses
to be thrown down, and all the churches to be
razed to the ground.
When the Jesuit Superior, Pere Valignani,
returned with the ambassadors, after an absence
of eight years (so long had it taken to exchange
amenities across distant seas and foreign lands
in those days), he found this edict in force, and
partially carried out. The old King of Bungo,
the great protector of the Jesuits, was dead, his
successor ill disposed. All their Christian communities, schools, and hospitals had been suppressed, and the missionaries dispersed, expelled,
or forced into concealment. There are few
more striking examples of the instability of
human affairs; and it must have been a cruel
blow to Valignani, as the Superior of the Order,
so long happy and successful in all his efforts.
We enter on the third and last phase of this
eventful history. The first edict for the banishment of the missionaries was published in June
1587. All that follows is but a narrative of
partially interrupted persecutions, the decay
of trade, increasing restrictions, and at last the
expulsion of all, amid scenes of martyrdom and
sweeping destruction. In the year 1635, the
Portuguese were shut up in Decima, and only
allowed to trade there, amidst, it is said, the jeers
and derisions of their Dutch rivals.
A year or two later, the fall of the last Christian
strong-hold, Simabara, battered in breach by
the Dutch artillery, under Kockebecker, marked
the final catastrophe, and the close of all relations but the miserable ones allowed to the
Dutch factory, which an avenging Nemesis
transferred to the prison bounds of their ruined
rivals in Decima. Since that date until recent
treaties were signed, no Japanese had been allowed to leave his island home, nor foreigners to
land. All who had been cast on shore, or made
the attempt, had either been killed or imprisoned. Great must be the power wielded by the
rulers of this strange country, thus, for two centuries, to succeed in preventing the departure
of a single Japanese subject! Yet such appears
to be the fact, though before this edict they were
enterprising sailors, and, if we may believe the
records of the period, not only traded with the
Indian archipelago, but even extended their
voyages as far as South America. Thus briefly
we have the whole history of European inter
course (for the few attempts made by the British
and French to take part were too feeble and interrupted to be worthy of much note), and two
questions press themselves on the attention of
all who read. Whence the seemingly sudden
and violent change in the policy of the Japanese?
And, was it sudden in reality, or of slow and insidious growth—which only came suddenly
upon Europeans, because they blinded themselves to the signs of change and indications of
danger, otherwise plainly enough to be discerned, had any one looked with clear and intelligent eye?
The accounts of the period are full of details
of feuds between the different monastic orders;
of the pride, avarice, and overbearing arrogance
of the priests; the overreaching and insatiable
cupidity of the Portuguese and Spanish merchants, which latter charges are not even limited
to the laymen. But, admitting all these causes
to have been in operation, and exercising the
influence which belongs to them, it is impossible
to doubt that other and more profound causes
of distrust and dissatisfaction chiefly moved
Taiko-sama, when laying the foundation of his
usurped empire, to irreconcilable enmity, directed more especially, if not altogether and exclusively, against the Padres of every order, and
their converts. One cause of such enmity
lies, indeed, on the surface.
The great success of the Jesuits and missionaries of various monastic orders had been based,
in part at least, on the shifting sands of political
favor and influence with the feudatory princes
in their several territories; a turbulent race, as
was the same class in the days of the early
French and English kings: not always at peace
with each other, and often in league against their
Suzerain. One of the most obvious conditions


of strength to the latter was the abasement and
weakening of the nobles. Taiko-sama, in order
to strengthen and render hereditary his sovereign
power, necessarily therefore set himself to this
task, as did Louis XI., and, later, Richelieu and
Louis XIV., in France.
Whatever was identified with the Feudal
chiefs could not fail to share the fate of an order
doomed to destruction or humiliation. While
the Jesuit, therefore, sought to promote the
objects of his mission by favor of princes and
court influence, and, for a time, reaped great
fruit therefrom, these same Feudatory princes
were looking to force and intrigue to advance
their own interests, and uphold their cause
against an ambitious and successful general
who had seized the quasi sceptre. That both
the princes and their proteges, the missionaries,
should be involved in a common ruin, was in the
nature of things to be expected, and indeed
inevitable. If one feudatory pringe protected
Christianity, it was equally open to his successor
or rival to attack and persecute it. The spiritual guide who had put his trust in Princes anc
the Sword, found all the aid of man impotent
to save when the hour of trial and persecution
came. They had built upon a mundane foundation with the aid of sword and buckler, and
by the same was their ruin effected.
But beneath all this lay other causes, wider
and more penetrating, as well as more permanent in their influence. Another and far more
fatal element of destruction had been slowly
but surely preparing the way for the final catastrophe from the beginning—undermining the
very ground upon which the whole spiritual
edifice was built, whether Jesuit or Augustinian,
Franciscan or Dominican, Spaniard or Portuguese, fashioned the walls.
The determining cause of the downfall and
utter destruction of the Roman Church in Japan
is to be sought in the pretension to a spiritual
supremacy, which is but another name for the
monopoly of power, since all that is political
or secular must bow to God’s viceregent on
earth, who claims the right to bind and to loosen,
to absolve subjects of their oath and fealty,
and dethrone kings by his edict. This pretension to supremacy and papal infallibility—to a
power as unlimited as it is irresponsible—has
been woven into the very texture and fabric of
the Church of Rome, and has long been considered inseparable from it.
The Japanese rulers, who during nearly fifty
years successively never relaxed in their policy
to extirpate out of the land all trace of the missionaries and their teaching, and were deterred
by no difficulties, no sacrifice of life or commercial advantages, and never stopped until their
object was finally accomplished, clearly saw that
between them and such teachers there could
be neither peace nor truce. The two systems
were necessarily antagonistic and mutually
destructive. The Siogun must veil his power
to the higher pretensions of the Pope and the
priests; hold it from their hands, hable to be
dispossessed at their pleasure, or be engaged
in interminable conflict, all the more dangerous
that spiritual weapons could be brought to
bear, as well as the arm of flesh, by his adversaries of the cowl and rosary. Taiko-sama, a
man of no ordinary gifts apparently, who first
engaged in a war to the death, and issued the
edict of extermination, must indeed have been
something more than dull not to have his doubts
raised and his worst conclusions verified by the
tenor of the letters to the Pope, given by the
three Feudal princes to their ambassadors.
Hear how they run. Thus writes the Prince
of Bungo:
‘To him who ought to be adored and who
holds the place of the King of Heaven, the great
and very holy Pope'; and, in the body of the
letter, he continues in the same strain: ‘Your
holiness (who holds the place of God on earth.)”
The King of Arima addressed himself 'to the
very great and holy lord whom I adore, because
he holds on earth the place of God himself.”
The Prince of Omara goes, if possible, farther:
With hands raised toward heaven, and sentiments of profound admiration, I adore the most
holy Pope, who holds the place of God on earth.
With what feelings must Taiko-sama have
spelled over these acts of homage to an alien
sovereign by three of the leading feudatory


princes of the empire, when the death of Nobunanga in 1582, the sovereign friend of the missionaries, threw the reins of power into his
hands? There is an absurd story told of the
Siogun’s jealousy having first been roused by the
indiscreet answer of a Spaniard, who, on being
asked how his master had managed to possess
himself of half the world, replied: 'He commenced by sending priests, who win over the
people, and, when this is done, his troops are
dispatched to join the Christian, and the conquest is easy and complete.” I say it is absurd,
because, in the first place, the account of the
process then in vogue is much too near the truth
to have been openly told by one of the chief
agents; and, next, it was too palpably calculated
to lead to the expulsion of the narrator and all
his race. Nor was any such plain-spoken
traveler needed. Taiko-sama must have been
blind not to have seen whither the Church of
Rome was tending, and how irreconcilable were
its pretensions and his own.
Another law than that of the Japanese empire
had been introduced, and other Rulers and administrators than those nominated by either
Mikado or Siogun (the titular and the effective
rulers of Japan) were in full exercise of their
functions, claiming from Japanese subjects,
once become converts, fealty and implicit obedience to the Church’s commands—an obedience
which might at any time be turned against the
authority and rule of the territorial Sovereign.
There was nothing very far-fetched in the conclusion, or monstrous in the assumption that
such was the tendency of the Church polity.
That same sovereign of Spain, whose dominions,
Taiko-sama heard, had been extended over half
the world by priestly aid, had actually moved
the Pope to issue a bull to dethrone the Queen
of England in favor of another pretender to the
crown, to raise up conspirators among her subjects, and release them from all oaths or ti's
of allegiance.
This and no other cause, it is impossible to
doubt, led to the final expulsion of every European, the extermination of every Christian
convert, and the closing of every port for two
centuries. The annihilation of commerce and
material interests was merely a necessary consequence of the close connection that had subsisted between the professors of religion and the
traders, taken in connection with their common
nationality.


OH, BOLONY!
O some aspire
To homes up higher
Among the angels,
With starry crown
To sit them down
And chant evangels—
Now I would not go far
For Heaven’s sake,
But tramp a continent
Or swim a lake
For the kind of good bolony like our
butcher used to make.
For riches some
Would give a tome
'Neath desert bow
With some girl friend,
They count the end
Of gain enow—
Now 1 would not go far
For money’s sake,
But tramp a continent
Or swim a lake
For the kind of good bolony like our
butcher used to make.
Within the shops
Among the chops
They have some, yes,
But not the kind
That’s on my mind
And yours, I guess—
I surely 'd not go far
For such a fake,
Nor tramp a continent
Nor swim a lake—
Ah, there ain’t no good bolony like our
butcher used to make!
—W. R.


  


December, 1929


 UNON 3
OORO
MA ERL
GMLNA MA MA A
AUN 



4


SME(EORMO


NEW ATTRACTIONS—NEW SHOWS—NEW


The most complete oriental exposit
Japan and the Philippines along corr
given the prominence they deserve. Th
will be bigger and better than ever
will be larger in scope. Private firms”


Different in every way! That’s wh
shows and attractions this Carniva
Manila Carnivals. It will feature sp
tional and thrilling.
The nightly balls in the Auditoriumsetting, dazzling in brillianc, and sple


NUO


COMMERCIAL ANY


BUY STOCKHOLDE


You will save money at the same time that you enjoy the thr
Subscribe now to the many privileges accorded stockholders.


LOAOA M UUANUA UAMRL MARUAA MA MCRUARURURRLRLRURLRURLR AA AAUALUURARLRCARAO



RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


  


XN
UA
a MEOO
MNANO
MALMNA MNA.



OS LAS OX ROly


RIDES—NEW THRILLS—NEW FEATURES


ion in which the progress of China,
mercial and industrial lines will be
e insular and provincial participations
-in line with the whole fair, which
participation will also be in evidence.


the 1930 Carnival will be. In sidewill be epochal in the history of
ectacular exhibitions that are sensa

to be held under the most gorgeous
idor—will be the Mecca offun seekers.


N
L


INDUSTRIAL FAIR


RS' PRIVILEGES

Is of what is destined to be the greatest show in the Far East
jee, write or phone the Secretary-Treasurer about this! NOW!


MURLN MON 
Da
GOGO

CM MEA
OODOOOODOD



IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


22


  


December, 1929


Origins of the Roman Catholic Church
GIBBON—(Continued from November)
The Journal is publishing a few pages of Gibbon because the authentic origins
of the faith that undertook the indefatigable task of evangelizing the Orient, succeeding in the Philippines and barely failing in Japan, are no doubt of general, if
casual, interest in these Islands.—Ed.


VII. It is the undoubted right of every society
to exclude from its communion and benefits
such among its members as reject or violate
those regulations which have been established
by general consent. In the exercise of this
power the censures of the Christian church were
chiefly directed against scandalous sinners, and
particularly those who were guilty of murder,
of fraud, or of incontinence; against the authors
or the followers of any heretical opinions which
had been condemned by the judgment of the
episcopal order; and against those unhappy
persons who, whether from choice or from compulsion, had polluted themselves after their
baptism by any act of idolatrous worship. The
consequences of excommunication were of a
temporal as well as a spiritual nature. The
Christian against whom it was pronounced was
deprived of any part in the oblations of the
faithful. The ties both of religious and of private friendship were dissolved: he found himself
a profane object of abhorrence to the persons
whom he the most esteemed, or by whom he had
been the most tenderly beloved; and as far as
an expulsion from a respectable society could
imprint on his character a mark of disgrace, he
was shunned or suspected by the generality of
mankind. The situation of these unfortunate
exiles was in itself very painful and melancholy;
but, as it usually happens, their apprehensions
far exceeded their sufferings. The benefits of
the Christian communion were those of eternal
life; nor could they erase from their minds the
awful opinion that to those ecclesiastical governors by whom they were condemned the Deity
had committed the keys of Hell and of Paradise.
The heretics, indeed, who might be supported
by the consciousness of their intentions, and by
the flattering hope that they alone had discovered the true path of salvation, endeavored to
regain, in their separate assemblies, those comforts, temporal as well as spiritual, which they
no longer derived from the great society of
Christians. But almost all those who had reluctantly yielded to the power of vice or idolatry
were sensible of their fallen condition, and
anxiously desirous of being restored to the benefits of the Christian communion.
With regard to the treatment of these pentitents, two opposite opinions, the one of justice,
the other of mercy, divided the primitive church.
The more rigid and inflexible casuists refused
them forever, and without exception, the meanest place in the holy community which they had
disgraced or deserted; and leaving them to the
remorse of a guilty conscience, indulged them
only with a faint ray of hope that the contrition
of their life and death might possibly be accepted
by the Supreme Being. A milder sentiment was
embraced, in practice as well as in theory, by the
purest and most respectable of the Christian
churches. The gates of reconciliation and of
heaven were seldom shut against the returning
penitent; but a severe and solemn form of displine was instituted, which, while it served to
expiate his crime, might powerfully deter the
spectators from the imitation of his example.
Humbled by a public confession, emaciated by
fasting, and clothed in sackcloth, the penitent lay
prostrate at the door of the assembly, imploring
with tears the pardon of his offences, and soliciting the prayers of the faithful. If the fault was
of a very heinous nature, whole years of penance
were esteemed an inadequate satisfaction to the
divine justice; and it was always by slow and
painful gradations that the sinner, the heretic,
or the apostate, was readmitted into the bosom
of the church. A sentence of perpetual excommunication was, however, reserved for some
crimes of an extraordinary magnitude, and particularly for the inexcusable relapses of those
penitents who had already experienced and
abused the clemency of their ecclesiastical superiors. According to the circumstances or the


number of the guilty, the exercise of the Christian discipline was varied by the discretion of
the bishops. The councils of Ancyra and Illiberis were held about the same time, the one in
Galatia, the other in Spain; but their respective
canons, which are still extant, seem to breathe a
very different spirit. The Galatian, who after
his baptism had repeatedly sacrificed to idols,
might obtain his pardon by a penance of seven
years; and if he had seduced others to imitate
his example, only three years more were added
to the term of his exile. But the unhappy
Spaniard who had committed the same offence


was deprived of the hope of reconciliation, even
in the article of death; and his idolatry was
placed at the head of a list of seventeen other
crimes, against which a sentence no less terrible
was pronounced. Among these we may distinguish the inexpiable guilt of calumniating a
bishop, a presbyter, or even a deacon.
The well-tempered mixture of liberality and
rigor, the judicious dispensation of rewards and
punishments, according to the maxims of policy
as well as justice, constituted the human
strength of the church. The Bishops, whose
paternal care extended itself to the government
of both worlds, were sensible of the importance
of these prerogatives; and, covering their ambition with the fair pretence of the love of order,
they were jealous of any rival in the exercise of
a discipline so necessary to prevent the desertion
of those troops which had enlisted themselves
under the banner of the cross, and whose numbers every day became more considerable.
From the imperious declamations of Cyprian we
(Please turn to page 31 col. 2)


NSULAR LOMdER COTAiya
Owners and Operators of
Sawmills—Planing Mills—Dry Kilns—Box Factory
At Fabrica, Occidental Negros, P. I.
Production—52 Million Board Feet
Annually
Manufacturers, Exporters, and Dealers


Bandsawn Lumber
Tanguile
Red and White Lauan
Almon
Apitong
Complete Stock of All Sizes Always on Hand, Including
Flooring —Ceiling — Siding —Interior Trim—Box Shooks
Kiln-dried or Air-dried


Manila Office:
P. V. O. Building
Calle Pureza
Cable Address:
"ILCO," Manila


Mill Office:
Fabrica
Occidental Negros
P. I.


U.S. A. Office:
Atlantic Building.
Philadelphia, Pa.
Cable Address:
“ILCO.” Philadelphia


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OJURNAL


Decemper, 1929


THE AMEKICAN CHAMBER OF COMMEKCE JOURNAL


23


Haphazard Studies in the English Language
(Continued from November)


bursted. Should never be used. The past
tense and past participle of the verb “to burst”
is “burst.” Say, “The gun burst," not “bursted," and of course avoid the vulgarism “busted."
“He burst in upon them,” “The balloon
has burst at last,” are correct. There is no
such form as “bursted,” save in the mouths
of ignorant speakers.
bum. This is a slang word which is too coarse
for refined usage, and vet it has become so
generally employed—"He’s a bum. "A bum
"I feel bum,” that it will be difficult
job,”
to correct it.
but. Misused in many ways. For instance:
“I do not doubt but, or but that” should be
“I do not doubt that,” “I should not wonder
but,” should be "wonder if.”
Doubt but that” is a common error. The
“but” should be omitted.
“But” is incorrect after "no sooner,”" which
should be followed by “than.” A similar
rule should be observed with regard to "no
other.” Say "no other than she,” not "no
other but she.”
After the verb fear, "but that” is frequently
permissible, as in “I have no fear but that he
will speak " signifying certainty that he will
speak, which can be equally well expressed by
“I have no fear that he will not speak.”
but what. Correctly used in “I read nothing
but what I enjoy.” but often misused for "but
that,” in sentences like “She would not believe
but what I did it.” “I have no doubt but
what” is always wrong, and should be “I have
no doubt that."
but yet. Improperly used when either “but”
or “vet” would convey the meaning intended.
by. Frequently misused for with, from, and
for. It is properly used before an agent or
doer, "with” should precede the instrument
or means; thus, "He was struck by his assailant with a knife.”
“Her hat was adorned by feathers,” should
be “with feathers.”
When the New York Times spoke of "a
gentleman by the name of Hinkley,” a New
York Sun purist remarked: “Oh, no! You
mean, 'a gentleman of the name of Hinkley."
This is English, you know.” But we easily
may know a man of the name of Hinkley by”
the name of Smith. He may rejoice in an
alias, or we may have been mistaken in his
name. "A gentleman named Hinkley” would
have rendered criticism unnecessarv.
by, bye. The preposition and the adverb
“by,” but the noun may be
are invariably
We may use either form in
spelled "bye.”
"by the by (e) ” where the last word is the
noun, but in the adverbial phrase "by and
by,” only the shorter “by” is permissible.
C
cab. This has become a perfectly good word,
although when first taken from the word
cabriolet, it was considered slang of the most
common variety.
cabaret. Pronounced ka-ba-ray—first two a’s
as in fast, last a long; be sure to make three
syllables of this word, with a very slight
accent on the second one.
cada’ver. Pronounced ka-da’ver (long a), not
ka-dav'er.
cafe. Pronounced ka-fay—first a as in fast,
last a long.
Cairo. The name of the Egyptian capital is
pronounced ki'ro (long i); the Cairo in Illinois
is called ka’ro (long a)
calamity. Should not be misused for "loss”.
A calamity is a great disaster or misfortune.
calculate. Often misused for think, suppose,
believe, expect, or intend. “I calculate to
go home,” should be, "I intend, or expect, to
go home.” By "I calculate you are right,”
the uneducated speaker means “I suppose, or
believe, you are right.”
A very common misuse of “calculated”
prevails among people who pride themselves
on their correct English but say: “His nomination is calculated to lose votes for the
ticket.” The meaning to be conveyed is that


of likely or apt, and these words should be
used instead of “calculated,” the sense of
which is "adjusting means to an end, computing, reckoning, projecting.
When used in the sense of devised or adapted, “calculated” is permissible, as in “His
speech was calculated to avoid trouble.”
Eminent writers like Goldsmith and Cobbett
have at times used “calculated” for "likely”
or “suited,” though such use is generally
deprecated.
caliber. Should not be used with the adjectives
high, low etc. Caliber being the inside
measure of a cavity, as a gunbarrel, it can be
modified only by adjectives expressing expansion. "An essay or poem of higher caliber” is ridiculous. The writer of such a
sentence might as well speak of a broader
altitude, a thinner circumference, or'a bulkier


range. "Larger, or greater, caliber” is correst
can. Often misused for may. When a boy says,
“Can I eat an apple?” the question is unnecessarv. Of course he “can.” He means

to ask “May I eat an apple?
“Can" denotes
possibility; "may” liberty and probability.
He who has sound limbs can walk, but he may
not walk on the grass when signs forbid.
canine. This word means like a dog, or pertaining to a dog, but is commonly misused for the
word dog. It is preferably accented on the
last syllable, kanine', long i.
carbine. Pronounced kar’bine with long i;
not kar’been or kar’bin.
card. Mispronounced kyard; should be kard.
"We have heard,” says William Henry P.
Phyfe, “that this affectation thrives especially
in young ladies’ schools, and in the circles
of the would-be elegant.”
carry. See bring.
(To be continued)


When You
Go Xmas
Shopbino
Buy Erom
BECK'S
and Get
Premium
Coupons
JHEN you buy things at
W Becks Department Store
on the Escolta, 10% of what
you pay comes back to you in
Premium Coupons with which you
can purchase other things; and
you can save your coupons until
they will get free for, you (without any money) whatever you
select in our Premium Catalog—
a fine bed, a beautiful reading
lamp, an exquisite toilet set, a
set of dishes—anything!
BEOKSLOCOLIIX


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


24


OMMERCE JOURNAL
  


DecelliDci, 1343


Sunset
By G. V. HURLEY


A dead man on Culion, watching the sunset,
Hisname had been Bob Shahen he was alive.
but now that he is dead he has no name. He sits
alone, on the tiny veranda of the cottage they
have allotted him, watching the smoke of the
passing steamers that belong to another world
than his. Few people come to Culion; those
that do, transact their business quickly and
depart with haste; Culion is the leper colony of
the Philippines. A bit of verdant foliage and
white sand, set down north of Palawan, in a blue
tropical sea. To the casual eye it is a very
beautiful place. It might be paradise: it isn’t.
It is a green mausoleum, the abode of the animated dead. A place of only two tenses, the
present and the past—there is no future there.
Walking ghosts inhabit Culion, men who have
disappeared from all that makes life worth the
living, as completely as if they had never existed.
The summer of 1922 recalls to me a time when
Bob had been alive. There were rumors of a
gold strike in the Cotobato country back of
Kiamba, and Bob and I, free lance geologists in
Manila, were among the first in the field. We
had both come out of the same school back home
and casual friendship over there had ripened into
intimacy during our three-year association in
the islands. There wasn’t much foundation for
the gold rumor. It seems that a Moro had
brought some chickens into the public market
at Cotobato and their craws had assayed about
eight pesos in rough gold. When questioned as
to where the chickens came from, the native
had waved vaguely towards the hill country.
Sapalow—in the mountains. It was enough to
start us.
“We’ve as much chance of finding this place
as the chickens had,” said Bob, characteristically.
“Let’s go, Bill, we need the money. I would
like to bring Mildred over here and this chicken
feed would help.”
We had both laughed at the wisecrack. So


after we had got an outfit together and Bob had
written a long letter to Mildred, we shoved off,
down into Cotobato after gold. Three months
later we were pecking rocks and panning gravel,
sixty miles from the coast, in the interior of
Mindanao. Have you ever tried to find the
fabled needle in the haystack? That was the
proposition that we went against. Mindanao
is a vast place, a great, black, silent land of
cogon grass, higher than a man’s head; of wet
jungle, swift running rivers, towering cliffs, and
over all, a sun that scorches down every day in
the vear. As I look back now, I can see how
small our percentage was, but we stayed on,
always looking for the gold that we knew was
there. Hacking and scratching at the surface
of a land that presented every possible natural
handicap—never breaking through to pay dirt.
Every night, around our little fire, Bob used
to bring out Mildred’s picture. "Taking my
tonic,” he always explained. And I guess it was
a tonic to him, sitting there looking at her picture with the rain dripping from his soggy helmet. Never having felt so, I could only envy
Bob and his Mildred. She was a great help, and
it was too bad that things turned out as they
did, for all the time Bob was getting closer and
closer to the thing that was to make all thought
of Mildred an impossibility. Some things need
explaining very badly, for there were so many
other ways, better ways, that Bob might have
died on that trip, rather than the way he did.
It would have been so easy for him to have laid
his hand on one of the little deadly tree snakes,
always hanging on the ends of the limbs over!
head. A python might have dropped silently
from above and satisfactorily ended the whole
affair. One of the great cobras of interior Mindanao might have resented Bob’s careless foot.
But none of these things happened, and we pushed on and on, tracing the beds of unnamed rivers,
examining our little bits of stone. All the while


biting a path through the feverish jungle with
our barongs. It was man’s work, in 106 degrees
of heat.
It was late in September when we took
council in our camp, high in the hills overlooking the trail to Buluan lake. We decided, over
our rice and dried fish, to give up the search and
return to Manila via Cotobato. A week later
found us well on our way, trying, in a driving
rain, to cross a swollen river near the lake. Our
heavily laden pack animal fell in the swift current, and before we could get the struggling
sapie to it’s feet, our blankets and provisions
were all swept away. There was a Moro village by the river, a few straggling houses of nipa
and bamboo, and we made our bedraggled way
to the nearest hut, which happened to be deserted. We had hardly more than unstrapped our
guns when a Moro woman came running across
the caingin. Wahlay malad; wahlay malad;
she shrieked, gesturing wildly and following with
a torrent of words that neither of us could understand. Bob paused in the act of removing his
wet helmet.
“Wahlay malad—dangerous house. I don't
see anything the matter with it, do you, Bill?
I wouldn’t care to ride a typhoon out in it,
seems a bit wobbly on its pins, but it'’s dry and
that’s most important just now.”
I turned to the frightened woman and explained in my insufficient Moro that it would do,
and she left, shaking her head and rolling frightened eyes. I was too accustomed to the native
legends and belief in witchcraft to comment
much on the woman’s actions. “There is probably a devil in that balete tree, Bob,” I said,
pointing to the huge, gnarled, parasitic growth
swaying in the rain. We promptly forgot the
Moro woman and her wahlay malad.
We had bananas and dried fish for supper,
sold to us with reluctance by the woman across
the clearing, who showed a marked desire to
keep away from us now that we had decided to
stay. After supper, Bob, rustling in a dark
corner, emerged triumphant, with a battered
sarong left by the previous occupant. "Allah
is great!” he laughed. “Tonight we sleep in


Built by
Filipino Craftsmen


PHE NEWEST Styles are
1 now ready for the Holidays—handsome, comfortable
and reasonably priced.


HIKE SHOE FACTORY
STYLE CREATORS
286 SAN MARCELINO
MANILA, P. I.


Luzon Stevedoring
Co., Inc.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Phone 2-16-61
Port Area


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


R
LA
PL
HE
  


25


Improving Buntal Fiber and Buntal Articles
By SALVADOR DEL MUNDO*


state, Bill, wrapped in the sarong of some pious
Mohammedan."
“Not me,” I replied, "too buggy—my rain
coat will have to do.”
So, Bob in the sarong and I in my rain coat,
we stretched out for a long, cold night. We
finally went to sleep to the monotonous beat of
the agongs across the way, and the droning of the
rain on the nipa roof.
We had been back in Manila for two or three
months, maybe longer, enjoying the shows,
catching up on a bit of back eating and the like,
when I was called to Camarines Norte to examine a property. The day before I left I had
suggested a farewell game of golf to Bob, but
he had begged off on the ground of a peculiar
numbness in his right hand. “Must have acquired a touch of rheumatism in Cotobato,” he
said, "notice how it’s drawn my little finger
He had held up his hand for me to see, and it was
all twisted and contracted out of shape.” “We’ll
have the game when you come back, Bill."
But we never did.
The job took a little longer than I had expected.' When I did get back to Manila, Bob
was gone and his letter, three months’ old, was
waiting for me. He had written“Dear Bill:
“I went to see the Doc about my hand
shortly after you left, and Bill—the Moro
woman was right. It was a wahlay malad
we stayed in that night. If we could have
understood her, we would have pushed on,
regardless of the rain. I’ve got it, Bill * 2
and I’m off to Culion.
“It was that damned sarong that did it.
Thank God you didn’t take my suggestion
and roll in with me! And now, Bill, I’m
depending on you to carry out a little last
favor for me. Mildred must never know
about this.
“Pve thought it all out carefully and decided that it is best that I should be dead. Much
better for her to think me dead than to be a
living horror to her. I am dead anyway,
Bill, for all practical purposes, so it will only
be a white lie that you tell her, quite justifiable. With me incarcerated over here alive,
I would be a bar to her future happiness, and
even if I got well there would always be that
doubt that neither of us could dispel.
‘You can handle it, Bill, I’m banking on
you. And now all hail and farewell. Ave
Caesar, morituri te salutamus. The boatman
is waiting to ferry me over the Styx, and I
mus’nt keep him waiting. It’s sunset, Bill,
and I’ll soon be alone in the dark. So long!
—Bob.”
In due time, because it was best, I told Mildred how Bob had died in central Mindanao, in
eight minutes, from the bite of a dahley-poo, a
cobra—with her picture in his hand and her
name on pale lips.
It was almost six vears ago. Mildred is
married now. I have been around the world
and back again, every place except the islands.
Never there. Sometimes Bob’s little nurse
must come to him, as he sits watching the sun
go down. “The doctor says that you are better;
"  
much better, and maybe, some day s
But Bob only smiles—the gray smile of a man
who has seen his world tumble about his ears,
the smile of a man for whom there is no tomor.
row, the smile of a man dead among the living
dead—watching the sunset.


Tropical Landscape Architecture
(Continued from p. 13)
is universal.
It is true that many of the best effects are
obtained by grouping together plants from many
countries and climes, but it is also true that many
plants which would be an ornament to any garden are passed by unnoticed because they are
wild and common. Such ornamental native
plants are particularly desirable because they
are already adapted to the climate and are
usually easy of culture, not to mention that they
usually improve in attractiveness under cultivation.


The Bureau of Science receives many requests
for information in regard to a comparatively
inexpensive process for improving the appearance
of buntal fiber, not only from various local hat
dealers and commercial houses exporting native
hats and fiber, but also from private parties.
Information that may be valuable to the various
people who are interested in the subject is given
in this paper.
Buntal is the name given to the flexible material obtained from the fibrous bundles of the
petiole of the matured leaf of buri palm, Corypha
elata. When recently and properly pulled from
the petiole, these fibers are white and glossy,
but when exposed to air and light they become
discolored and acquire an ugly brownish tint.
The fiber is extensively woven into baskets,
handbags, and similar household articles of


commercial value, but by far its most important
industrial application is in the making of hats
which are sold under the name of buntal Baliuag
or Lucban, accordingly as the hats have been
made in Baliuag, Bulacan, or in Lucban, Tayabas. Buntal hats have met with favorable
reception in foreign countries and the demand
has created a profitable home industry. By
request of local firms engaged in exporting native
hats, experiments were performed in this laboratory with a view of evolving a comparatively
cheap process of improving the appearance of
buntal fiber or hats.
In evolving the process outlined below, it
was not the primary object to produce a perfect
bleach such as may be accomplished wit h the
use of more powerful bleaching agents, sodium
YPhilippine Journal of Science.


Fast Drivers: Oil, Which
Lasts Longest At High
Speed, Lubricates Best!


Thousands of kilometers of speedway tests
have shown that the New Mobiloil stands
up better and lasts longer at high speeds
than other oils. So we can confidently
say: The New Mobiloil can keep the
first-year feel in your engine for at least
50,000 kilometers—whatever your speed.


VACUUM OIL COMPANY


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


26


  


December, 1929


peroxide for example. Rather, certain desirable
features were borne in mind and duly incorporated in the method; namely, the relative
low cost of materials required, the absence of
any injurious effect on buntal fiber, and the
relative ease of manipulation involved. The
present process was tried and thoroughly tested
with a number of Baliuag and Lucban hats,
and the results obtained were satisfactory
even when the operator was inexperienced
in the art of bleaching.
METHOD
Materials.—Two solutions are required, a
bleaching agent to be designated as solution 1,
and a decolorizing bath designated as solution 2.
Parts
Solution 1:
Commercial potassium perman5
ganate....................
Commercial sodium carbonate
2
(dry)............ . ..
Water....................... 1,000
Preparation.—Measure out the required quantity of water. Add the solid ingredients a few
portions at a time, stirring briskly to aid in
dissolving the solid particles. To secure a
homogeneous solution, continue stirring for
some time after the complete solution of the


solid chemicals.
Parts
Solution 2:
20
Hypo (sodium thiosulphate)..
.... 1,000
Water.....


Dilute sulphuric acid sufficient
to render acid.
Note: Acidify solution 2 when it
is ready for use.
Preparation.—Pour the weighed amount of
hypo into the measured quantity of water, a little
at a time and with constant agitation. When all
the hypo has dissolved, pour in about 2 cubic
centimeters of commercial sulphuric acid for
each liter of hypo solution. An excess of acid
should be avoided. Stir. Note the evolution
of a peculiar, pungent odor in the acidified hypo
solution. The gas which causes this odor effects
decolorization, and the absence of odor would
tend to indicate that solution 2 is weak, in which
case more acid should be added. Solution 2
becomes milky white in time on account of
precipitated sulphur, but the turbidity is harmless
and should cause no alarm.
PROCEDURE
Immerse the fiber or hats in solution 1; keep
them there until they acquire a dark brown stain
due to permanganate. The longer the hats
are kept in solution 1, the better the bleach
obtained. On the other hand, more time is
required to decolorize the permanganate stain
with solution 2. A little practice will enable
one to determine when to remove the hats from
solution 1. A bleach is usually secured after
an immersion of from one to two hours. A
somewhat longer period is required when the
solutions become weak. Solution 1 may be
used repeatedly untilit fails to stain the immersed
hats to the required tint; when, of course, the
solution may be strengthened by the addition
of some crystals of potassium permanganate.
A badly spent solution should be discarded.
When the immersed hats have become sufficiently darkened by exposure to permanganate
remove them from solution 1. Rinse well with
water to remove the excess of permanganate and
transfer to solution 2.
Keep the hats in solution 2 (with occasional
shaking) until the brown stain acquired from the
previous treatment is completely decolorized.
If decolorization proceeds rather too slowly,
a few more drops of acid should be added to
solution 2. Too much acid should be avoided
as it is detrimental to the fiber. Slow decolorization is commendable as it imparts a glossy
finish to the bleached surface. When the stained
hats have become completely decolorized, remove them from solution 2, and wash them well
with water (running water preferred). If a
piece of blue litmus paper is available, test for
complete removal of residual acidity. The
hats may now be set out to dry.
When solution 2 becomes too weak from continuous use or from prolonged standing, it often


happens that the stains produced by the previous
immersion in solution 1 are removed only with
considerable difficulty or, in some cases, the stains
are not removed at all; much, of course, to the
alarm of the operator. Should this happen, a
simple remedy lies in regenerating solution 2
by the addition of a few more drops of acid,
or should it be feared to introduce too large an
excess of acid, a freshly prepared solution should
be secured.
Potassium permanganate is the only expensive
chemical used in this process, but the amount
of it required is so small as to make the expense


A Glorious
Thing!


you want


JBElTTOw!


The knowing know!
RueNZIe Gb ofTeINay IRC.
LIOUOR DEALERS
Manila, P. I.
343 T. Pinpin Tel. 2-39-36


from this source no drawback at all. Sodium
carbonate is used to give solution 1 an alkaline
reaction. It serves as a detergent for greasy
material which may adhere to the fiber surface
and hinder the bleaching action of permanganate.
Sodium carbonate as well as hypo may be
secured from any druggist at a low cost.
Very little attention is required by the method
outlined above. After the hats have been
dumped into the bleaching or decolorizing baths,
all the attention required is occasional shaking
and stirring. The procedure should cause no
trouble even in the hands of beginners and inexperienced operators.


Roughing It In Russia
By JUNIUS B. WOOD
Pulozero, U. S. S. R., March 8.—"Sit down
and have tea, it will take a few minutes to get
the reindeer,” said the hospitable young president of the village executive committee. I was
stamping my snow covered shoes inside his door.
It was 3:30 p. m. and already dark.
The “few minutes” eventually developed into
six hours. A telegram had been sent ahead
asking him to provide a reindeer team to go to
Lovozero. A village president arranges all
such details in Soviet Russia. Also in Soviet
Russia time means nothing and a true Russian
is never expected to keep an appointment until
he arrives. The surprised young man explained
that he had received the telegram but was not
sure we were coming. He sent a boy out for
the reindeer and another muffled, cheerful youngster led us down the village road to call on the
school teacher.
Three little boys, a local version of a comic
strip, were in the school master’s yard. Visitors
were a novelty but they were not abashed.
Russian children seldom are. They grabbed
my hands and started tugging toward the door
which one had opened. As eyes became accustomed to the darkness, it was disclosed that
the predominating odor in the kitchen came
from a fat ewe and a lamb in a corner. A
woman and baby came from a bedroom and the
pedagogue in felt boots and furs tramped in
from the barn.
“Come and look at the schoolroom, twentyfour pupils of all nationalities,” was his first
remark, proud of the little classroom. "Have
seven boys myself, like little steps, three oldest
in school in Murmansk. Sit
A Proud
down,” as we moved into
School Master another room, “tea will be
ready in a minute. This is
your room, live right here as long as you are in
the village.”
The hospitality was appreciated but we explained that we were leaving in a few minutes.
He laughed heartily.
“Not a few minutes, not in three hours,” he
insisted. “The deer are out feeding and must
be lassoed and brought in. The village soviet
meets this evening. I’m secretary, and you
can start after the meeting.”
So we had tea and black bread, emptied our
half bottle of vodka and walked back to the
president’s little house. His comely young
wife brewed more tea and while she ate sunflower seeds, his mother crocheted lace and local
gossips sat on the floor and talked, we spread
our food on the family table and ate. Getting
impatient would not catch any reindeer. Anyway,
the teacher had explained that Lapp drivers
insist on traveling at night.
“How about wolves?”
“Oh, never mind them—" he was not making
the trip.
“I heard an American was in the village so
came over," a wizened, wiry veteran explained
from his seat on the fioor."sy
Use Tobacco know he’ll give me some good
Substitutes tobacco,” he unblushingly added. “Of course,” I agreed.
Before I could get a hand into my pocket,
his pipe was knocked empty on the floor. When
a paper sack of "makhorka” emerged, he was
struck dumb but the others roared. Makhorka


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


THE AMERKICAN CHAMBER OF COMMERUE JOURNAL


27


is not tobacco, but a pungent ground root whose
sinoke smells to heaven.
“Even my makhorka is better than that,"
he sadly complained, picking up the still glowing embers and stuffing them back in his pipe.
At 9 o’clock, lights were out in the houses
but the village soviet was still in session. We
walked over and it adjourned, everybody being
invited to the president’s for tea. That we
should not freeze on the ride was the chief topic
of discussion. The Lapp driver appeared with
three pairs of hip-length reindeer boots and three
malitza. A malitza is a hooded, buttonless
coat with the fur outside. Arctic explorers
usually are photographed in them. They are
worn over all other overcoats and caps and are
the most uncomfortable garment ever invented.
The entire village was assembled to assist
in the departure. All gave advice, and a novice
needed considerable, as more adjustments were
necessary than merely sitting on the sled. The
teacher as secretary of the soviet
Guide with quoted the bottom prices for
Long Pole siedding. The reindeer with a
night's hard pulling ahead of
them stood dejectedly uninterested, the Lapp
driver agreed.


Some time prior to the year 1668 Datu Manuel,
baptized a Christian by sandalled friars, emigrated from the well-populated island of Cebu
to Bago on the island now called Negros, in
those days still largely peopled by wooly-haired
aborigines ruled by Bornean chieftains. To
the scattered coastal settlement of Bago, Manuel
brought his barangay, consisting of his wife and
married children, a large number of relatives, his
servants and slaves, increasing considerably
the original population of seven hundred.
In the datu’s household, as the legend goes,
was a handsome girl, baptized Martina, whose
mother was Manuel’s niece, and whose father


Holding the twenty-foot pole which serves
both as whip and reins, aloft like a medieval
knight charging into battle, the squat driver
stepped nimbly to the front sled, chirped like a
bird, prodded the lead deer, the leather traces
jerked taut and we were off. We bumped over
the railroad tracks, two lines of black in the
snow, swung in a circle toward the east and
quicker than it can be told were in a silent,
trackless, empty world of white.
On the front sled was a young communist
from Murmansk, a pleasant earnest youth, sent
to carry the party gospel to the younger generation in the little arctic village which was our
destination. So, in other ages and in other
climes, many have rode forth as missionaries to
spread other gospels.
In time even the rough, hard floor of the sled
became softer. Lulled by the cold, the soft
crunch of runners on the snow and the rhythmic click-click-click of reindeer feet, I dozed.
Perhaps it was for a minute, or perhaps for an
hour. I suddenly awoke to find myself buried
in four feet of snow. My half-conscious shout
as l rolled of had reached the driver and the
sleds had stopped. Evidently Lapland sleds
are not built for sleeping.


was reputed to be a Spaniard of Cebu. One
glance at her was sufficient to confirm the fact
that the blood and beauty of both races were her
birthright. She was modest and retiring, with
a sweet low voice, which virtues brought many
suitors for her hand to the old man’s doorstep.
However eligible the young men were, their
suits were unsuccessful, for Manuel had long
cherished the plan of marrying her to the son of
an old comrade, who like himself had emigrated
from Cebu to Ilo not far from Bago. Since
Martina showed not the least inclination for the
datu’s choice, and after each visit to his old
friend had returned sad and downcast, there had


been delay in bringing the voung people together.
Rumor had it that she looked with favor on the
son of one of the Bago chieftains who possessed
large fisheries there, but neither he nor his
father dared to make proposals for the hand of
the girl refused to so many, and so their romance
had come to an impasse.
As the month of April began, Manuel decided
not to wait longer, and set off with his ward
carrying her down the coast to be married to the
son of his friend, regardless of her wishes. It
had never been customary to secure a girl’s
consent to marriage, so why should he not carry
out his plans?
The moon half shadowed by clouds dimly
lighted the way of the barangay. In the center
of the craft a negrito slave plaved a plaintive air
on his nose flute, and now and then the rowers
broke into the sad refrain of Malay paddlers, a
song as old as the race. Streaks of vivid phosphorescence marked the trail of a shark in
pursuit of prey. The barangay was about half
way between Bago and Ilo, which they expected
to reach at dawn. Underneath the thatchedroof
the women reclined, among them the girl Martina brooding mournfully, clad like the others
in a short jacket and skirt of Chinese silk, with
the ornaments of her rank. Suddenly, as if she
had made a decision, she rose and, silently passing the paddlers, approached the stern of the
boat where she poised herself a moment, then
dived into the sea.
Instantly confusion reigned. As the pa ddlers
stopped the boat, the cries of the girl’s mother
mingled with the datu’s commands. Several
of the crew were ordered overboard to attempt a
rescue, but Martina had completely disappeared,
and the proximity of sharks together with the
semi-obscurity of the night rendered prolonged
search hopeless, for the girl’s body did not come
to the surface. After some time had passed,
and the swimmers were on board again, it was
decided that nothing could be done, and the
barangay turned back in the direction of Bago.
On the melancholy return there was considerable talk of the tragedy. The women quite
audibly expressed their grief, and the men,


A Legend of Negros
The Lost MartinaBy PERCY A. HILL


EMPRESS OF ASIA
16900 tons


EMPRESS OF CANADA
21500 tons


EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16800 tons


To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


CANADIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS
14-16 CALLE DAVID
MANILA, P. I.


THE VIMTE EMIRESS OF PETONfIO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


28


BLSAFI C
EY
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL
THE AMERICAN


December, 1929


including the datu, asked each other innumerable questions. They were bewildered by theg
suddenness and completeness of the disappear-g
ance. They had been close to some very smallig
uninhabited islands, and some declared she)
might have swam there for refuge; others thoughth
that if she had been seized by a shark she might
have vanished into those jaws of death; while al)
few others stoutly maintained that some suitori
had decoyed her from the barangay and made
off with her. As the discussion grew more
heated, the incident became more of a mystery.
Arrived in Bago they related so many differenti
versions of the incident that the disappointed
suitors, who were numerous, claimed the datuj
had made away with the girl because of her!;
disobedience to his wishes. Despite the old);
man’s protests he was imprisoned by the Bornean!
chief, Matalas, upon the young men’s complaints.42
A few days later, shocked by the charges andl;
saddened by Martina’s disappearance, the aged
datu Manuel died. Thereupon his wife who was't
convinced of her husband’s innocence, under-i
took the task of clearing his good name by)
solving the mysterv.
Together with the distracted mother of the
lost girl and a small retinue, the datu’s wife,


¡Maria, set out down the coast for the settlement
lof the Mamaylaos (now called Himamaylan),
where a kindly Spanish friar labored among the
natives. She related the occurrence to the good
'father who comforted her with assurances of her
thusband’s innocence, saying that the girl preferlred death to an unsought marriage.
Maria was not content merely with the friar’s
declaration that innocence would prevail cver
calumny, but wished a more direct sign which
iwould convince the people of Bago. She decided to consult an old native whom she had
heard the Mamaylaos, with whom she lodged,
mention. They told her that back in the hills
Ithere lived an old bailan or kataloman, a wizard,
named Ino, who had the gift of second sight and
had solved many mysteries for others. AcIcompanied by her slaves, bearing gifts, she
sought old Ino in his rude shelter on the edge of
jan abandoned forest caingin, or clearing. It
iwas a hot, dank place, with only the chirp of birds
land the hum of insect life breaking the silence.
The ancient kataloman’s grizzled lotks bore
lwitness to his aborigin blood, and his false
switches of yellow abaca, the rice-straw fan, and
this carved bamboo proclaimed him a priest of
ithe primitive Malay religion.


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route
66


ORLD
IDE
TKELLSS


RADIO CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES
9 PLAZA MORAGA


PHOnEs:


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


The datu’s wife told her story, and the wizard
ruminated a few moments, then gravely informed
her that he would try to discover the fate of the
girl, though nothing could be done until the full
moon appeared. Maria and Martina’s mother
waited while the old native went about his
preparations for the incantation. From the
jungle he collected shrubs and plants, among
them the teo-teo, which when treated with the
oil of certain insects he claimed had the power
to attract sharks and other large fish. He also
filled a bamboo basket with small aromatic
flowers of a jungle tree which wilted as soon as
they were gathered. He declared that when
these flowers were submerged they would freshen
if the corpse was found. A bundle of dried
shrubs was taken along, as a last resort, the old
man said, in case everything else failed.
Guided by a mamaylao, at last the women
returned to Bago over the forest trails, and
equipping a light barangay, sailed down the
coast to the spot where the tragedy had taken
place. They were accompanied by Martina’s
mother’s two younger brothers, skillful and
determined men.
At a point below the town of Bago they were
joined by the wizard Ino, who paddled out on
a raft of logs to meet them.
They arrived at the spot where the girl had
been lost about sunset, but Ino told them that
nothing could be done until the exact hour of
Martina’s disappearance. They threw out an
anchor and waited in silence. The water was
clear, and only about thirty or forty feet deep,
the sea calm, the skies unclouded, and the rising
moon clear and brilliant.
At last it was the hour they had awaited.
The wizard threw overboard the prepared shrubs
of teo-teo to attract the sharks in the vicinity,
at the same time intoning a low monotonous
incantation. At first nothing happened, but in
half an hour the waters close by were agitated
by the swimming of large fish: phosphorescent
streaks were visible and air bubbles rose to the
surface.
“Some of these are man-eating sharks,”
whispered the wizard. “I will give the order to
kill the first that approaches near enough, so
prepare your harpoon-spears and be ready.
But in spite of the magical teo-teo shrubs
none of the sharks came close enough to be
harpooned, and in an hour they all had disappeared, leaving the sea’s surface as calm as when
they had first appeared.
Martina’s voung uncles were disappointed at
having missed the shark, but at least this much
of the mystery had been cleared up: the ancient
opined that the girl had not been seized by a
shark.
Ino then took up the basket of wilted white
flowers, covered the top with a bamboo meshwork, and tying a stone to it, lowered it overboard, holding fast to a stout cord of abaca, as
the basket disappeared in the water’s depths.
After a half hour’s submersion, the old man
drew the flowers up into the boat. The entire
company examined the basket’s contents curiously, and the old wizard shook his head. Only
a few of the flowers exhibited any sign of freshness, the rest remaining as wilted as before, a
sign which baffled him.
“There must be something down there,” he
said. “I suggest that one of the young divers go
below and investigate. The task is difficult and
dangerous, but to convince ourselves and the
mother of the girl, it should be undertaken.”
He was demanding no small risk of the diver
who would go deep into the sea, perhaps to
encounter one of the kataos, or men of the sea.
Then there was the danger from sharks, saw-fish
and the octopus. It was a young warrior named
Kibol, one of Martina’s uncles, who offered
himself. He proudly threw off his garments and
stood ready to plunge into the water. Old
Ino handed him a piece of crude copper, saying
that as long as he possessed it no shark would
attack him. This he fastened about his neck
with a hemp cord, then balancing himself a
moment on the gunwale of the craft, dived into
the sea’s depths. Anxious minutes droned by.
No word was spoken until at last Kibol’s black
hair appeared on the surface and he climbed
aboard amid rejoicings. But this was strange!


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


F
  


29


C'EST LA GUERRE!


Amaing aa anial a Maaaa 9 P.
on an equality with Great Britain’s, and forty
per cent stronger than Japan’s. The facts as
they stand to-day are that all of England’s
capital ships can outshoot and outspeed America’s eight deficient battleships.
By 1928 Great Britain wiil have fifty-seven
fast cruisers, Japan twenty-eight, and the United
States only twenty-two. Relying upon the
Arms Limitation Agreement to preserve peace.
and overlooking the part played by secondary
warships, the United States has slipped way
behind in her ratio. Congress has just passed
an appropriation of one hundred million dollars
for the construction of ten light cruisers in an
effort to maintain our footing on the seas.
Instead of facing the hard facts of world
politics and the continuous fight for empire,
Americans persist in comparing the size of their
fleets with those of Japan, pointing to Japan’s
building programme as a reason why their own
navy should be strengthened. In fact, Japan
has been more than once accused of violating
the Washington Agreement by secretly making
up her deficiency in capital ships by an increase
in secondary armaments. Let us look at the
other side of the question.
Add to the British naval quota the present
and future Australian tonnage, every ship placed
in commission by the Indian Government,
throw in the fortifications at Singapore, the
huge Jamshedpur Steel Works,—the key of
British Imperial defense in Asia,—and Americans will begin to realize that if Japan ia not
to be eliminated as a first-class Power and her
influence in Asia undermined her Government
must make every sacrifice to maintain in a high
state of preparedness and efficiency the full
VIn MA N IaNg IA LS MO MANg TNA VO
the clothes of the unfortunate Martina which
she had worn at the time of her disappearance.
All that Kibol could tell them was that after a
short search he found the clothes entangled in a
maze of coral branches, but that he had found
no body, nor in fact any other sign of the girl.
The wizard meditated while conversation and
conjecture buzzed about him. How could the
clothes have become attached to the coral
without a rent, unless the girl herself had removed
them? Certainly no finny denizen of the sea
could have taken them off. Finally Ino raised
his head and addressed the girl’s mother:
“Your daughter cannot have died here from
the signs we have; nor was she destroyed by the
sharks. There remains a last resort, the smoke
finger. We will follow it and see whether we
can solve the mystery.”
The moon shed a brilliant light over the sea,
upon whose bosom the barangay rocked lightly.
Standing upright in the boat, the old native
stretched out his arms to the heavens and three
times invoked the aid of the great Laon. A
soft breeze blew from the land bringing with it
the nameless perfumes of the jungle. Far away
in its sylvan depths a jungle fowl crew its challenge to the dawn. At a command from Ino
one of the crew blew on the coals in the kalan
until they began to burn with a dull red glow,
when the wizard placed on the fire the bundle of
dried shrubs which he had brought along.
The smoke from the burning shrubs rose on
the air in heavy spiral scrolls, was wafted by the
breeze down to the level of the sea, and like a
ghostly finger moved in the direction of some
rocky islets to the northeast. They lifted the
sea-anchor and the boat followed the trail of
smoke toward the shore, moving along softly,
until it touched a sandbank lying between the
main-land and weed-covered rocks. The tide
was at ebb and there was a wide stretch of shallow
pools, sandbanks and coral ridges.
The grey finger still beckoned towards the
shore. Scarcely had the craft beached on the
sandbank before everyone on board had slipped
into the shallow water, following their eerie
guide. They waded along for a time among the
seaweed until they were arrested by the sound of
low singing which seemed to come from behind
a rock covered with marine growths, ordinarily
submerged at high tide. They did not know
Crin b sl l potso


naval quota assigned to her under the Washington treaties.
By dint of subsidies, the Indian Government
is developing the greatest steel works in Asia.
If this subsidy be withdrawn, the Indian Army
Board will operate and maintain its own steel
plant from its own funds. Protected by the
subsidy, the Indian iron and steel makers have
captured the Japanese pig-iron market compelling the Japanese manufacturer to contribute
to the cost of creating a military weapon designed in part for their undoing. By the time
the Singapore Base is completed, the Jamshedpur
Steel Works will be placed on a permanent and
profitable working basis. An Indian navy will
be in the process of development outside the
restrictions of the Washington treaties, and
patrolling the waters between Singapore and
Suez. A British battleship division detached
from the main fleet in the North Sea, with its
swift cruisers, torpedo boats, destroyers, submarines, air-carriers, and flying squadrons, cooperating with the Australian and Indian navies,


will make Singapore its home station. The
docking facilities of Hongkong, superior even to
those of Singapore, provide Britain with a
secondary and almost impregnable hase within
striking distance of Formosa and the Philippines. Slowly but surely Great Britain is
strengthening her strategical position in Asia.
Watching only what Japan is doing, seeing in
her modest activities a menace to their own
security, the only people who remain blind to
the writing on the wall are the Americans.
In fairness it must be said that Great Britain
is preparing in a purely defensive manner. In
this she is fully justified. Japan, with the
lessons of Europe before her, labors under no
delusions. The fear that these defensive preparations may at any moment be turned into
weapons of offense justifies Japan in taking
measures to defend herself. It is the same old
vicious combination of circumstances which
brought on the Great War. Britain fears
Japan’s expansion. She fears the menace of her


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


(Please turn to page 34, col. 3.)


MeCormick-Deering Industrial Tractors


TCCORMICK-DEERING Industrial tractors
IVI have inaugurated a new conception of
industrial power. They are speeding up the work
and cutting costs in every activity where mobile
power can be used. Earth moving jobs, transporting heavy equipment, loading and unloading
materials, excavating, and building and maintaining roads are but a few activities where
MeCormick-Deering Industrial tractors save
time and labor and provide their owners with
more power.
MACLEOD AND COMPANY
154 M. DE COMILLAS, MANILA
BRANCHES IN: ILOILO CEBU LEGASPI DAVAO VIGAN


30


A ME
E
I
  


December, 1929


Browsing Among New Books
By GLADYS TRAYNOR


EMINENT ASIANS By Josef Washington Hall
(Upton Close). Appleton & Co.
Mr. Hall, writing of
the lives and works of
six great leaders of Asia
in Eminent Asians, continues his story of the
westernization of the
East told in The Revoli
of Asia. He seems to
have an abundance of
material to draw upon
and crowds many entertaining anecdotes into
the pages of his latest
book.
The first of modern
great men of the East
is Sun Yat Sen. Every
GuaNg TMaaon
one who has resided for


any length of time in China has undoubtedly
read and heard much of the father of the Chinese
Republic. Yet, if I may draw conclusions from
my own experience, I venture to predict that
even they will learn more about this visionary
doctor born of the people, who was to become a
liberator. Those interested in China’s struggle
for a place among the Powers should read this
account of Sun Yat Sen and Chingling, his
lovely wife.
With Sun Yat Sen the author groups Ito and
Yamagata of Japan, Mustapha Kemal of Turkey,
Stalin of Russia, and the prophet of India,
Mahatma Ghandi. Ghandi, of course, is wellknown throughout the world, though the author
writes of him as a man, rather than a god or a
Hindu fakir. Stalin is also more or less familiar
to readers; Kemal, dictator of Turkey, has been
something of a mystery because of his aversion
to publicity. But of the builders of modern
Japan, Ito and Yamagata, both sprung from the
Samurai and friends from boyhood, practicallv
nothing is known in the West. Today Ito is
revered in Japan, while Yamagata, the Japanese
Bismark who is responsible for the present
status of Japan’s army, greatly honored during
his long public life, takes second place. I thing
the author’s best work in the book is the story
of these two ex-warriors.
Mr. Hall writes in a finished popular style,
building on a thorough knowledge of oriental
history. His many vears as newspaper correspondent, foreign adviser to governing heads,
and free lance traveler and student, have familiarized him with customs and traditions which
furnish a convincing background for the incidents
he relates.


FieLD OF HOnOr By Donn Byrne. The Century
Co.
Field of Honor, Donn Byrne’s last novel,
published after his death, is written in the same
exquisitely beautiful style of his other works,
but takes a slightly different form. It is a tale
of England’s part in the French Revolution,
interwoven with the slender love story of a
young Irish couple, Garrett Dillon and his
pretty bride, Jocelyn, introduced partly, one
feels, to please the reader who has come to expect
something of romantic Ireland in every book by
Byrne. Garrett is on the side of England and
leaves his young wife to become a King’s Mes

senger. Jocelyn, related to Irish martyrs, is for
revolution and the cause of freedom. Finely
descriptive scenes are laid in Ireland, the Isle of
Man, London; then follow the soldiers into every
battlefield of Europe.
Napoleon is the real hero of the story; the
author paints a sympathetic, flattering portrait
of him, and a harsh though sympathetic portrait
of Lord Castlereagh, an Irishman hated in his
own country, England’s minister of war, whose
unscrupulous, clever scheming finally brings
about “the little man’s” downfall. Other
portraits mark the passage of the years in the
introductions to each part of the book: a delightful sketch of Wordsworth, of the venerable Doge
of Venice, of the spy, Lady Stanhope, a very
human picture of Josephine on the eve of her
divorce from Napoleon, and reverent appreciations of the poets Gocthe and Shelley. In these
studies the author evidences a gift of understanding insight into human character not bestowed
on all novelists. It is an unusual and fascinating
method of placing the time of a story, after the
manner of the old minstrels who began a new
tale by relating some well-known legend.
Donn Byrne, who won his reputation as a
romantic novelist idealizing the traditions of his
brave little green isle in glowing prose poems,
could not have been the visionary, wistful Celtic
dreamer that he was without injecting symbolism
and philosophy into his novels. Those who look
for these will find them in this volume. Field
of Honor justifies the use of superlatives. It is
not only excellent entertainment, but has also
an enduring quality in the haunting beauty of
rich, vivid prose. Here is a book for those who
like their fiction to be literature.
PENROD JASHBER. By Booth Tarkington.
Doubleday Doran
In this book Mr. Tarkington assures Penrod’s
admirers that this favorite character is still
the engaging small boy with whom they have
lived over surreptitious pleasures of childhood.
Penrod Jashber is a boy’s story, written for
grown-ups, of the days "when the stable was
empty but not yet rebuilt into a garage.” The
author’s description of Penrod’s mental processes
will delight the reader as much as the incidents
he recounts.
The new Penrod story relates the development
of a Mr. Hyde in the person of George B. Jashber,
Pvt. detect. No. 103. Penrod-Jashber perfects
his methods by himself, then brings Herman and
Verman, the two colored boys and his small
neighbor Sam Williams, into his organization
to shadow a suspected suitor of his nineteenyear old sister Margaret. The picture of the
immaculate young man strolling out with his
girl friend on a Sunday afternoon, followed by a
procession headed first by a small tongue-tied
colored boy calling meaningless words to another
colored boy back of him, who in turn translates
and relays the messages to Sam, dodging behind
trees, with Penrod bringing up the rear, is especially provocative of chuckles.
The detectives’ encroachment upon the adult
world occasions complications which turn out
happily for at least one person. Sam’s big
brother, just home from college, is also interested
in Margaret, and he thinks this new game of


CHARTERED BANK


OF INDIA, AUSTRALIA
AND CHINA


Capital and Reserve Fund. . ....... . . . . . . . . . . . E7,000,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietor..... . . . . . . . . ..... 3,000,000


MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872


SUB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
Every description of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
throughout India, China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
French Indo-China, Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.


Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
C. E. STEWART, Acting Manager.
Maanla.


The
Philippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
SURETYSHIPS
DOCUMENTS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance


ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
Eoans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest


Call or write for particulars


Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
P O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


Penrod’s is worth financing to the extent of a
dollar now and then.
The days when boys and girls depended upon
their own imaginations to relieve vacation
monotony are rapidly becoming legendary in an
age of moving pictures, radios and mechanical
toys, but Penrod will continue to live on in a
world of reality by the side of those other immortal boys, Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry
Finn.
DEAR SOOKY. By Percy Crosby. Being Letters
from Skippy, with illustrations by the author.
G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
If a tear and a laugh and the tender revelation
of a small boy’s soul can be said to be components
of great literature, then this little volume by the
creator of Skippy should win a place in the first
ranks. Skippy is a lovable small boy just beginning to be conscious of his masculinity. The
sweet charm of babyhood hasn’t vet been entirely
eclipsed by boyish deviltry. He is at the age
all parents would like to keep their boys.
Skippy, visiting his aunt down in Virginia,
writes to his little pal Sooky. He wants to know
why his girl Carol hasn’t answered his three
postcards. Her neglect bothers him a good deal
until he finally makes an effort to propitiate
her. He writes:
“I borrowed fifteen cents outa the Sunday
School barrel an’ bought a string of blue beads
with it, but Aunt Emily saw them an’ she said
it ain’t proper to give jewelry to a girl. There
was nothing to do but cut 'em up, but maybe I
didn’t have the chickens hoppin’ around all
afternoon, flippin' them with the bean-shooter..'
Now the beads is all gone so the farm’s quieted
down.
He writes from his grandmother’s up in the
mountains where he has gone for Christmas, and
tells about the village band composed of players
from seven to seventy, and the moving picture
that keeps snappin’ in the middle of a scene.
While you are still lauzhing at the funny little
village, the author in a deft phrase or two brings
a lump to your throat over the picture of the
small homesick boy wondering what’s wrong at
home, "cause if not why am I up here 'stead
of in my own home with my own mother.”
The book is beautifully illustrated in colors and
printed on unusually fine paper in excellent
print. It ought to make any child, whatever
his age, happy on Christmas morning.
TriPLE murdeR By Carolyn Wells. J. B.
Lippincott Co.
Carolvn Wells wastes no time in projecting
the reader into her new Fleming Stone detective
story which moves along at a good pace. The
wealthy Maxwell Garnett drives up to the exclusive country club in the Adirondacks where
he is spending the summer, steps out of his high

IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


  


31


powered roadster, and turns to help his wife
out of the rumble seat. Then begins the mystery. He discovers that she is dead, murdered.
Suspicion is immediately cast upon Garnett.
Jean was his third wife, and inquiry reveals that
his first wife died suddenly from an unexplained
fall from a roof. His second wife also disappeared suddenly when no one but her husband
was present. Her dead body was later found
in a lily pond. The finger of guilt points unmistakably at Garnett, but his brother steps
forward in the role of an eager, helpful would-be
unraveler of the mystery and engages the services
of the great detective, Fleming Stone, who happens to be vacationing at the club. This gentleman proceeds to apply psvchology to the solution
of the crime, much to the disgust of the local
chief of police, and eventually uncovers the real
murderer, who, of course, is the least suspected
person.
Triple Murder, if you like mystery stories,
will hold your interest.


The Lost Martina
(Continued from page 29)
what or whom they expected to find, but they
were drawn to the rock now by more than the
smoke spell.
They were now on the other side of the rock,
and there before their eyes only a few feet in
front of them was the lost Martina, seated on a
low promontory of the jagged rock. They had
surprised her as she was combing her long brown
hair with slim fingers, abundant tresses which
were her only garment. With a cry of delight,
the girl’s mother hastened toward her daughter,
arms outstretched and eyes streaming with tears.
In her haste she stumbled and slipped on a submerged rock and fell into a deep pool, becoming
entangled in seaweed from which she struggled
to extricate herself. She ceased her frantic
strugglea moment and looked up as her daughter's
voice came to her:
"Mother, do not come nearer. I was vour
daughter but am no more of your world. Here
I live with the kindly kataos who rescued me
from the cruelties and temptations of men.
Seek not to disturb me. I am happy till Fate
shall release me."
In vain the mother tried to reach Martina.
She was caught in the pool as in a vice. Behind
her stood the others, the datu’s wife, the crew
of the barangay, and her brothers, grouped
around the old wizard, rooted to the spot with
mouths agape. Then quite suddenly the first
rays of dawn fell in rosy shafts across the water,
and when the mother and the others looked
again the girl had vanished in the morning mists,
again lost to them forever.
'When the barangay returned to Bago the
story was taken down by old chroniclers of folk
tales. Though for some generations the tale
was handed down from father to son, it has now
almost been forgotten—a fading legend of
olden time when superstition and credulity were
more prevalent than now.


INFORMATION FOR
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reports made
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY,
LUMBERETC.
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: “YPIL,” Cebu.


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management -. ANTRIM, ANDERSON, Inc.


Origins of the Roman
(Continued from page 22)
should naturally conclude that the doctrines
of excommunication and penance formed the
most essential part of religion; and that it was
much less dangerous for the disciples of Christ
to neglect the observance of the moral duties,
than to despise the censures and authority of
their bishops. Sometimes we might imagine
that we were listening to the voice of Moses,
when he commanded the earth to open, and to
swallow up, in consuming flames, the rebellious
race which refused obedience to the priesthood
of Aaron; and we should sometimes suppose that
we heard a Roman consul asserting the majesty
of the republic, and declaring his inflexible resolution to enforce the rigor of the laws. “If such
irregularities are suffered with impunity” dt is
thus that the bishop of Carthage chides the
lenity of his colleague), "if such irregularities
are suffered, there is an end of EPISCOPAL VIGOR;
an end of the sublime and divine power of
governing the Church, an end of Christianity
itself.” Cyprian had renounced those temporal
honors which it is probable he would never have
obtained; but the acquisition of such absolute
command over the consciences and understanding of a congregation, however obscure or despised by the world, is more truly grateful to the
pride of the human heart than the possession of
the most despotic power, imposed by arms and
conquest on a reluctant people.
In the course of this important, though perhaps tedious, inquiry, I have attempted to display the secondary causes which so efficaciously
assisted the truth of the Christian religion. If
among these causes we have discovered any artificial ornaments, any accidental circumstances,
or any mixture of error and passion, it cannot
appear surprising that mankind should be the
most sensibly affected by such motives as were
suited to their imperfect nature. It was by the
aid of these causes, exclusive zeal, the immediate expectation of another world, the claim of
miracles, the practice of rigid virtue, and the
constitution of the primitive church, that Christianity spread itself with so much success in the
Roman empire. To the first of these the Christians were indebted for their invincible valor,
which disdained to capitulate, with the enemy
whom they were resolved to vanquish. The
three succeeding causes supplied their valor with
the most formidable arms. The last of these
causes united their courage, directed their arms,
and gave their efforts that irresistible weight,
which even a small band of well-trained and
intrepid volunteers has so often possessed over
an undisciplined multitude, ignorant of the
subject and careless of the event of the war.
In the various religions of Polytheism, some
wandering fanatics of Egypt and Syria, who
addressed themselves to the credulous superstition of the populace, were perhaps the only order
of priests that derived their whole support and
credit from their sacerdotal profession, and were
very deeply affected by a personal concern for
the safety or prosperity of their tutelar deities.
The ministers of Polytheism, both in Rome and
in the provinces, were, for the most part, men of
a noble birth, and of an affluent fortune, who
received, as an honorable distinction, the care
of a celebrated temple, or of a public sacrifice,
exhibited, very frequently at their own expense,
the sacred games, and with cold indifference
performed the ancient rites, according to the


laws and fashion of their country. As they were
engaged in the ordinary occupations of life, their
zeal and devotion were seldom animated by
a sense of interest, or by the habits of an
ecclesiastical character. Confined to their respective temples and cities, they remained without any connection of discipline or government;
and whilst they acknowledged the supreme jurisdiction of the senate, of the college of pontiffs,
and of the emperor, those civil magistrates contented themselves with the easy task of maintaining in peace and dignity the general worship of
mankind. We have already seen how various,
how loose, and how uncertain were the religious
sentiments of Polytheists. They were abandoned, almost without control, to the natural workings of a superstitious fancy. The accidental
circumstances of their life and situation determined the object as well as the degree of their
devotion; and as long as their adoration was
successively prostituted to a thousand deities, it
was scarcely possible that their hearts could be
susceptible of a very sincere or lively passion for
any of them.
(To be continued)


MANILA CARNIVAL!
FEBRUARY 15 TO MARCH 2
ideal time to visit the Philippines!


OX Y GEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure


HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hyarogen
99.800 pure


ACETYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes


WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops


BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
Electric Storage Batteries


Phiiopine Acetviene Go.
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.
VERC

IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


32


  


December, 1929


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, The Robert Dollar Company


With the movement
of new crop sugar under
way there isan improveDNL
ment in the cargo situation for the past
month over that of
several months previous.
The weak spot is stillthe
Pacific coast, although
there are indications of
a more normal movement to that market.
Copra, lumber and
hemp are still moving
only in fair quantities.
To the Atlantic coast conditions are fair, with
hemp moving somewhat more freely, although
this is still a weak point. Lumber continues to
move in fair quantities and it is predicted that
there will be a considerably increased volume
when that market is really developed. There is
an improvement shown in the movement of
general cargo to that market.
On the European berth shipments continue in
satisfactory volume, with copra meal and cake
quite active and lumber, hemp and general
cargo moving in about normal quantities.
From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines, there were exported from the
Philippines during the month of October, 1929,
to China and Japan ports 11,581 tons with a total
of 45 sailings, of which 3,840 tons were carried
in American bottoms with 9 sailings; To Pacific
coast for local delivery 26,926 tons with a total
of 16 sailings, of which 17,897 tons were carried
in American bottoms with 1I sailings; To Pacific
coast for overland delivery 604 tons with a total
of 9 sailings, of which 584 tons were carried in


American bottoms with 6 sailings; To Pacific
coast for intercoastal 2355 tons with a total of
10 sailings, of which 2169 tons were carried in
American bottoms with 9 sailings; To Atlantic
coast 26,945 tons with a total of 16 sailings, of
which 16,412 tons were carried in American
bottoms with 5 sailings; To European ports
23,264 tons with a total of 21 sailings, of which
211 tons were carried in American bottoms with
2 sailings; To Australian ports 1529 tons with a
total of 5 sailings, of which American bottoms
carried none; a grand total of 93,204 tons with
a total of 73 sailings, of which American bottoms
carried 41,239 tons with 16 sailings.
The month of November in Trans-pacific
passenger business, according to available statistics, showed favorably with the same period of
last vear. November is always a very good
month for passenger business to the Pacific
coast, as many people leave at that time to be
in the United States and Canada for Christmas
and New Years. Round-the-World traffic is
steadily increasing and shows material gains
over the same period last year. It is particularly
noted that tourists are spending a longer time in
Manila than in past years. Heretofore tourists
have been staying for a period of only 2 or 3
days, but owing to the fact that steamship companies are lending their facilities toward advertising the Philippines, tourists are realizing that
considerably more time may be spent in the
Islands at a great advantage. The Philippine
Tourist Bureau, which was organized some few
months ago, when in full swing, will help the
situation immeasurably.
The Dollar Line has recently established a
precedent wherein it requires all Pursers on
Trans-pacific vessels to make a trip to Baguio
so that they may be enabled to tell incoming
tourists of this beautiful resort. This is a
measure instituted to cooperate with the Philippine Tourist Bureau. All lines should work with
this tourist bureau in its efforts to place the
Philippines before the traveling public.


Steerage traffic to Honolulu continues in a
very favorable manner to the extent that all
space has been booked ahead indefinitely. Traffic to the United States has not been heavy for
the reason that laborers have been required in
the fields for the rice harvest. However, after
Christmas this traffic will increase rapidly. For
the present, because of the yet limited space to
the United States via Honolulu, this traffic
must necessarily move through the Port of
Seattle.
The following figures show passenger traffic
moving during the month of November: (first
figure represents first-class, second figure steerage) To China and Japan, 207-328; To Honolulu,
2-850; To Pacific Coast, 87-120; To Singapore
and Straits Settlements, 20-10; To Mediterranean Ports, 11-1; To America via Suez, O-1, or a
total of 327 First Class and 1220 Steerage passengers departing from the Philippines
L. Everett, Inc., have been appointed managing
agents of the Southern Transport & Trading
Co., whose steamer Southern Trader was formally turned over to the new agents on Monday,
November 18, and was despatched on Saturday,
November 23, for Iloilo, Cebu, Zamboanga and
Davao.
The Southern Trader is a vessel of 1518 tons
net register, capable of lifting 4000 tons deadweight. She has four hatches served by eight
cargo booms and is equipped with heavy lift
gear to handle up to 10 tons. Chill-room space
will accommodate about 12 tons of refrigerator
cargo. The passenger accommodations consist
of five cabins for first class, recently refitted
throughout, and the third class will take care
of 84 persons.
The new agents announce that the vessel will
be operated in their regular service to Cebu,
Zamboanga and Davao, calling at other ports
as inducements offer.
Addition of the Southern Trader gives L.
Everett, Inc., three vessels in the inter-island
trade—the others being the Philippine Steam
Navigation Co.’s passenger/freight steamer
Kinau, a popular vessel in the fortnightly
service between Manila and Cebu, Dumaguete,
Zamboanga, Cotabato and Jolo and the Flor
ence D, running on a fortnightly schedule
between Manila and Legaspi, Tabaco. They
also have been appointed agents for the M/S
Kolambugan, a vessel of 1400 tons deadweight,
recently completed in Hongkong yards for the
Compania Naviera of Cebu. She will be placed
in the Manila/ Mindanao trade shortly.
Mr. Everett, whose headquarters are in
Shanghai, was a recent visitor to Manila. He
expressed his confidence in the development of
the inter-island carrying trade, especially in the
Mindanao section, and stated that his company
and associates had plans for still further expansion with combination passenger and freight
vessels of accelerated speed for the near future.
L. Everett, Inc., are also general agents in the
Orient for the American Pioneer and American
Gulf Orient Lines, operating regular fast freight
services between the North Atlantic and Gulf
coasts and the Orient.


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for New
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The World."
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig S von Knobelsdorff
Agents


90 Rosario, Manila


Phone 22324


(Please turn to page 34)


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


FREIGHT REVENUE CAR LOADINGS


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By L. ARCADIO
Acting Traffic Manager, Manila
Railroad Company.


The commodities received in Manila September 26 to October 25,
1929, both inclusive, via Manila Railroad are as follows:
1929


October


November


Rice, cavans................


142,375
* DE


163,000


Sugar, piculs................


.. 54,824


338,240


Tobacco, bales..............


39,000
*


11,180


Copra, piculs................


.. 305,400


22,605


Coconuts.............. . . . . .


.. 2,290,750


2,217,600


Lumber, B. F...............


835,650
*


656,100


Desiccated coconuts, cases.....


21,525
* 


24,039


The freight revenue car loading statistic for four weeks ending November 23, 1929, as compared with four weeks of the same month of the
year 1928 are given below:


COMMODITIES


NUAMEN ON
FREIGHT CARS


TuMENN
TONNAGE


Cang 
ImO
or Deci "ase


1O


TON


1O


TON


Cars


Tonnage


Rice.............


1


5
39


8,089


5,445


90


S34


Palay............


120


223


1,094


1,965


(03)


($71)


Sugar............


430


129


12,899


12,197


702


Sugar Cane......


4,485


3,666


79,891


68,161


819


11,730


Copra............


821


1,065


7,642


9,686


(244)


(2,044)


Coconuts.........


301


23


3,138


2,692


52


446


Hemp............


18


20


isl


162


(2)


6i)


Tobacco..........


18


32


125


(125


(93)


Livestock.......


3


441


351


Mineral Products.
Lumber and Tim

445


457


4,149 


4,577)


(12)


(428)


ber...........
Other Forest Prod

189


177


4,200


3,860


12


340


ucts........ . . . .


13


20


122


130


(


(8)


Manufactures.....
All others includ

284


322


3,185 


3,804


(38)


(619)


ing LCL. .....


3,221


3,754


22,261


28,421


(533)


(6,160)


ToTA


IlI5l


10.061


148 174


MLN


1I


6.598


Philippine Coconut Oil
Demands for the independence of the Philippines have become louder
and stronger from some United States Senators in connection with the
discussion of the new proposed tariff rates. Because the Islands produce
sugar and coconut oil, those Senators who are interested in a high tariff
on these products are demanding that the Filipinos be freed from
American rule and a high duty be set against their goods, ostensibly for
the protection of American industry. Unable to shut out Philippine
coconut oil by a high duty in the new tariff bill because the Islands
are an American possession, these Senators propose the quick and simple
expedient of cutting off the Islands from the American territorial family
in order to manufacture an excuse to build the tariff wall. Of course, serious consideration of the proposal by the Senate is out of the question
at this time. Nevertheless, the suggestion in itself gives an interesting
slant on the mental attitude of some Senators. If the coat sleeve is too
short, cut off a piece of the arm to make it fit.—Soap.


SUMMARY


Wan Cning 9o
turday, Nov. 2.


2,598


2,476


34,823


31,411


122


3,412


Week ending Saturday Nov. 9...


2,610


2,529


33,585


5


81


2,063


Week ending Saturday, Nov. 16.


2,986


2,895


39,809


36,944


91


2,865


Week ending Saturday, Nov. 23.


2,957


3,061


39,957


41,699


10o)


0,742)


TOTAU.


11151


10.96)


1148 174 1141 576


190


18598


NotE: Figures in parenthesis indicate decrease.
It will be noted there has been slight increase in both the number
of cars and volume of tonnage handled. This is attributed to the heavier
shipments of rice, sugar, sugar cane, coconuts and lumber and timber transported, which greatly offset the decrease suffered on some other commodities.


AMERICAN MAIL LINE
DOLLAR STEAMSHIP LINE, INC., LTD.
COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


The "President”' Liners Offer
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


TO SAN FRANCISCO
AND
LOS ANGELES
via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE FRIDAYS


ROUND THE


WORLD


President Van Buren


- - - Dec.


18


President Garfield


-.- Jan.


1


President Polk --


Jan.


15


President Adams-


-- Jan.


29


Sailings every fortnight


NEW TRANS PACIFIC SERVICE
To San Francisco direct via Honolulu


VICTORIA
AND
SEATTLE
via
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
and Yokohama
SAILINGS
ON
ALTERNATE SATURDAYS


24 Calle David


MANILA


Telephone No. 2-24-41


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


O*


TIIL Alviliueary CrlalmBlle Or COImiVEIOLJOUItiid


Eculinelr l


Shipping Personals
(Continued from page 32)
Geo. J. MeCarthy, assistant general passenger agent for The Robert Dollar Co. with
headquarters in Shanghai, accompanied by
Mrs. MeCarthy, arrived in Manila December
3 aboard the Round-the-World Liner President
Wilson and departed for Shanghai December 7
aboard the SS President Grant. Mr. MeCarthy
was on a business trip in the interests of his
company.
G. A. Harrell district passenger agent in the
Philippines for The Robert Dollar Co., accompanied by Mrs. Harrell and young daughter, returned to his post in Manila November Il aboard
the SS President Taft, after a five months' holiday
in the United States.


L. Everett, president of L. Everett, Inc..
arrived in Manila October 23 aboard the SS
Empress of Asia from Shanghai and, after spending some time in Manila in the interests of his
company, returned to Shanghai November 15
aboard the SS President Taft.


G. P. Bradford, general agent, L. Everett,
Inc., Manila, returned from Southern Islands
aboard the SS Kinau November 13.


H. M. Cavender, general agent, The Robert
Dollar Co., Manila, returned to Manila November 7 aboard the SS Stuart Dollar, after a
three weeks’ absence thru Southern ports.
J. B. Lanyon, representative of the Blue
Funnel Line, arrived in Manila November 5
aboard the SS President Johnson, and in company
with Neil Macleod, manager shipping department Smith, Bell & Co., Ltd., Manila, left
Manila November 6 aboard the SS Panay for
Cebu. Mr. Macleod returned to Manila from
Cebu aboard the SS Bohol November 15, Mr.
Lanyon continuing thru Southern Philippine
ports to Kolambugan and Davao, and thence to
Sandakan, British North Borneo. Mr. Lanyon
is expected to return to Manila December 6
aboard the SS St. Albans. Mr. Lanyon, accompanied by Mr. Neil Macleod, expects to
leave Manila again December 7 for Iloilo and
Negros aboard the SS Viscaya.


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporation


The local market for
copra has been quiet
but steady during the
entire month of November with production
in the entire archipelago very unsatisfactory. During the last
half of the month, prices
at primary points were
advanced, but at this
writing are reported
somewhat easier.

The European copra
market has fluctuated
between comparatively narrow limits during the
month and is today reported steady at 222-2-6
for Sundried. Notwithstanding light production in the Philippines, the U. S. copra market
has ruled quiet during November with only
fair interest displayed at asking prices. While
heavier production during the month of December up to the Christmas holidays is expected,
at the same time we do not look for materially
lower prices at Manila up to the end of the year.
Latest cable advices follow:
London F. M. M........E21-15-0
Sundried. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222-2-6
San Francisco buyers. ...4-1,/4 cents
Manila Buen-Corriente... P9.125 to P9.37-172
Resecada buyers......... ₱10.37-1/2.
COCONUTOIL:—With ample stocks of competing Fats and Oils and under the depressing influence of stock market conditions, U. S. trading
in this commodity was comparatively light dur
ing the month of November. Sales were reported
from the Philippines up through June of 1930 at
7 cents c.i.f. Atlantic coast ports. At San Francisco the market is reported at 6-548 to 6-344
cents per pound f. o. b. tank cars. There are
buyers today at 6-3/4 cents c. i. f. New York
with no sellers. Latest advices follow:
San Francisco.........6-5/8 cents f. o. b.
tank cars
New York buyers......6-3,4 C. I. F.
Sellers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 cents C. I. F.
Manila. ... . . . . . . . . . . . .29 centavos per kilo
ex tank
30-1,2 centavos per kilo delivered in drums.
COPRA CAKE:—Pressure of resales with very
light demand has characterized the Continental
copra cake market during the month under review. Very little trading is reported for shipment
from Manila, and local mills are not inclined to
meet buyers' ideas on bids received. Latest advices follow:
Hamburg, January shipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E8-2-6
San Francisco......... No quotations.
Manila sellers......... ₱58.00 to F60.00 per
metric, ton ex-godown
Buyers................ P54.00 to P55.00.


C'est La Guerre
(Continued from page 29)
ever-expanding trade. Japan is gradually ousting Great Britain in China. Her Dominions
cry loudly for protection against the bogey of
the 'Yellow Peril.' So Britain looks a long way
ahead and prepares against her old-time ally.
Japan also looks a long way into the future,
determined at all hazards to preserve her independence and industrial prosperity.
While these great Powers arm against the day
when friends may be turned into foes, America
pursues the even tenor of her ways, quibbles
over the expense of a few light cruisers, and
withholds appropriations that will maintain its
fighting forces in a state of efficiency. Secure
in her isolation, her great wealth and unlimited
resources, and misled by European propaganda,
America leisurely arms only against a possible
menace in the Pacific, while forces in Europe are
in motion to bring about her downfall.—Living
Ago.


DAGUIO NNIGII TRALNS
FOR 1929-1930 SEASON
WEEKLY SPECIAL SERVICE
Train Drawn by Oil-Burning Locomotive
Powerful—Clean—No Cinders
DeLuxe Cars with Sleeping Berths and Buffet Service
The BAGUIO NIGHT SPECIAL leaves Manila at 11:00 P. M. every
Friday night, returning from San Fernando at 8:40 P. M. and from Damortis at 10:30 P. M. the following Sunday.
For trip on Friday, December 20, on account of the Christmas Week,
the NIGHT SPECIAL will return to Manila the following Wednesday,
December 25. For trip on Friday, December 27, it will return on Wednesday, January 1, instead of Sunday.
Connection with Benguet Auto Line at Damortis to and from Baguio.
On northbound trip, passengers leave promptly after arrival of train
at Damortis and reach Baguio before 8:00 A. M. and from Baguio, first
class busses and automobiles leave at 8:00 P. M. and third class at 6:30
P. M., arriving at Damortis in time to connect with the BAGUIO NIGHT
SPECIAL train.
RATES
Manila-Baguio, one way................ .. .. . . . .
120 days, Manila-Baguio, round trip............

10.28
8.88
Manila-Damortis, one way ...... . . . . . . . . . . . ....
3.14
120 days, Manila-Damortis, round trip..........
13.82
Manila-San Fernando, U., one way..............
10. 64
53
120 days, Manila-San Fernando U., round trip..
16.46
5.00
Sleeper berth, each way ................ . .... ...
Both single and round trip tickets to Baguio may be purchased at stations between Manila and San Fabian where BAGUIO NIGHT EXPRESS
train is scheduled to stop. All classes of tickets, one way and round trip,
are good on these trains between points mentioned in the train schedule.
For northbound trip sleeping car reservations should be made and
tickets purchased at Manila Station (Tutuban) or Manila Railroad City
Office, 519 Dasmarinas, telephone 2-31-83, near Peoples Bank. For southbound trip reservations should be made at Benguet Auto Line station,
Baguio, or railroad stations at which this train stops. Baggage, Express
parcels and C. O. D. shipments will be handled to or from Baguio at stations
mentioned on train schedule.
Express rates on automobiles when owner holds first class ticket to
destination of the automobile:
One way Round trip
P32.20
Manila-Damortis .......................... . ...
₱61.18
Manila-San Fernando U.................... ...
36.80 65.54
BAGUIO NIGHT SPECIAL makes connection with Northern Luzon
Transportation at San Fernando, La Union, where it arrives at 7:37 A.M.,
enabling travelers to llocos provinces to reach destination on the same day.
Manila Railroad Company


1st Class 3rd Class


₱14.33 ₱ 5.64


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


Dcechidel, 1343


TIPL AIN


-- oO


TOEAGO REVEN
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.


Raw Lear: The market in local grades remained quiet during
November. To Japan
and Korea the seasonal
export of La Union
tobacco started. Spain
absorbed, as usual, the
large bulk of exports,
movements to other destinations remaining rather limited. Comparative figures for November shipments abroad
are as follows:
Rawleaf
Stripped and
Serap kilos


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


This month shows
the largest November
business of which we
have record. Three exceptionally large sales,
one of over P500,000
in Paco and two of over
P200,000 each in Ermita and Sta. Ana account for the unusually
largetotal. The general
business, excluding these
three sales, is P588,084,
which is lower than
any November total a


since 1918 excepting only 1921.
SManila
Sales City of .6
Oct. 1929 Nov..1929


Sta. Cruz........


....₱ 177,744


₱184,433


Binondo.............


61,441


60,000


San Nicolas......


432



25,380


Tondo...............


154,743


74,085


Sampaloc.........


108,017
**


68,512


San Miguel......


* **


17,000


Quiapo..........


..... 114,921


7,000


Intramuros........


35,500
* * * .


Ermita...........


65,000



326,760


Malate...........


192,757
E*


42,814


Paco.............


57,205
**


553,645


Sta. Ana..........


19,014
* *


329,808


Pandacan.........
Sta. Mesa........


*  .
16,350
** . *


46,867


MANIRA PAMAAON


Take the NEW
EIVRARRO BURDBE
Companion train to the
ORRRIAD
LIMITED
Across America
A


6,211
China........... . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
Czechoslovakia.................
485
England............ .. . . . . . . . . .
13,364
Hongkong............ . . . . . . . . .
Japan and Korea......... 500,654
2,219
Java.........................
26,775
North Atlantic (Europe)........
Spain.............. . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,188,594
4,293
Straits Settlements..............
133,068
United States..................
24,055
Uruguay............. . . . . . . . . . .


1690,846
October, 1929. .... . . . . . . . ...... 1,847,035
November, 1928. . . . . . . . . . . ..... 3,926,406


CIGARS: Exports to the United States while
somewhat higher than in November 1928, are
about 10% lower than for the preceding month.
No improvement for Manila cigars is in sight in
the American market. Statistical figures for
cigars shipped to the United States compare as
follows:
November 1929, 14,862,160: October, 1929,
16,311,308; November'1928, 13,926.491.


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
By RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager, International Banking Corporation


The market opened
with all Banks buying
USS
 at 51800
premium for NovemberDece mber deliveries.
Exporters, however, held
off settling and by the
middle of the month
Banks were offering
3,4% premium for November delivery in order
to get cover for their
sales commitments. As
the month end approached Banks were
willing to apply the rate
EREI of 344% premium to
December settlements.
On demand credit bills were bought at 144%
premium during the second half of November
and 60 dis credit bills were taken at 778%
discount. As the market strengthened Banks
gradually raised their selling rates for USg TT
to 1-1/8% premium, at which level the market
closed with a steady tendency.
The following purchases of telegraphic transfers have been made from the Insular Treasurer


7 , )HetHERyouenter America
O at Seattle via the short
Trans-Pacific route, or at San
Francisco, board the New Empire
Builder or its companion train,
the Oriental Limited, for eastern
America. Luxuriously equipped
and smartly serviced, yet charging
no extra fare, this fast trainreaches
Chicago in olla hours from Seattle
or Portland. It traverses 1200
clean, cinderless miles of diverting
scenery behind either oil-burning
or electric locomotives—o0 day

light miles along Glacier National
Park.
Enroute you will also see the electrified New Cascade Tunnel, longest in the Western Hemisphere—
8 miles through the Cascade
Mountains—shortening the distance across America on the Great
Northern Railway. Reaching Chicago, you can make connections
with fast de luxe trains for Detroit,
Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, New York, Boston, Wash-¬
ington, D. C., and other American
cities.


since last report:
Week ending:—
October 26th........... . . . . . .
'il
November 2nd........... . ...
November 9th. $ 6,000
November 16th........ 506,000
Sterling rates varied very slightly throughout
November. Sellers were quoting 2/-5716 for
TT and buyers were offering 2/-1/2 with perhaps
a cut of 1/16 d in special cases.
The New York-London cross-rate closed on
October 31st at 487 29,32, opened on November
(Continued on page 37)


CLEAN. CINDERLESS, LUXURIOUS, SCENIC ROUTE


Apply to Tourist Agencies orTrans-Pacific
Steamship Lines or write
J. Wesley Young, Gen'l Agent, Pass’r Dept., 1400 4th Ave., Seattle, Wash.
A. H. Hebb, Agent, 916 Government St., Victoria, B. C.
Edw. A. Dye, Gen’b Agent, 607 Hastings St.. Vancouver, B. C.
C. A. Gerken, Gen’l Agent, 679 Market St., San Francisco, Cal.
M. J. Costello, West. Traf. Mgr., Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hillrail


A Dependable Railway


N RESTONDING TO ADVERTIBEMENIS FLEASE MENTION TRE AMERIGAN GHAMBER OF GOMMERCE JOUERAL


  


December, 1929


36


LUMBER REVIEW
By ARTHUR F. FISCHER
Director of Forestry


The lumber situation beginning September
has been characterized by overstocking of lower
grades in the Manila market and in the other
large ports. This over-stocking is due to the
curtailment of shipments to China particularly
Shanghai because of exchange reflecting disturbed
warconditions there. Japan shipments of sawn
lumber also have diminished. These export curtailments are in grades not required in other
foreign markets. Demand for the higher grades


of lumber is brisk for U. S. shipments particularly. Depressed markets in local agricultural export products is
reflected in decreased purchasing power locally. With the market
bettering in hemp, copra, sugar, etc., local lumber stock will be absorbed. Construction has not decreased to any extent in the past month
and with the advent of good weather building construction will
increase and local stock will move.
The following is a comparative table showing lumber and timber
export for September of 1928 and 1929:
U. S. 1929, bd. ft. 4,125,944, P322,426; 1928, bd. ft. 5,347,488,
₱442,687; Japan, 1929, bd. ft. 2,688,160, P117,023; 1928, bd. ft. 1,384,360,
P85,352; China, 1929, bd. ft. 2,087,352, P157,724; 1928, bd. ft. 1,113,424,
₱92,964; all other countries, 1929, bd. ft. 520,672, P40,706; 1928, bd. ft.
1,397,928, P116,912; all being for the month of September.
Lumber deliveries from 39 mills were 18,296 M ft. this September
and 18,205 M ft, last. The September inventories of these 39 mills
totaled 43,422 M ft. this year and 33,689 M ft. last, while their total mill
production during September this year and last year was 20,600 M ft.
and 19,221 M ft. respectively. All measurements bd. ft.


Can You Write? Ten to One You Can!


Prize Competition Announced
For the Best Narrative, Not More Than 3,000 Words, of
Philippine Economic Progress Under the United States
submitted prior to January 31, The Journal
will pay 150 pesos
For the second best paper on the same subject,
50 pesos


Similar competitions, open to all, in which substance will
be weighted equally with diction, will be announced frequently
until further notice. Determined to develop a literary
market here, The Journal offers the same price for
manuscripts as that paid by first-rate American Magazines.
There Is but One Condition
Competitors must be yearly subscribers to The Journal.
If not already subscribers, each should send P4 and his
name and address with his manuscript. In addition, editorial
service—kindly, sympathetic literary criticism—to the limit
of the editor’s physical capacity is proffered
free to all yearly subscribers.


This Is The Most Appropriate
LIGHT
For Your
SLEEPING ROOM


It Gives The Desired Light—
Dim or Bright


Visit Us and We Will
be Glad to Show You
EEMAO IO.
ELECTRICAL AND MACHINERY FIRM
Tel. 2-35-32
627 Ave. Rizal, Manila


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


  


37


Review of the Exchange Market
(Continued from page 35)
Ist at 487 31,32, was high at 488 on November
2nd, dropped to a low of 487 11432 on November
18th and stood at 487 7,8 on the last day of the
month.
The closing quotations for London Bar Silver
on October 31st was 23 ready and 23 3,16 forward. The low point for November was 22
1/2 ready and 22 548 forward on the 28th, while
on the first the high for the month was reached
at 22 15/16 ready and 23 1/16 forward.
New York Bar Silver rose from 49 7,8, the
final quotation for October, to 50 on November
1st, 2nd and 3rd, which was high for that month.
The rate gradually receded, finding a low of 49
348 on several instances and finally closing at
49 578.
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on November 30th:
Paris, 12.40; Madrid, 142 1,4; Singapore,
115 344; Japan, 99 548; Shanghai, 89 1,2; Hongkong, 87; India, 134 3,'4; Java, 122 1,4.


NOVEMBER SUGAR REVIEW
By GEORGE H. FAIRCHILD


New York Marker:
The New York sugar

market was depressed
at the opening of the
month under review,
S P
small sales for present
shipment having been
effected to refiners at
2.00 cents c. and f.
(3.77 cents I. t.). Signs
A
of improvement were
noted on the 4th which
however were not long

ANN
maintained since on the
7th there were sellers
but no buyers at 1-31,’32 cents e. and f. (3.74
cents l. t.). Small sales of centrifugals were
made at 3.71 cents l. t. which was considered
the nominal value during the first week. Offerings of Cubas at the latter quotation during
the early part of the second week attracted no
buyers. In the latfer part of the week however
the market showed a better tone in sympathy
with the improvement in the stock markef.
The weck closed with a quotation of 2.00 cents
c. and f. at which there were sellers but no
buyers. At the opening of the third week small
sales for present shipment were made to refiners
at 3.77 cents I. t. Prices declined thereafter
and small sales were effected at 1-15,16 cents
c. and f. (3.71 cents 1. t.). Incidentally the
price of refined was reduced from 5.25 cents to
5.00 cents during the week. The market improved at the close of the week when small
sales present shipment were made to refiners at
2.00 cents c. and f. (3.77 cents I. t.). During
the fourth week prices gradually declined owing
to holders pressing sales in an effort to stimulate
the market before the next Cuban crop. On
the 26th small sales prompt shipment Cubas
were made to refiners at 1-29,32 cents e. and f.
(3.57 cents I. t.).
The latest visible world stocks were 2,721,000
tons as compared with 2,070,000 tons at the
same time in 1928 and 2,009,000 tons at the same
time in 1927.
Futures: Quotations on the Exchange during
November fluctuated as follows:


Iligh


Low


Latest


1929—Dec......


.. 2.09


1.91


1.95


1930—Jan.......


.. 2.09


1.96 2.02


Mar.....


... 2.13


2.00


2.06


May—


.. 2.19


2.07


2.13


Juy......


.. 2.26


2.15


2.20


Sept.....


.. 2.32


2.22


2.25


Philippine Sales: During the month under
review, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the
Atlantic Coast were reported as follows, afloats,
near arrivals and for future deliveries: 25825
tons at prices ranging from 3.74 cents to 3.90cents


as compared with sales amounting to 35000
tons during the same period last year at prices
ranging from 3.77 cents to 3.96 cents landed
terms.
Europe: F. O. Licht’s second estimate of the
1929-30 crop in Europe released on October
31st placing it at 8,174,000 tons shows a decrease of 3.5% in comparison with the 1928-29
production which was 8,467,327 tons. Licht
reports that the rains in Otober have broken the
long dry spell in Europe but have not been of
great significance as they came too late to duplicate the excellent yields of last year.
Local Marxer: Throughout the month the
local market for centrifugals was quiet with only
small transactions on the basis of P8.75 per
picul. Holders of large parcels would not sell
at ruling prices, expecting an improvement in
the local market.
Crop Prospecis: During the month' under
review milling of the 1929-30 crop is in full
swing at most of the Philippine centrals. The
final figures for the 1928-29 crop compiled by
the Philippine Sugar Association show a production of 700,208 metric tons. It is the consensus of opinion that the 1929-30 crop will
not be very far off this mark.


Heavy torrential rains fell on Negro; during
the middle of the month, as a result or hich
many steel and wooden bridges were destre! d.
Only slight damage was done to the cane fields
by the heavy rains however.
Philippine Excports: Exports of sugar from
the Philippines for the 1929-30 crop beginning
on November 1, 1929, to date ameunted to
36,513 tons, segregated as follows:
Metric tons


Centrifugals................ 35,966
280
Muscovados................
267
Refined................. ...
Total.................. 36,513


Java Market: The Java market was steady
during the first weck. Price declined thereafter
until the lowest quotations for Superiors for the
month were reached at the close of the month
which were as follows:
Spot and December... Gs. 12-1/4-P6.64 Per P. I.
January... . . . . . . . . . .Gs. 12-1/2- 6.76) Picul
February-March... . . (is. 12-3/4- 6.89If. o. b.


“North
Coast
")

Limited
O
EEID
TA
(e
"Finest””
“the finest train in the world and I have
traveled on all that are worth talking
about”'—Samuel Hopkins Adams,
Auburn, N. Y.
(CU
"
Best
“equipment the very best, service splendid—a wonderful train"—N. A. Peterson, San Francisco.
NOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between
N the North Pacific Coast and Chicago! Leaves
E
Seattle at 11:00 A. M. for all the principal cities of
the United States. Two days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel is its
diner service. New-style Observation-Club car with deep, restful
lounge—cushioned chairs—library—writing corner—club rooms—
showers—and maid and valet service.
The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thos.
Cook &l Son, Shanghai Commercial Gl Savings Bank, or any transPacific steamship company will gladly furnish additional information.


Oswald Crawford, G. A.
ol Granvile Stres!"
Vancouver. B. C.


R. J. Tozer, A. G. P. A.
200 L. C. Smith Bldg.
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.


E. E. Blackwood, G.
914 Government Stroot
Victoria, B. C.


NorthernPacificRailway


(352)


"First of the Northern Transcontinentals”


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


38


  


December, 1929


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariably feature
of McCullough Service, and our reputation for producing good printing
merits your patronage.


MCCULLOUGHPRINTING COMPANY
(A Division of Philippine Education Co., Inc.)
101 ESCOLTA Phone 21801 MANILA, P. I.


UNE QUISIANDING FACI
Sift the Bunk from present day Tire Advertising
—more miles, better made—purer rubber—secret
processes, and so forth. Generalities anyone
may claim!
In paying out money for tires, you want Facts.
One is so overwhelmingly outstanding no intelligent buyer can overlook it:
MORE PEOPLE RIDE ON GOODYEAR
TIRES THAN ON ANY OTHER KIND
Goodyear Tires have been proved best by millions
—proved best on the road where claims are judged
by results.
A proof of Goodyear popularity is that Goodyear
makes more tires by many thousands each year,
than any other concern.
Mere luck had nothing to do with this supremacy,
Goodyear Tires had to be good to make good.
Our Service is on a par with Goodyear quality.
We help you to get 100 % usefulness from your tires.
The secret of Goodyear leadership is known to
millions who ride on Goodyears. Let us help
you discover it.
Houston Rubber Co.
MANILA
548 Rizal Ave.
Tel. 2-21-22


REVIEW OF THE HEMP MARKET
By L. L. SPELLMAN
Macleod and Company


This report covers the Manila hemp market
for the month of November with statistics up to
and including December 2nd, 1929.
U. S. Grades: The New York market was
extremely dull on the first of the month with
practically no sales being made. Nominal quota
tions were: E, 10-1/2 cents; F, 9-344 cents; G,
7-748 cents; I, 9-1/2 cents,'Jl, 9-1/8 cents;'81,
9-548 cents; $2, 9-3/8 cents; $3, 8 cents.’ As
shippers showed more desire to get on with business, prices steadily declined and by the 15th of

the month the asking prices were: E, 10-1/4
cents; F, 9-1/4 cents; G, 7-1/2 cents; I, 8-778
2
cents; J1, 8-578 cents; $1, 9-1/8 cents;'$2, 8-374
AA'
cents; S3, 7-344 cents. This condition lasted
until about the 20th of the month when manufacturers commenced to show
more interest and the market gradually improved with a fair amount of
business being transacted. During this period prices steadily advanced
and the market closed steady to firm with shippers offering at: E, 11-348
cents; F 10 cents; G, 8-1/8 cents; I, 9-172 cents; 41, 9 cents; 8i, 9-778
cents; $2, 9-348 cents; $3,’8-1/4 cents. The month showed a net gain for
the higher grades while the prices on the low grades were about the same.
In Manila the market opened quiet with exporters showing very little
interest although all hemp being offered found buyers at: E, P34; F, P22;
G, P17.25;1, F21; J1, Fi9.75; 51, P21.50; 82, F20.25;83, ₱17.75. The
market gradually declined in sympathy with the consuming markets and
by the 15th of the month shippers were paying: E, P22; F. P30: G. Pleso!
I, ₱19; J1, ₱18, 81, P20; 82, ₱18.50; 53, F17; although very little hemp
was to be had. The latter part of the month the market for the U. S.
grades firmed up owing to fair demand in the U. S. and at the close shippers
were paying: E, P23.50; F P22.25; G, Pi6.75; I, P21; J1, ₱19.50; 81,
P21.50; 82, ₱19.75, 83, ₱1s. This brought prices back to about where
they were on the first and while there was no special demand for the better
grades, the market was decidedly steady.
U. K. Grades: The London market was quiet on the first of the
month with shippers offering freely at: J2, E35.10; K, 231; Ll, 231; L2,
E27; MI, 227; M2, 224.15; DL, E24.15; DM, E19.10. For the first week
the market remained quiet and steady and then prices began to decline on
account of pressure to sell. By the 15th hemp had changed hands at:
J2, 234.10; K, 231 Li, E29.5; L2, 226.10; Mi, 226.10; M2, 224.10; DL,
E24.5; DM, E19. During the last half of the month prices fiuctuated considerably but on the whole the general trend was upward and by the end of
the month shippers were offering on the basis of: J2, 236; K, 231.5; LI,
230; L2, E27; MI, E27; M2, 225.10; DL, E25.5; DM, E19. On the average all losses for the month were recovered and while the market closed
quiet, shippers were firm in their ideas of values.
In Manila the market on the first of the month was quiet so far as the
lower grades were concerned with exporters and speculators buying on the
basis of: J2, PI6, K, ₱13.75; Ll, ₱13.25; L2, ₱11.50; MI, F11.50; M2,
₱10; DL. F10; DM, P8. Prices gradually declined and by the middle of
the month, shippers were paving. 32, ₱15.50; K, ₱13.25; Ll, P12.75; L2,
Pll; Ml, Pil; M2, P9.50; DL, P9.50; DM, P7.50. During the last half
of the month, the market here followed the London market and at the close
buyers were paying: J2, Pi6.25; K, ₱14; Li, P13.25; L2, ₱11.50; Mi,
₱11.50;M2, ₱10.75;DL, ₱10.75; DM, P8; and the market was quite firm.
JAPAN: Buyers supplving this market continue to take very little
hemp notwithstanding the fact that the exchange has improved considerably. Reports would indicate that stocks in Kobe are still fair heavy.
This market is hardly likely to improve until the London market shows
more interest in hemp.
Maguey: Conditions point to rather a late start in the production of
Manila Maguey this year. There are still some stocks available in Manila
from last year’s crop and it is reported speculators are still holding upwards
of 20,000 piculs in Ilocos Norte and Ilocos Sur. Production in Cebu continues to be ample to supply the demand and prices remain unchanged.
Production: Notwithstanding persistent reports from most of the
hemp districts that there is no hemp available for sale, receipts keep averaging above 25,000 Bs. a week and the total for the year will be somewhat
in excess of 1,550,000 Bs. Unsold stocks in the export ports of the Islands
are now below 200,000 Bs. but undoubtedly there is a fair amount of fiber
being held in the provinces for an advance in price.
A week ago several of the Manila daily papers carried articles describing a severe storm in Davao that had destroyed some 2,000,000 hemp
plants. The dealers and speculators immediately endeavored to get prices
up on the strength of this information and were greatly disappointed when
it developed that the storm described happened in November 1928 and not
in November 1929.
Freight Rates: There is no change in rates on hemp since last report.
Statistics: The figures below are for the period ending December
2nd, 1929.


Manila Hemp
On hand Jan. 1st...
Receipts to date...


1928
1929
Bales
Bales
170,301 139,624
1,455,690 1,278,780
IAMEEAIN LADAN


Shipments to—
U. K..........
Continent......
U.S...........
Japan..........
All Others......


1929


1928


Bales


Bales


322,113


330,126


177,761


204,884


516,190


359,044


338,367


295,714


74,936


95,267


1420,307


19OO


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


December, 1929


  


Commodities


Sugal.......
Hemd.
Coconut Oil.....................
* ............. *.
Copra...
Cigars (Number).................
Embroidery......................
Maguey........................
Leaf Tobacco......
 * 4
Dessicated and Shredded Coconuts
Hats (Number)..................
Lumber (Cubic Meter).........
opra Meal....................
Cordage...............
Knotted Hemp..................
Pearl Buttons (Gross)............
Canton (low grade cordage fiber)..
All Other Products........... ....
Total Domestic Products.........
United States Products..........
Foreign Products.................
Grand Total............


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Monthly average for 12 1
Setpember, 1929
ending September, 1929
September, 1928


Quantity


Value


25


Quantity


Value


26


Quantity


VN


75


₱11,188,944


₱ 1,736,10


9.3


11,401,491


₱ 1,964,637


68.3


56,850,739


₱ 9,175,98


1.8


12,696,08


3,715,365


19.7


13,953,735


4,096,479





15,971,565


87
691,48


16,606,003


122,320


24.9


12,509,684


44,670


17.3


16,272,278


18,389,505


3,232,170


17.1


31,587,254


5,960,727


25.7


17,049,819


70*
3,3


 17,576,158


7,131


3.9


22,192,590


977,673


4.0


1,823,356


1,052,62


5.6


970,28"


4.0


06,694


163,915


0.9


1,101,943


220,444


O


1,395,774


289.


37,21


17,38


2,023,188


594,955


2.3


1,807,899


5,942


.4


1,967,212


575,809


2,237,260


936


3


1,767,57


88,00.


3,99


08,592


151,2


0,394


131,09


597,10


592,125


18,86


88,785


1,556


508,"


. 10,893,7


696,75





10,294,286


55,522


9,182,540


551,10


2.


468,829


249,699


1.4


22,670


89,138


1.0


367,981


922


55,660


184,467


1.


470


77,95


0.2


0,311


246,46


,192


63,561


0.4


'11


5
7,675


5
5,923


64,265





350,663


51,583


0.4


624,414


12


0.4


559,464


106,454


666,833


3.5


1,048


1.8


2,304,090 8.0


18,562,734


99.3


23,295,307


99.5


28,717,388


99.6


,678


0.5


151,424


.5


135,587


26,063


0.2


38,484


33,996


0.1


₱18,666,475


00.0


P23,485,215


00.0


P28,886,942


IO A


NOTE:—All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


Monthly average for


Articles


September,


1929 September,


1928


2 months ending


September,


1929


Value


3


Value


5


Value


25


Cotton Cloths..........


₱ 2,399,724


10.1 ₱ 2,915,066


13.6


₱ 3,682,026


14.7


Other Cotton Goods.....


1,262,523


5.4


1,293,887


6.0


1,224,959


4.8


Iron and Steel, Except


Machinery...........


2,131,565


9.0


2,5
388


10.5


2,015,078


4.0


Rice...................


408


.2


28,7


942,342


3


Wheat Flour...........


52


.5


933,053


Machinery and Parts of..


1,614,610


"9


S


1456,39


32


Dairy Products.........


509,826


476,950


2


Gasoline...............


679,448


3.0


1,203,256


.e


736,682


Silk Goods.............


77,465


3.0


515,436


746,55


.0


Automobiles...........


73


29,347


4


214,4


egetable Fiber Goods...



PA


193,67


6.5


482,425


Meat Products..........


99
271,


14,162


2.4


530,30


2.2


Illuminating Oil.........


51


1,84


348,340


1.


Fish and Fish Products..


16,23


405,45


428,23


Crude Oil..............


504,998


61,35


127,853


O.



*
oal......


336,263


1.4


770,298


e.


469,452


1.9


Chemicals, Dyes, Drugs,


Etc....


416,681


1.8


337,355


1.6


an


1.7


Fertilizers..............


24


91


37


1.5


Vegetables........


36¬


274,500


1.3


386,946


1.6


Paper Goods, E
pt



Books....


486,374


2.1


469,970


2.2


434,285


1.8


Tobacco and Manufac

ures of.....



523,546


2.2


75,226


464,575


1.9


Electrical Machinery...


1,157,400


4.8


352,150


1.7


454,060


1.8


Books and Other Printed


Matters...
.......


198,430


O.8


159,541


O.7


206,908


0.8


Cars and Carriages.....


433,598


19
1,767


0.9


208,894


Automobile Tires.......


21,641


0.9


092


1.3


306,879


Fruits and Nuts.......


136,659


26,42


1.1


314,143


H


Woolen Goods..........


176,549





iabaes


6


138,545


O.!


Leather Goods........


199,298


0.8


o.7


230,144


O.8


Shoes and Other Foot

warg............


215,801


210,222


184,29


O.?


Coffee.....



134.966


62


123,751


0.6


174,589


O.8


Breadstuff, Except Wheat


Flour...............


249,618


185,326


191,587


O.8


 .....
ggs..


111,384


62


120,605


62


204,599


0.6


and Other
Perfumi


Toilet Goods.........


139,959


133,415


139,860


O.8


Lubricating Oil....


201,209


68


391,846


28


184,544


0.5


Cacao Manufactures, Ex

cept Candy..........


92,600


128,587


128,008


O.7


Glass and Glassware....


114,430


0.5


123,706


68


169,141


o.6


Paints, Pigments, Var

nish, Etc...........


230,484


117,795


151,418


O.5


Oils not separately listed.


122,019


62


91,073


82


126,628


0.6


Earthern Stones and


Chinaware..

a


90,120


130,828


138,559


0.7


les..
Automobile Ace


217,849


64


275,092


22


174,796


0.5


Diamond and Other Pre

ious Stones Unset....


84,580


0.4


85,485


0.4


120,402


0.6


Wood, Reed, Bamboo,


Rattan....


138,554


0.6


10
338


.5


145,72


India Rubber Goods....


12,680


0.4


33,097


128,787


62


Soap.....


171,216


0.7


118,793


169,449


.8


Matches........... . . . .


93,693


0.4


3,454


i


66,40


0.3


Cattle.................


20,54


O.1


3,071


26,2:


O


Explosives.............


50,0.


0.2


44,242


0.2


Cement...
 * *


3,0


O


1


38,9


Sugar and Molasses.....


9,96.


0.1


S


22,451


O.


Motion Picture Films...


2,153


O.I


39,477


31,4


o.2


Other Imports..........


1,677,454


7.0


1,715,799


8.2


3,208,955


12.8


Total..........


P23,536,147


100.0


₱20,973,037


1O.O


P24,505,699


100.0


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN


COUNTRIES


Monthly average for


Ports


September,


1929


September, 1928


12 months ending


September, 1928


Value


75


Value


75


Value


20


Manila..........


₱29,822,153


71.3


₱30,669,542


70.0


₱36,238,590


67.


Iloilo...


3,578,561


8.3


3,516,340


8. 3


7,338,61


3.


Cebu.


6,405,463


15.0


6,503,246


14.9


6,541,07


2.1


Zamboanga.............
Jolo.


583,378


742,618


582,90


Davao...


29,458



H


99,748


88,839


Legaspl................


1,326,640


3.0


605,440


3.8


1,438,688





456,569


1.1


1,221,318


o.5


1,201,515


2.1


Ot


VO LOENS


100.0


₱44,458,252


100.0


₱53,475,226


100.0


CARRYING TRADE


IMPORTS


Nationality of Vessels


September


1929


September


Monthly average for
1928 12 months ending
September, 1929


Value


20


Value


75


Value


70


American..............


₱10,087,493


₱10,539,076


50.3


₱10,678,43


52.8


British................


7,684,625


3


5,944,132


28.


7,530,51


Japanese...............


923,05


4.0


976,806


4."


151,17


Dutch........


827,997


3.5


529,971


2.5


693,317


lerman.............


950,149


1,341,859


.4


1,600,1
7


Norwegian.............


2,313,668


149,848


.I


1,440,529


Philippine..............


59,759


6es


342,974


111,64


panish..


122,460


0.6


52,160


165,197


Chinese...............


13,07


82,838


0.4


0,540


Swedish................


4,907


0.2


1,316


Danish................


105,761


o.5


312,678


0.3


French.........


52,475


Italian................


40,668


0.2


By Freight.............


23,143,615


98.3


P20,459,664


97.6


23,857,003


97.3


By Mail............ ...


382,532


1.7


513,373


2.4


648,696


2.7


Total..........


P23,536,147


100.0 P20,973,037


100.0


₱24,505,699


100.0


EXPORTS


Nationality of Vessels September, 1929


Monthly average fon
September, 1928 12 months ending
September, 1929


Value
Value
0 Value 
75


American.............. ₱ 7,908,405 41.8 ₱10,515,193 45.4 ₱13,321,538 45.9
5,858,684 31.0
5.7
174,057
069,776 30.4
British.................
2,286,800
1,208,313
Japanese...............
3,251,907 11
6.5
4.1
1,408,769
756,429
jerman......
84,623 3..
12
995,036
Norwegian.............
632,137 3.5
367,120
7,65
Spanish................
816,66
722,736
3.8
2.C
529,971
Dutch.................
14,740
46,263 0.1
Philippines............
164,056
34,362
.3
1470
Chinese............. . . .
0.6
386,746 1.2
95,643
Swedish................
4,880
French.................
670,429 4.1
972,809 3.3
Danish................


17,901,87:
95.9 P22,180,439 94.6 P24,852,855 96.5
By Freight.............
1,304,776 5.4
764,597
4.1
By Mail...............
1,033,231 3.5


IGAl.. FIBGDAG IOOO FOSSESIS IOOG PSSSONGS IOO


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average fon
Countries
September, 1929 September, 1928 12 months endin
September, 1929


Value


75


Value


9


Value


2


United States........


..P28,632,595


68.1


P29,009,189


66.0


₱35,289,827


66


United Kingdom......


2,015,470


,567,30


5.9


2,184,2


ka


Japan............


2,272,35



3,289,47


7.5


273,8


6.


China..


1,278,02



2.8


1,511,50


.5


1,766


French East Indies...


1,670



348,263


.9


lo43,2


Germany.............


1,162



1,4


3.4


1,335,960


Spain................


1,108,301
* 


1,20


1,16


.1


Australia....
* ** 


287,595


159,102


7,2


British East Indies...


620,136


1.5


577,41


.3


7


Dutch East Indies....


583,812
 


21,59


561,78


France...............


7,334
* *


1.7


1,284,065


763,481


Netherlands..........


329,590
*


O.8


9,28


395,554


taly.


265,806


0.6


174,244


O.


404,951


o.7


ongkong............


192,833
*


160
99


.3


211,316


Belgium.............


254,40
*


0.6


40


Switzerland...........


174,127


418,8


6


PAD


65


Japanese-China.......


152,08



151,355


2,26


Siam................


46,60
* *





1,C


Sweden..............


150,04
*.


92,86


anada..............


80,980
*


4


73,405


,864
96


Norway..............
Austria..............


41,269
*
13,1


o.I


156,718
17,153


0. 3


93,846
9,656


0.2


Denmark............ .


7,439


O.1


43,564


O.)


33,753


0.1


Other Countries.......


125,041


0.3


252,108


0.5


2,715,363


5. I


Total........


₱42,202,622


100.0


P44,458,252


100.0


₱53,475,226


100.


  
December, 1929


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


KerrSteamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
NT?
“SILVER FLEEIExpress Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigerated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


 *EPP
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreian Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18
BRANCHES:
New York—London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


THOMAS BRESLIN
MINING ENGINEER
Qualified Private Surveyor
Room 6, Borromeo Building
157 Calle Norte America, Cebu
Residence: Mabolo, Cebu
Tel. 372-L.


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND


316 Carriedo


Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery


Y
LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
P. O. Box 1423
Manila, P. I


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: "SALEFIBER”


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers


E


UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
P26.50
One Year Guarantee
CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE
110 P. Faura
Tel. 5-69-44


P. O. Box 1394
Telephone 22070
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Collections
Investments
Income Tax
121 Real, Intramuros Manila, P. I.


ANIA
)
railorNe Co ire
N
AKA


73 Escolta 73


MR. MANUEL VALENTIN
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.
Manila, P. I.
244 Plaza Sta. Cruz
Phone 2-61-30


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


VO LNNO NO NNNNN EN NEE E N E N IEIA


RIU HERMANOS —623-ESCOLTA-623


Manila Wine Merchants
Limited
174 Juan Luna Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 403
Phones 2-25-67 and 2-25-68


WEANDSCO
Western Equipment and Supply Co.
Distributera in the Philippines for
Western Electric Co.
Graybar Electric Co.
Westin g ho us e


119 Calle T. Pinpin
P. O. Box C
Manila, P. I.


Recommended By Leading Doctors


Drink It For Your
Health’s Sake


TEL. 5.73.06


Nature's Best Mineral Water


NOW'S THE TIME!
SEND in Journal subscriptions for your friends in the
United States—men who are
(or out to be)) personally concerned for the welfare of the
Philippines. Make it a Christmas gift, and Do It Now!


SHALL YOUR EXECUTOR BE A BANK!
You make a Will so that the needs of your dependents may be
adequately provided for. You make it now because you know the
uncertainties of human life.
These reasons argue forcibly for the appointment of a corporate
Executor under your Will. A bank does not become ill, die, or move
away. It does not go to the United States or to Europe on an
extended vacation. Its facilities do not become impaired by time or
accident and its decisions are the result of collective judgment.
This Bank makes a business of managing estates. Its fees arc
the same as would be paid any other executor.
INTERNATIONAL BANKING CORPORATION
TRUST DEPARTMENT


EENE O NEEEN EAN TENEAN TO MNEAN MNIN A OIANN IA


EMPIRE SAFES
—


Afford Reliable Protection
for your Documents and other
Valuables, in case of fire. They
have been proven by some of the
most severe fires in the Philippines.
In many styles and sizesat very reasonable prices
PACIFIC COMMERCIAL COMPANY
DISTRIBUTOR


N EN


N


AEN TAIO


VMIEN ON


imal Thought in America: Also -Articles


of Philippine Culture, History, and Reviews

o CarentBusiness in All Leading Branches


ZINE:


PREEMINENT


IN .THE PHILIPPINE





o Popular
Short Smokes"


and both from
2
TADACALLRA


Our finest Isabela
tobacco.... full flavored and fragrant





The new MCCORMICK-DEERING tractor has proven itself in the Phili a a
States. Nearly two hundred of these new tractors have been sold here in the pas iw . "y ang
sold this year have been bought by hacenderos who purchased last year.


MACLEOD AND COMP.
154 M. DE COMILLAS, MANILA
Vigan
Cebu
Davao
Legaspi
Iloilo


30


H.P.


 the United
aay of those


Baybay





MO


vall-se
ea cool huts
a before dawn, to do their
they will
rciless sun drives them
work before th.
the afternoon they will
indoors; and late
be at it again. Wi ¡ver water is to be had,
they will grow fields of yams, peanuts, melons
and tomatoes; and m sandy fields along the
banks of streains  ey will grow patches of
tobacco. But over the great central valley of
Luzon as a whole there are few cases of this sort,
and where there is none there is only the melancholy wait for the middle of June and the sure
shifting of the monsoon from northeast to southwest, fetching back the rains.
None of this as yet, however. Threshing is
on. Then comes the hauling. Chinese millers
have loaned against the crop; it is Chinese money
that landlords have advanced to their tenants;
so the grain goes straight from the stack yards
as soon as it is threshed, into Chinese millers"
warehouses. There it may be sold or stored; if
the latter is a landlord’s choice, more money
may be borrowed on it. Eventually, 'as the
market requires, the Chinese will mill the 44
millions cavans of rice and sell them throughout
the islands. Their guilds are medieval, but
effective: mills and stores where the rice is
grown, stores and batering where it is sold; and
tolls and commissions all the way along.
Filipinos are growers and threshers, they have
yet to make conquest of the milling and merchandising of their principal food crop. Can
they ever do it? Could any other people do it?
At least they are garnering some of the transportation profits; the railroad (which the government owns) and lines of freight trucks have
superceded carabao carts in the hauling of the
rice to the mills and from the mills into Manila;


ned and , entad
and m
f the tr
by Filipinos. The same field has a
Americans, who have sometimes enterea the
field of milling but have not remained in it.
Every industry must have its bankers; the
Chinese are the bankers of the Philippine rice
industry, and so the cereal is in their control.
That will not keep the peasants from enjoying
the threshing. Some neighborhoods will tramp
out the grain with bare feet, some will flail it
out, some will use ponies and carabaos for tramp
ling it; and the women will gather it up in flat
bamboo baskets and winnow it in the dry wind.
Thus the threshing will take many forms. In
some neighborhoods it will be done by men and
women trampling away on bamboo platforms
at the top of bamboo towers 12 or 15 feet high,
and the winnowed grain will fall below and the
chaff carry off in the wind. But wherever areas
are large enough, there the American thresher
and the motor tractor will do the job; for they
can do it faster, cheaper and better—eliminating
most of the fire risk and making a timely job of
it. Where they are used, more off-season crops
will be grown; the fields will be cleared in time
for plowing and planting before the moisture
leaves them and while the weather favors growing things. Whatever the method, this is
threshing time. He who has goods for sale,
let him sell them now, when every peasant has
a few pesos to spend as he will. He either has
them from the rice he is threshing, or the new
loan added to his everlasting account with his
landlord. For this manorial master he has
sown the crop in the rain, reaped it in the sun.
At both jobs he has been contented and
stoically happy.


Some Customs of the Bontok Igorots
By GERTRUDE BINDER


A tiny bonfire of pine twigs lights up the
tony ground and two sides of a thatched hut,
barely four feet high, with a low narrow door
at one end. Three boys with naked, sculptural
bronze limbs squat before the fire and croon a
plaintive love song. As they sing the door of
the hut opens and a pair of bright brown eyes
peer out. A moment later a young girl, clad in
a short wrap-around skirt with horizontal stripes,
krawls out on all fours and seats herself on a
Hek. She is followed by another, and still
other, until there is a group of eight or ten
Puoyant, giggling girls warming themselves
beneath light shawls and huddling together oppoite the serenading youths. Two or three onlookers, their hands full of sweetmeats, sit down
beside the girls, or lounge against the nearby
pall. The singing ends. The girls chatter and
ese for the candy. One of them filches a
nd holds it for ransom.
er a while the pine twigs are burnt up, the
crawl back into their hovel, and the boys
son.
the scene is before an olog, girls’ dormitory,
the village of Bontok. The characters are
nbers efeone of the group of pagan tribes of
sed-hunters who inhabit the mountains of
hern Luzon. These people are looked dow¬:


upon as savages, but their physique, their agricultural achievements and many of their customs
are of a nature to make even the most complacent member of a superior race pause to
consider.
Among the tribes are Ifugaos, Kalingas
Benguets and Bontoks. Details of customs vary,
but in fundamental characteristics all of these
remarkable peoples are one. Outwardly, individuals are self-possessed and independent
Towards strangers they are sometimes scornful,
and always indifferent. Their stature is short;
but generations of mountain climbing and the
balancing of heavy loads on heads and shoulders
have given them faultlessly developed legs; flat,
beautiful backs and regal carriage. The women
of most tribes wear only skirts of brightly colored material which are wrapped around the hips
and extend slightly below the knees. The men
wear G-strings; that is, belts of colorful cotton
goods from which are hung, in front and in back,
panels of the same cloth. The G-string serves
also as a support for hunting knife or head-axe.
Tobacco, pipes and various trinkets are carried
in a tiny round basket, fastened after the fashion
of a Happy Hooligan hat to the back of a man’s
or boy’s head.
If a man is married he must wear a plain dull

taaang ni n Aut
eii

reatners or showy bits of ciotn.
Instead of appearing offensively naked
indecent in their scanty garments, these mo
tain people, with their statuesque bodies,
coloring set off by the touch of red or orang
skirt or G-string and quaint little hats pero
jauntily on the backs of their heads, add a t
inconceivably charming and artistic to the
jestic natural surroundings in which they li
The mountain tribes occupy themselves
the most part with the production of rice.
Since rice grows in water, hilly or mountain
country is useless for its cultivation unless
races are built; and the rice terraces built by
uncivilized Ifugao tribe of the Philippines h
a pla se in the front rank of the spectacular :
stupendous products of human labor. 7
Ifugaos, possibly because the country in whi
they live has a more abundant supply of wate
falls, have built more extensive terraces tha
their neighbors, the Benguets, Bontoks ar
Kalingas. The Ifugao country is accessible k
means of a trail which, much of the way, lit
along the sides of the mountains very close t
their summits. The traveler along the tra
passes for miles above a valley both of who:
walls are covered to their very tops with geon
rically regular rows of stone walls topped
the spring of the year, by the brilliant gree
young rice. The terraces were built by h
power, and it is hand and leg power which
carries to the tops of the steep hills the mate
used in repairing broken walls. By means o
elaborate system of irrigation, water is conduc
from natural cascades into the rice fields. O
a not-too-careful or not-too-scrupulous man
drain the water from the terrace above his o
or divert it from the one below. The resul
always a lawsuit and occasionally a reversion
head-hunting.
The cultivators of the rice fields live toget
in little villages at the base of the mounta
Many of them walk miles to their work, tak
with them a day’s supply of food.
Near the tops of the higher and steeper mo
tains which are not terraced large patches of
grass and men and women moving about
flies on a wall are visible. The grass is c
dried and carried to the villages to be used
roofing for houses.
Little besides roofing is needed for a mo
house, for the walls and foundations aro
significant as to be almost undiscovera
neath the pointed, over-hanging roof.
some of the tribes the buildings are ra
stilts, but among the Bontoks they are
the ground. There is a low wooden wall,
very black, with the space between it
roof open. The interior is divided int
compartments by partitions low enoug
looked over by a small boy. One c
reserved for cooking food over a fire built
floor, another corner is-used as a diningroor
the entire side of the house opposite these t
spaces is occupied by the bed, a wooden be
just wide enough to accommodate two peo
The ceiling is ornamented with feathers and
teeth of wild animals, hunting trophies which,
believed to bring good luck in future hunt


P Vail
ters


ine American Dry
VOA P
S O


BORRCA BORE


MANILA


Heavy Chemicals—Fertilizer—Manufacturers
ave been selling drugs for 97


Wholesale
Agents


MENTS PLEASE MENTIGS "


Ma


ARES


years


PUBLISHED MONTHLY
BY
e American Chamber of Commerce
OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Jember Chamber of Commerce of the United States)
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER
May 25, 1921, at the
POST OFFICE AT MANILA, P. I. 4
Local Subscription: P4.00 per year
Foreign Subscription: $3.00 U. S. Currency, per year
Single Copies: 35 Centavos
WALTER ROBB, Editor and Manager


DIRECTORS
E President
P. A. Meyer, Vice-President
H. L. Heath, Vice-President
B. A. Green, Treasurer
. M. Cotterman, Vice-President
V. Haussermann, Vice-President
E. E. Selph, General Counsel
George H. Fairchild
H. M. Cavender
V. L. Applegate


EXECUTIVE:
E
Chairman
P. A. Meyer
R. S. Rogers
RELIEF:
W. J. Odom, Chairman
Carl Hess
John Gordon


ALTERNATE DIRECTORS


Walter Z. Smith
A. B. Cresap
R. S. RogerJ. L. Headington


John R. Wilson, Secrelary


MANUFACTURING:
John Pickett, Chairman
W. J. Shaw
LEGISLATIVE:
W. Z. Smith, Chairman
Wm. J. Rohde
Horace B. Pond


COMMITTEES
FINANCE AND AUDIT.
John Headington, Chairman
A. B. Cresap
J. R. Wilson
FOREIGN TRADE:
M. M. Saleeby, Chairman
W.
C. Brune
Julius Reese


RECEPTION
ENTERTAINN:
I. Harrison, C.
J. R. Wilson


HOUSE:
B. A. Green, Che
J. R. Wilson


LIBRARY
John Gordon, Chaman
J. R. Wilson


PUBLICATIONS:
Chairman
Roy Bennett
BANKING AND
CURRENCY:
(Vacant)


SHIPPINC
J.E. Gardner, Jr., (
G. P. Bradford
J. R. Lloyd
INVESTMEl PA
R. J. Harrison, C aman


B. A. Green


Sow in the Rain: Harvest in the Sun


t the outskirts of Pasig, as the turn was made
ugh the Mariquina valley, a group of peasants
e encountered and a snapshot was desired;
reds and blues and browns of their costumes
e picturesque, and their big harvest hats,
and water-proof salakots fully thirty
hes wide, added a final striking touch. When
y knew what was wanted, they waited willingenough to have their pictures taken. Ques
ns were asked about the rice crop; they were
urning from the fields and the women had
gleanings in their baskets.
as the crop large?
o, it was small.
nough to tide over?
ardly. Almost surely not enough There
a been the long Croutb.
But they had a kind amio, master: sathan a
s case, landlord?
es; they had, fortumata'y agood landlord.
everything will be all right, for ii s al
interesting feudal basis. The peasanh a part of the land, on which one genera
ows another. They furnish the carabac
e half the crop, or they use the landlord’s
s and have a third of the crop. The
1 advances money and rice against their
and they pay him off at harvest time,
s now. Sometimes the debt is more
ir share of the rice. No matter, add it
next year’s and trust for a better crop.
se interest or not, according to your desire.
rs is the land, and the people must have it for
ting. Sometimes the debt is more than
be paid before the debtor dies. No matter,
children will pay; they will stay right on


on the land, in his same cottage, and on the
same terms.
Yours is the land, they the indentured folk
working it. You are rich, mayaman; and fate
is better, quite naturally, to you than to them.
You will have no trouble unless you do them
an injustice. But they will defend with their
lives their good character as peasants, and wil
not suffer loss of face before their fellows. Each
family can cultivate but little land; three hectares, 7)e acres, would be a large field. This
might yield 500 cavans of palay, or rough rice,
which may be figured at ₱1,500, your share
as landlord being P750, out of which some
incidental expenses for extra help must come.
It is the same with the like share of the tenant,
se that while ti landlord has a satisfactory
return on his investment, the tenant has but
a poor living.
The usual income of a tenant family will not
maan aeeed P40n, from the rice fields, but it
is semetimes helped out by other activities.
If it is not much, ncither does it take a whole
ycar to car . an en tPe threshing is done there
is a iong dry summer of surcease from the fields,
which cannot be plowed until the monsoon
changes and the rains begin again.
The gayest time of the peasants’ year is the
present. It began in December, with the ripening of the rice and the advent of harvest, and will
continue through threshing time. Now it is
that marriages are celebrated, children baptised,
old debts are paid and new ones contracted.
On every side, now, in the rice valleys, the
yellow grain is in the shock, and it is rapidly
being stacked. Soon the sear stubble will


stretch away on either side of the dust: aas.
to the brown foothills; and in the valva all
that will be seen will be the yards of asak
the thatch villages, and the trails of nbo
and green clumps of trees bordering the
nial streams. The valleys will parch ur the
muck, in the fields now, is as hard a rogk;
until the bermuda, which the caraba s now
fatten on in the stubble fields, langui nes u
rain, and the carabaos aren’t driven to tha tields
to graze, but just drowse all day long in the
groves or under the bamboo, and muich rice
straw and sugar cane.
It will be the dead time of the year. T.


JACOD LEVY
PHILIPPINE HATS


Buntals
Bamboos
Calas'


Corresponden. . licited
Manita, ₱l
227 Calle David
Cable Address: "TEXTILES"


Speed Up Your 1929 Deliveries
With Ford Trucks!
Powerful
Economical
Sturdy
and Above All Dependable
Write for Free Illustrated Catalog and Easy
Monthly Installment
"After We Sell We Serve”
MANILA TRADING & SUPPLY CO.
MANILA
Cebu
Bacolod
ilo


R ERICAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE JOURNAL


Januaty


IHADII


nese, American—three cities and
ms within them. There is yet a
one which unites and supports all
is the Manila of the Filipino
e district inhabited by workers,
There, in place of the comfortable
uneta, are huts built of the dried
iipa palms and raised on bamboo
street is a clothes line alley, with
ashing hanging out to dry. Mobs
ay about among the pendant shirts
s.. They always are seen in pairs,
ne astride the hip of another slightly
e clothes worn by the younger urchins
useful nor ornamental, for, as a rule,
of one incredibly dirty and ab

breviated shirt. Girls are taught at an early
age to make use of their heads, not for what is
inside them, but for what can be placed on top
of them. Transportation of clothes, of vegetables, of fish—all of it is head work for the
giris and women of Tondo.
There are few automobiles in Manila’s poor
districts. They have not yet replaced the twowheeled pony-drawn wagons and carabaodrawn carts. The carabao is a large water
buffalo who requires a daily bath, pulls extremely heavy loads and moves with a deliberation which the snail himself could hardly hope
to equal.
It is not an inapt metaphor which gives the
name "Pearl” to this far Eastern city with its
many layers of culture and its varying shadeslof
interest.


diniscences About Larry Montes
Golf Champion
Abundio "Larry” and Vicente
tas not yet 13 years old, of Tagalog
and hailing from Bulakan, went
re municipal links of Manila.
nly a few weeks ago, Larry, one
er of the two, won the Philippines
rnament with a score of 275 for
wo 67’s, one 70 and one 71. Larry
ghteen until February 28. He
wpn the open tournament when he
gurlg his temper over missing an easy
d not kicked his ball away. Again,
have won the tournament when he
vhen he actually did finish six shots
winner, if his and his opponent’s
iot been confused, by his opponent,
way; so that he holed out with the
nd was of necessity disqualified.
fluous to say Larry is a great golf
soned golfers by scores witnessed
ay; they report that it was the best
r saw, and they hope Larry will
chance to play a match with Bobby
nentor. Like Jones, Larry plays
he has read Jones extensively, and
instruction pages of other great men
e. There is evidently a future for
What circumstances discovered him?
ose his opportunities? He is not the
in the family, as has been stated.
is a tuberculosis victim, now in
ulakan, fighting it out with infected
lying, an open-air job, came to
is brother Vicente in time to save
om the first it gave them wages
Larry Montes


BBUU


IRLS


1888—foremost ever since


INFORMATION FOB
INVESTORS
Expert, confidential reporte made
on Philippine project
ENGINEERING, MINI"
AGBICULTURE, FORES!
LUMBERET
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
BRYAN, LANDON CO.
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: "YPIL,” Cebu

of ₱100 a month, quite enough for the family s
support. It also started their mother to purveying lunch to the caddies, and gave her a chance
to take up the game; she is a good player now,
for a woman, sometimes making nine holes in
48, her lowest score. Larry has two younger
brothers and two young sisters, 9 and 13, who
are in school.
Larry’s and Vicente’s wages now from caddying are around P200 a month; what with what
they make and what their mother makes, the
family is rising from peasantry to middle-class
plenitude. The boys are worthy of this better
fortune; they are obedient to their mother and
polite and courteous to all; the championship
pleases Larry, delights his mother, brothers
and sisters, but has not spoiled him. He can
still be relied upon.
But will it be excusable to go a little farther
into his career, bringing out more clearly what
made it possible? Larry has been at every turn,
as he acknowledges, assisted by Americans. It
was Americans who converted the old moat
around the city’s walls into the sunken gardens,
more recently made the municipal links; and
from American players chiefly, Larry has drawn
his wages. He has gained from the principle
so widely practiced among Americans, that the
laborer is worthy of his hire; it has been his good
fortune that this principle is being accepted in
the islands.
An American, he says, gave him his first club;
it was with Americans, too, that he, as caddy,
first played around the course—played on equal
terms. It was “Mr. Kilroy of the Manila hotel
and some other Americans" that put him into
the open tournament the first time; it was
Clyde A. DeWitt, well known Manila lawyer,
who put him into the next open tournament,
“Mr. DeWitt, for whom I have caddied many
times and who often lets me play around with
him."
“This year, Dr. N. L. Downs, a Shanghai
dentist, who has been visiting at the Manila
hotel and for whom I have caddied, put me in the
tournament.
“Dr. Downs had taken a great deal of interest
in me and kept urging me to enter.... One
morning Dr. Downs came to me and handed
me a piece of paper. ‘There you are, Larry,"
he said, 'you’re in.’ I looked at the paper.
It was an official receipt for my entry fee in the
open championship of the Philippines."
In this world everywhere, men fall into groups
as tories and liberals. Many young Filipinos
who read these lines won’t be thoroughly oriented
in their minds as yet as to the full meaning of
these terms, which they will more immediately
associate with British politics. But they will
learn later that they are terms of universal
application, and that toryism ended in the
Philippines in 1898, when liberalism began.
Generally speaking, Americans are liberals.
That impromptu celebration on the club veranda,
unconsciously the toast was to liberalism. It’s
the spirit that gives the under dog a chance,
and glories in his making good.


RTISENENIS PLEASE MENTION IME ANERICAN CRAMBER  COMMENCE JOURNAL


uary, 1929


  


When Latoba was the parish priest of Camalig,
arned from the congregation that once
a time there had been buried, near the
mairi altar, a religious whom the people believed
ve been a saint. Verifying the rumor
n the memory of two villagers of ancient
ears, one 120 years old and the other 110,
cavated in the spot indicated and disa grave, the earth of which had never
dhered to that around it, and in which an und skeleton was found, "the bones giving off
and fragrant odor.” These remains,
inidentified, were exhumed, and given
al in Baligan. “The people perceived
jubilation and admiration" all that was
in warrant of the holy tradition, "but


no habit, cord, paper or other thing was found.”
Father Huerta undertakes with some hesitation and no precise conclusion, in 1865, to ascertain who among the Franciscan evangelists
this presumed saint might have been. He thereby reveals this interesting fact: between 1652
and 1700, eight Franciscans died in Camarines
province; and between 1586 and 1600, no less
than 154 died there! Here is indicated a part
of the cost of the Philippines to Spain; when the
small number of the missionaries at any one
period is considered, and the fact that when
priests fell ill effort was made to bring them to
the principal seat of the order in Manila, or to
Los Banos, where the Franciscan infirmary
was maintained, or to N. S. de Guadalupe, or



Tne Pearl of the Orient
By GERTRUDE BINDER


the Hospital de San Juan
standing this, so many, as Fathe
rately recounts, died at their
He finally assumes that it
Diaz who was the candidate for P
He had become a Franciscan
reached the Philippines in 1678
Camalig July 20, 1689, presum
was the parish priest there. I
searched the records painsoakingly
but his effort was but vaguely re
next town he speaks of is Polang
next excursion will begin.


than a quarter of a century since
States took the Philippines from Spa
city of broad streets, well cared-fo
nificent public buildings, luxuricand clubhouses, modern amuse
conveniences. It is, in short,


ieval romance lingers, neglected and unamong the prosaic manifestations
ress. East meets West and northushes impatiently past tropical
ila, historic Pearl of the Orient.
ish founded the city in the sixteenth
ley laid out narrow, crooked streets
ed them with a massive stone wall.
wall they built great cathedrals and
laborate, imposing and time-defying.
anish capital, with the beauty of its
uildings mellowed and heightened by
pical vegetation, remains. It is the
muros, or walled city, of modern Manila.
s streets, lighted by candles in the
everent populace, pass saintly images,
ng in solemn procession to and from the
churches, which, even today, are
ld-fashioned Spanish Catholicism,
poetry and color, its superstition
al.
ism.
m the walled city is the Paco
emetery, in the niches of whose circular walls
were placed. It is built about a
ich, in its faultless simplicity, is a
of architecture. The place was
a burial ground many years ago
arded and kept trim and neat by
aretaker, himself an antique
a
panish era. He welcomes the
siasm; shows him, by way
great age of the cemetery, the
apel; points out the graves of
obles and the cross which marks
 Jose Rizal, the national hero of
was first buried; picks flowers
and presents them to his guests
e irresistibly reminiscent of the
a
courtesy of old Spain.


way, if he is an American, he is made to feel at
home.
Manila's Carnival and Indus
This new city has grown up in the little more
January 26 to February
BAUUIO BLASON NON O
See the Mountain City in its resplendent
At
glory and enjoy its invigorating climate
Travel by Railroad
Safe, Comfortable and Economical
BAGUIO NIGHT SPECIAL
Leaves Manila every Friday at 11:00 P. M.
December Schedule for Baguio Night Special
Leaves Manila, December 7, 14, 21, 28
Return Manila, December 9, 16, 25, January 1
Baguio EXPRESS leaves at 8:00 A.M. every day
Passenger rates lower than last year


Followed Spaniards
omnipresent Chinese were not slow to
follow the Spaniards into the Philippines. Their
rew up outside the walls of that built
cit
ropeans. Today the “Chinese quarter”
is the mecca of Manila bargain hunters. There,
here are whole streets, or, more properly, whole
lleys, given over to the sale of one particular
commodity. There are shoe streets, cotton
goods streets, silk streets and furniture streets.
e shopkeepers stand at the doors of their
little hole-in-the-wall stores and call seductively
to passersby, “Shoes, M’am? Shoes, M’am?
Anything for you today, M’am?” Inside, skillful
shoppers, not to be taken in by a “first price,”
bargain and demure until they are able to buy
for five pesos a pair of shoes or a bolt of material
first offered at 10.
A visitor’s first impression of Manila, however,
is not likely to be of either a medieval European
town, or a crowded oriental community, but of
a booming American city, in no way unlike those
of our West and middle West, full of local pride
and material prosperity.
The new arrival disembarks from his steamship at a magnificent pier, fitted to serve the
needs of a city many times the size of Manila; he
is lodged in a convenient, up-to-date hotel in the
fashionable Luneta district; he is taken automobile riding along a broad boulevard that fronts
the bay; he travels in a street car to the crowded
shopping center where he is confronted by glaring
electric lights announcing the showing of a late
American movie, and in every other imaginable


First Class Thi.


Manila to Baguio, one way .... ₱14.33
Manila-Baguio, round trip, 120 days.. 23.32
Manila-Damortis, one way . 8.88
Manila-Damortis, round trip, 20 days......... 13.32
15.24
Manila-Bauang Sur, round trip, 20 days ..
Manila-Bauang Sur, one way.... 10.16
Sleeper berth on night trains each way . 5.00


NOTE:—Sales of third class round trip tickets between stdiscontinued October 15, 1928.
Baguio Night Special makes connection with L
Northern Transportation at Bauang Sur, where it 
7:07 A.M., enabling travelers to Ilocos Province, to r
destination on the same day.


Manila Railroad C


IN RESPONDING TO A RTISEMENTS PLEASE MEI'   


Sreat Mission Trail: Franciscans in Ad bay


rom the Spanish province of Albay the
anduanes have been Set apart as a separate
wvince row, so the province of Albay today
races the portion on the mainland of Luzon
the coastal islands of San Miguel, Cagraray,
i and Raporapo, which last may also be
ed Rapurapu. The ancient name for Albay
- Ibalon; the legendary origin of the people
preserved in an old ballad, of which an extene fragment is extant. Some time, the Journal
il publish an English version of this ballad.
eryone should, of course, travel through the
sol region of Luzon, and visit the Camarines,
pay and Sorsogon; they will never know
greatest natural beauties of the islands
til they do so. But as the Journal went
to this subject at length in June 1927, it will
do so here; it will not repeat itself, or ever
isciously grow long-winded.
The topography of Albay is broken into mounns, foothills and broad valleys perennially
Father Huerta, our mentor in Franmatters, says the mountain chains of the
have the shape of a Y “the union or
hre of which is Mayon," and that a Spanish
tain, one Antonio Siguenza, ascertained the
ght of Mayon to be 1,682 feet. “It conlally emits rumblings and smoke, and many
js its slopes are bathed in flames, which,
lng serpentine fashion into its valleys, offer
elicious perspective”; so perhaps Mayon’s
ing of last year was not so unusual after
le government and the newspaper correTents made capital, as usual, out of a phenopn which the people of Albay merely gazed
mi with scarcely disturbed admiration; and
lives were lost. However, “On October 23,
5, there was a horrible eruption which shook
town of Malinao and caused great damage
Albay, Casagua, Camalig, Budiao, Guinoand Tigao. In 1800 another eruption
widespread damage, but the one which
 February 1, 1814, beggars description.”
as then that the town of Casagua was
d out. Siguenza was in error, or Huerta’s
contains a misprint, for Mayon is 7,992
ligh.
inages from Mayon’s persistent activity
Ithat date have been insignificant. How
hmon danger gentles all living creatures.
the eruption of 1814, Fray Juan de la
i parish priest of Ligao, found himself
by the protection a crooked coconut
gave him. With him in this accidental
rom earth’s fury were two porkers,
wil A boars, a deer whose antlers had
sclorched, and a lean rat nursing a
off starvelings. The eruption of July
353, damaged Camalig and Guinobatan,
Tthirty-three people and injured many
With these repeated blasts Mayon has
d up her crater as to give constant
khe vapors and gases generated within
the worst she does nowadays is to boil
Isend new flows of lava down her slopes,
tre inexhaustibly fertile.
lspel the native superstitions concerning
Fray Pedro Ferrer attempted an ascent
nountain in 1592, with a party of his
ers, but they abandoned him before
Ithe summit. He then descended,
ack with him samples of excellent
the first found in the islands, and the
f this was for many years the Spaniards’
'or making their gun powder.
jous recent ascents of Mayon have been
It is reported that the parish priest of
¡Albay, has been up several times; a
party ascended last year, following
ion, under the leadership of Father
of the weather bureau.
Huerta furnishes another opportunity
forcefully to the reader’s mind the
viewpoint in youth since the medieval


l same year, and with the same motive
¡in 1592, with the motive of disproving
live superstitions concerning the mounlray Esteban Solis attempted an ascent.
le of Caceres, he had come to the Philin the company of his relative, Governor


and Captain General Francisco de Sande, and
having personally aided in the temporal conquest
of Camarines, instead of adorning himself with
the medals and honors which he merited, which
the governor bestowed upon him, he assumed
our saintly habit and professed in our monastery
in Manila, the prelates assigning him afterwards
to the conversion of the inhabitants of the
province where he had been an officer in the
campaigns, Camarines.”
Youth seeks fame in other fields now than that
of the conquistador and the mission monastery,
because the advent of science and the progress
of commerce and invention have opened these
fields to him. But essentially he is not different
from Don Esteban Solis, who became a Franciscan monk; that is to say, among the early
friars in the Philippines were men of the same
energy and invincible ambition as the men who


* OIA
7
POo


Desk Calendars
Diaries
Memo Books
Account Books
Stationery
Magazines
BOOKS


PHILIPPINE
EDUCATIONN
101-103 ESCOLTA


nowade
bore deserts for e  efin
combustion engine, and build and Oy
and zeppelins.
To evangelize the world was, in?
days, quite the thing to do. It was not nprofitable to the genuine pioneers, an:
than pioneering in the air was profit:
Langley and the Wrights. But it held th
of adventure out to youth; enough, and d
seized.
“The first apostle in Albay was the Au
nian, Fray Alonso Gimenez; and so the
version of this province is due entirely to
religious, who from 1578 forward never ce.
to evangelize in the name of our Father, hay
the satisfaction of being the founders of
greater number of the towns making up
province; although recently, and by reason
being ousted, they have ceded many of the
towns to the mitre.” (During the last centur
especially the latter half, up to the fatal reactic
precipitating the revolutions, there was a graduz
accession of secular priests in the parishes, whic.
were relinquished by the friars—always witl
reluctance and dire predictions of the unwisdon
of the innovation.) “In this beautiful province
fecund in production of every sort and am ng
the richest in the archipelago because of its
active commerce, the sons of the patriarch San
Francisco administer the following towns”:
Villa de Libon.—Founded by the conquistador, Juan de Salcedo, in 1573, and therefors
the first pueblo established by the Spaniards
in Camarines. Joined to Albay in 1847.  he
first pueblo assigned to the Franciscans on the.-
arrival in the islands, 1587. Patron (naturally!),
Santiago Apostol—St. James the Apostle. The
church is of brick, the work of Fray Vicente de
Dosbarrios.
Camalig.—The native corruption of the
Spanish camarin, warehouse or barn. There
are two traditions; one, that the name derives
from that of a hill, roughly in the form of a warehouse, which is adjacent to the town; the other,
that the conquistadores built a warehouse here,
which perhaps was headquarters for gold seekers
and miners, and that the name derives from this
fact. Of Camarines up to 1847, when it was
joined to Albay. Founded, about 1569-70.
Destroyed in the eruption of 1814, when some
of the refugees founded Tondol; but others
persisted in remaining on, building villages at
Quilaponte and Baligan, until, in 1837, when
Baligan burned, they obtained the government’s permission to rebuild the ruined town of
Camalig.
‘The church, under the advocation of St.
John the Baptist, was first built of wood. In
the year 1605 they obtained the government’s
permission to build it of stone, which decree,
signed by the governor and captain general,
D. Pedro Bravo y Acuna, and notifying the
captain encomendero of the pueblo D. Pedro
Arceo Covarrubias, is conserved in the church
archives of the year 1741, according to a manuscript referring to the town preserved in our
archives in Manila. In this manuscript we
find, that in the construction of the church and
convento of stone the only workmen employed
were bandits, vagabonds and criminals confined
in the presidio, for the custody of whom there
had been built a very secure jail; and in this
same year, 1741, the jail was serving as a boys”
school. The narrow door leading to a dark and
subterranean calaboose is still to be seen. This
church and convento of stone was, without
doubt, that which was destroyed in the eruption
of 1814, since there is no record of another.
“In 1837, when the town was reestablished
on the site shaken by the volcano, as we have
noted, the church and convento was reconstructed under the direction of the Reverend
Fathers Fr. Francisco Latoba and Fr. Manuel
Brihuega; and the principal portal and the
tower, and tile roof, were built during 1845 and
the years immediately following by R. P. Fr.
Miguel Barcela, who also painted and adorned
the church completely, as he did the parish
house.
“San Roque is specially venerated in this
church, and prior to the eruption of 1814 the
attendance of the faithful was such that the
fiesta favorably compared with the most ostentatious in the Islands.”


ESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OURN


uf Best Manila Newspape-- December Editorials


RACTICAL-MINDED RIZAL
he privilege of Filipinos to discover in
he virtues that they wish were common
their people. He is supremely the
and by common acclaim he has attained
stature of greatness. What is learned
his life or what would be taught from its
deeds of service and his deeper deed of
ice, are thus brought to his people with
inality of a sacrament. Rizal said it. It
t be the ultimate in truth. Rizal did it.
lust be the essence of wisdom put into action.
al has been made to win this dominance over
thought of his people. What Rizal woulo
iction, for his people, stands as a command
ich they must obey.
This role of the great master fits Rizal beyond
awvil. His interest was varied. His life found
xpression in many directions. To his people,
is ability that touched diverse subjects is not
or more admiration but for lasting worship.
The great fact is that he performed, not neessarily that he performed greatly. Thus the
messages that can be drawn from his life. He is
the epic sermon to the nation that gave him
birth.
Admittedly an idealist, Rizal was also a
practical leader. He was too much the man
of the world to believe that ideals alone can
—wErk the miracle of advancing the cause of his
people. He preached the practice of the common abstract virtues: love of country, respect
for the old, loyalty to family ties, honesty,
integrity. He knew more than these. He also
told his people that they must save, and not be
improvident. That is a turn of mind that shows
him as the practical leader. In his exile he gave
examples of practical patriotism to the folk of
the town. He did not orate there. He did
not fulminate against the local golden calf.
He did not organize secret societies. He rather
worked that the people be healthier. That
better drinking water be theirs. Better medical
attendance. Better town plaza. Rizal was
also the apostle of materialism.
In that historic interview between Rizal and
Dr. Valenzuela, the refusal of Rizal to agree
to the proposal of the emisary of the Filipino
revolutionists, was the refusal of the practical
Rizal. He frowned on armed uprising as an
idealist’s solution for a situation that needed
more than idealism to realign it permanently
in favor of the Filipinos.
Today with Rizal Day once more centering
on the great hero the attention of his own people
it is well that the Filipinos remember Rizal the
Idealist as well as Rizal the practical leader.
He was not the theorist talking only of impractical
things leading to nothing or of practical things
to be led to impermanence. He was not the
standpatter living in a past glorified. Were
he with the Filipinos today he would be of the
Filipinos who combine with idealism the practical
means to effect Filipino dreams into permanent
contributions to Filipino welfare.—Tribune,
December 30.
TAXING POWERS
A measure, rushed through the legislature
and now before the governor general for signature, proposing sweeping taxation and licensing
powers for the Manila municipal board, is filled
with powder. It would empower the municipal
government to do things which easily might
become discriminatory. The bill is so dangerous
that it deserves the governor general’s veto.
Legality of the measure is doubtful due to the
fact that its title describes its purpose as “reg
ulating and fixing license fees for all classes of
merchants, industries and occupations, and
authorizing the municipal board of the city of
Manila to grant exclusive fishery privileges in
the waters of the city.” But in the body of the
bill powers of taxation are mentioned, and license
and tax are entirely different things. Taxation
is not mentioned in the title but it is the real
matter of consideration in the body of the bill.
As a matter of fact the weight of evidence shows
that taxation for city revenues, not licensing
and regulation, is the purpose of the whole
hing. A license fee charged for a service renred is quite different from taxation for general
enues.


The municipal board long has smarted over
its inability to go the limit in imposing taxes.
Unreasonable efforts at inequitable taxes have
demonstrated the practicability of the legal
restraints in this connection. Fair-minded,
level-headed, community-building and tax pay
ing business men have felt a security in the
limitations on the municipal board’s taxing
powers because, putting it in frank words, the
business men have not had confidence in the
board’s judgment in dealing with the intricacies
of taxation and in its ability to make safe and
fair use of unlimited powers of taxation.
The legislature was deaf to suggestions from
the municipal board when the board was Democrata. However, it is Nacionalista now.
And a sweeping measure was railroaded through,
under an innocent looking title.


EDITORIAL SELECTIONS FOR
DECEMBER


Tribune, Dec. 30.—Practical-Minded
Rizal. Selected by Professor V. M.
Hilario.
Bulletin, Dec. 6.—Taxing Powers.
Selected by Mr. Jesus Valenzuela.
Times, Dec. 23.—Science in Farming.
Selected by Professor Verne Dyson.
Herald, Dec. 28.—Land Ownership Not
Essential. Selected by Professor
Cristino Jamias.
Certified,
G. P. SHANNON.


If this measure becomes law, the municipal
board will be authorized—by suggestion invited
—to tax apartment houses and office buildings,
such tax being in addition to the present real
estate tax. This clause is decidedly suggestive
of double taxation.
A chain of circumstance indicates that fire
insurance companies were aimed at for taxation,
the contention being that city fire fighting apparatus minimizing fire losses renders a service
which gives profits to the insurance companies.
This contention might be worthy of some consideration if it were not for the fact that fire
insurance rates are based upon the fire prevention and fire fighting provisions, which is to say
that the insuring public, not the insurance companies, reap the benefits of the guarantees
against losses. Rates are determined by losses.
The bill is loaded.—Bulletin, December 6.
SCIENCE IN FARMING
For many years past farming in the Philippines
was done without science. The introduction
of modern agricultural machinery, use of fer
tilizers, seed selection, crop rotation and other
farm methods that go to increase production
are of recent importation. The bureau of
agriculture, it must be admitted, must be given
credit for some of these innovations. But
judging by the poor yield of many Philippine
crops, it is evident that there still is a great field
for science in farming.
It is for this reason that the Manila Times
commends the selection of Atherton Lee, technical adviser of the Philippine Sugar Association,
by the Governor General to make a study of the
practicability of adopting in the Philippines the
system of specialization by experimental stations
such as that in vogue in Java. Under this
system an experimental station specializes only
in one crop instead of dividing its time and
interest among several crops. Mr. Lee will not
receive any compensation except the necessary
traveling expenses
The tremendous progress attained by the
Philippine sugar industry is a lesson to farmers
in general in these islands. Such progress has
been stimulated by experiments and researches
undertaken on the field and in laboratories. With
the specialization of the experimental stations
in only one line of the work they are doing now,
much is expected to be learned from them by
Philippine farmers. In other words, farming
will be placed on a scientific basis instead of be
ing undertaken as it now is in a haphazard way
in many places, and the major crops such as


rice, corn, tobacco, coconut anu
given greater attention for increased pr
Other plants particularly coffee, pin
maguey, mango and lanzones, which have gi
commnercial possibilities, also deserve be"
promoted through scientific farming.—Tim
December 23.
LAND OWNERSHIP NOT ESSENTIA
For the maximum production of raw mater,
necessary for the manufacture of finished goot
to supply the ever increasing world demand i
commodities, a vast extent of land such as t
dream of powerful corporate interests is r
essential.
What a factory needs that turns out, sa
rubber tires for automobiles is rubber.
course, it would be much more convenient if t
factory could have control of the sources of ra
material, for then it would not have to wor
about the fluctuations of prices. But as in 
case of the rubber industry, American capitalis
need not lose sleep over the control of possik
land acreage. For even if manufacturers d
own the land they could nevertheless ge
supply of raw material to feed their fac
at reasonable prices with a systematic
humane method of production, under Americ
influence.
In the Philippines, for instance, Amerio
manufacturers need not own vast tracts of )
for the exploitation of rubber. The Filip
can produce the required amount of this e
modity on the ir own land with proper cultiy
And what is needed by American manuf c
is not a law to favor their interests bu.
investment of sufficient capital to finance
small farmers who are but willing to goli
the rubber growing industry to supplyf
American demand for this commodity.
The present land laws of the Philippines
no hindrance to the proper cultivation of ruk
if what is needed is the product and n
control over the sources of production.
Writing on the rubber business to Se
Alunan of the Department of Agricultul
Natural Resources, an unnamed Am
businessman who is in close touch with 1
inent rubber men in the United States s
“I told him that I had an idea that as far :
rubber business is concerned that the pi
land laws in the Philippine Islands were n
at all... If a rubber company could act
banker, with some profit-sharing arrange,
it seems to me that the rubber business
Philippine Islands could be developed exck
under existing laws... If the land la lw.
changed and a rubber company would'; a
unlimited acreage, there would be always Ipo
opposition to the company. But, on t hhe
hand, if a company went out to the Phfilk
and started a number of small farmers!c
which belonged to those farmers, it seenis'
that the Filipinos would welcome th
open farms and would cooperate with
every way possible, and all that would !
sary to have the enthusiastic cooperatic
Filipino leaders would be for them to e
themselves with fairness and decency
their farmers."
Such an attitude expresses in a nut s
general sentiment of the Filipinos on the
of land and agricultural enterprises.
When powerful corporate intere.-s
invade the Philippines with plans for the
of unlimited acreage, the Filipinos imm
look upon such invasion with grave su
They see a menace in such an enterparwhen they come with the idea of mut I
and helpfulness as the principal Eco,
their business ventures, they recelific
come and the cooperation of the brupt
There is nothing so dear to the , S.J
natives of this country as their soilther
of open rebellions against the sovung
in the past had their roots deep ie of
sod. If there is anything held sacies:
violable by the Filipinos, next to t the
for their politica freedom, it is the tig-15
ship to their own land. And whg
let big corporations to develop their nat!
. F
mutual benefit, there is no influe”.y
enough that can persuade them to give
title to their land voluntarily.—Heral
cember 28.


N A BONTOK MOUNTAIN TRAIL
- 19 tne PAcal season for visiting the Indonesians of whom Miss Binder writes


excursions. Outside, the ground is paved with
stones and there is a little stone pit with a thatch
hovel at one end where dwells the pampered
family pig.
There is no need for sleeping space for a


family in the house of a Bontok. Children are
social .charges.
As soon as a girl is old enough to spend the
nights away from her mother, she goes to sleep
in one of the ologs which are property of the


TAuaitie dun ana ramit Co.
OF MANILA
ENGINEERS
MANUFACTORERS
CONTRACTORS


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILA, P. I.


community. Th
boys called an
rooms for all the
there in the evenin
disturbed by chatter
atos are forbidden grot
on the other hand, is
young women receive
admirers. Visitors are
ologs at midnight, but
marry a man, she m
morning. None of the
enough to permit its oc
the sole furniture is a w
half of the room and is sh
come.
Among the Ifugaos, th
property of families rather
ologs are closed to visito
nights. On these nights !
dates go out to visit their aOccasionally, girls and boys itr
meet in the ologs of mutualne:
Marriage, for rich Ifugaos,ov
tract, the contract consistins s
rangement among the parentto
each family will contribute tOg 1
of the young couple. The pOOw
free-will marriage. Divorce law.
advanced and liberal nature
woman are divorced by mean:
ceremony similar to that by
married. There are three grou
The first is adultery, the second
third common consent. In
woman is found to, bo imin
vorced and the joint prope
kept by the unoffending I
proves barren after two or th
life, she and her marriage p
to her parents. When hust
that they no longer wish to
divide the property they
equally between them, subi
religious ceremony and are fr
Occasionally, among a gi
women building or repairing :
mountains a man is seen wiel
his right hand and supporting
his hip with his left. Road
and optional occupation for hil
is his traditional responsibilit
bringing to maturity the fam
borne.
Equality between the sexes e
in this country, that women enj
ileges, but that work, responsi
and social position are shared
ination by men and women
are built and repaired and fic
for planting by the men. Th
more exacting work of plantin
growing crops is left to the we
leaves for the terraces on the far
comfortable in the assurance
will watch over the children a
meal ready for her on her ret


For the motorist
who does not speculate in quality


N
E
MOTOR OILS AND GA
At Service Stations an
Dealers on All Motor Ros


Standard Oil Company of New


reen: Remarks on Car


y WALTER ROBB
n as a peace officer
en, Manila’s chief of
en with a gratuitous
nyway. Among lawan be found who have,
of policemen in their
it scribe, who is never
fellows than when they
ttracting the intervenattention of the force.
restricted scope of his
has beheld the police
and covenant with crime
ience the taxes devoted
thing more than wasted,
s were wantonly preyed
Green is an astounding
ade the department in
- cause his character is a’
ast to that of the sleuth and
ral, which virtue is likewise
y widely shared in the departketch is written. Chief Green
the nited States, on leave of
mily goes with him, and there
nay not return to Manila. It
7, to say something about what
ere to prompt so many wishes,
ients, for a pleasant period of
observation for him in America,
turn no his post in Manila.
to 1922, when Wood named
olice. Surely then the departnkus on the city revenues; it
a head, fluttering aimlessly
at like a dying rooster; it
uld be fired, and few men
gh to aim them; it lacked
gether; it was confused in
detective department was
lore so than now; but, while
s utterly wanting and even
was nowhere visible or effectit of its authority, which it
z to exercise upon men who
id only too slow in imposing
:s.
artment was at the lowest
ute in its history, when Green
Six years have passed, and
e?
icrease of personnel or approevolutionized the entire departin doing this, taken the initiative,
his authority under the law. He
is subordinates also to use the
ithority, down to the newest
man on a beat—not in provo-blouse abuse of the public.
and for its peace, contentment
This, actual service to the
in the new discipline manifest
from top to bottom; and out
i esprit de corps extending
ment itself, into the offices
city, where there is now a
to entertain the requests
st their duties.
he worst policed cities in
become one of the best;
1the security of his home,
have an eye on it and no
tments that are rare,
erntirely to the character
1 that heads them. In
en desreed the traffic
e captana, six sergeants
tailed from the regular
erly, has but 814 men
r departments follow
latic genius and police
the job of rehabiliforce. Traffic inandled aan


has been that wil.
fewer arrests and less
burden on the police
courts and those above
it, crime has steadily
declined and security
and confidence spread
like a beneficent contagion.
Notwithstanding this,
however, the department is infinitely better prepared now than
ever in the past to cope
with any emergency
that might arise. It is
a theory of Chief
Green’s, and a very
right one too, that the
better the police are
prepared for their duties in the prevention
of crime and the maintenance of peace, the
easier it will be for
them to do so and the
less of it they will have
to do. From having
no weapons but night
sticks fit to use, and
only a few antiquated
firearms of any sort,
the department has
progressed to where it
is amply equipped with
the most modern Winchester riot guns, and
every patrolman has a
dependable colts .45
revolver.
With the effective
use of these firearms
the men have been
made familiar by constant practice at the
targets. It has been a
part of the discipline
and orderliness of Chief
Green to organize his
men into military
squads; the whole de
partment is organized
militarily, Green having the rank of colonelin-command, and the
men, trained by their
daily practice of the
drill manual, gothrough
military evolutions like
soldiers. When the
firearms practicebegan,
when any one of the
men, or even the officers, at least most of
them, fired a pistol the
bullet might strike
anywhere—save on the
target. For them to
have arms was a criminal menace to the
public. But now they
can all shoot straight
(with the object, however, of bringing their
quarry to bay, and
not of killing him), and
many are experts and
sharpshooters, by the
rules for soldiers established.
Be it remembered
that this has all been
brought about among
men and officers who
are all feloniously underpaid; nor is the
adwerh too harsh, for
may be
refusing
employes


Any
Roaa
Any
Season


All roads seem equally good
in any weather when you ride
on these big comfortable tires.
The jolts and vibration disappear and the Non-Skid tread
gives a safe hold on wet or
slippery roads. For safety and
economy equip with Firestones
MOST MILES PER PESO
A

Gum-Dipped Balloons
Pacific Commercial Co.
FIRESTONE DISTRIBI TOR


ON


January, 1929


  OF COMMEROL JOORA


from it, and sells it, hot, for ten centavos. A
bibinka cooked between fires of wood or charcoal would perhaps be flavorless. At any rate,
no stranger is ever seen making the experiment.
There is no complicated labor-saving equipment in calle Tetuan’s sugar refinery. The
stove, in an alcove set off from the rest of the
shop, is fed with logs. Mixing, beating and


part, and others follow until the maximum pressure has been reached. Then another batch
goes through.
Lumbang oil is used in paint. It is equivalent
to linseed oil. In very small quantities it can
be used as medicine by those who are not too
fastidious.


Calle Tetuan: Skirting a Neglected Canal


cutting is done by hand. The sugar is a very
superior crude. It is called caramelo, and the
uninstructed might mistake it for candy. Really
it is the Philippine version of cube sugar, for use
in tea and coffee. It is made from huge lumps
of open-kettle sugar bought from the small mills
of the cane-growing provinces. These lumps,
like large boulders, lie about, some of them in
a corner reserved for them, but more against
the doors and on the mats of the outer room.
These blocks, reduced somewhat in size, are
mixed with syrup in shallow pans. The mixture is boiled, then carried to the room near the
street and placed over cold water in depressions
in the floor, beaten until it begins to harden,
then cut by hand into rectangles of unvarying
size. The product ready for sale at the price
of one centavo a cube is creamy-colored, porous
and caramel-flavored.


ESCOLTA TRAFFIC COUNTED AGAIN


“I have the honor to inform you that on last
Monday, December 15, vehicles entering the
Escolta and stopping thereon were again counted
by members of this division. It was found that
7,072 automobiles entered, 1,235 of which stopped; 2,355 carromatas entered, 397 of which
stopped. The count was made from 8:00 a. m.,
to 12:30 p. m., and from 3:45 to 6:30 p. m.,
during the middle of the month when traffic
is comparatively light. It is estimated that,
daily, before Christmas and the coming New


Year, more than twice the ni
listed above would enter the E—SILVESTRI
Sergeant, Co
Salip Uktan
Many ages ago there lived, in
of Siasi, a man named Salip Ukt:
a very boastful and selfish person
reason had few friends. One day
village taking a large bunch of b
he hoped to sell in the market,
prices; for they were large and wel
As he walked al ng the narr
road he boasted of the naeness and
of his fruit, but there were fey
he paused to refresh himself witl
nut, and calculate whai he won
money he received for his ban an
he contemplated the luscious fru
valuable it seemed to him.
“I will sell these bananas, and wit
I will buy a horse,” he mused.
sell the horse at profit and buy a ca
that I will sell milk until I have 2
fortune. Then I will buy some
bulls and cultivate a large tract of
build myself a palace and marry ma
princesses. I shall be the father o
and thirty daughters. Ah, I sha
great man," gloated Salip Uktarah,
the market place. “And when my
to my table I shall command them
I have finished, even as the King
But Salip, engrossed with 10
stumbled over a stone, and droppel
They were badly crushed, and ro
distance down into the little gumarket. They were ruined.
Salip Uktarah gave a mighty
and rage. He tore his hair and
his ill luck. Then he began sei
of his voice: “I have lost my he
my carabao; I have lost my
have lost my lands, my palchildren."
His frensied cries att
crowd, and some of the o
him; but he only kept or
he fell exhausted, and;
from the excess of his
But his selfish and
that even death could,
suffering; so Salip U.
ghost in all Sulu. Sor
folk say that he can sti
the old market site of
of the riches he never

The sugar refinery and oil manufactory are
near neighbors. The oil, displayed for sale in
tins and hogsheads, is made by a fascinatingly
antiquated process in an apartment connected
with the shop by a dark stall where three fat
oxen are housed. The oxen relieve each other
at walking round in a ten-foot circle and pulling
a roller over the greasy lumbang nuts, the raw
material of the factory, and reducing them to a
meal in order that their oil may be more easily
extracted. The meal, made hot, is put into
burlap bags with wicker hoops around them and
then into a clumsy pressing device. When the
pressing machine is full and it is time to pull
down the levers and make the oil flow, all hands
are called to the work. The first time the levers
are brought down by one man’s hands; the last
time, two men jumping and springing in unison
climb on each—there is one on each side—and
force it down with the weight of their bodies.
After this, wedges are driven in behind the
compacts of lumbang meal, where the rattan
hoops are replaced with steel ones. To drive
home the wedges and extract the final drops
of oil, the Chinese use a large block of granite, suspended from an overhead timber, as
a hammer. The timber is notched, for the steel
ring of the rope in which the granite block is
ng. Notch by notch the stone moves forle first wedge is soon in to its widest


CAMERA SY


110 Escolta, Manila
WVOINGMV AI

avaler


PONEY


LLSLCLEOT CUIHIVIERCOLTOURINAD


January, 1929


Bureau Association Men Insured


e took a sensible step forward
is recently, when arrangements
by the Philippine Postal and
nployees' Association for the
le lives of its members by a local
e plan is that of group in
has been so beneficial in the United
designed to give at least some
men of low salaries. It would
s is a time of the year favorable to
of such plans by employers, with
having their employes protected.
'ar case, collectively the association
avings of P200,000; there was
of forethought with which to
s being made convenient for the
le premiums of their respective
out having to make the remittances
factories in Manila thus covered?
spartment would like to learn of
any large mercantile houses where
ace is in force. This is pioneering
bines, but getting to be a common
in America. The day will dawn
lives everywhere will be insured as
they are taken into employment.
urance) has done more,” says the
a Britanica, "than all gifts of imrity to foster a sense of human
and of common interest. Ithas done
repressive legislation to destroy
spirit. It is impossible to conceive
tion in its full vigor and progressive
it this principle which unites the
law of practical economy, that he
umanity who best serves himself,
'en rule of religion, Bear ye one
iens.”
s association, the lowest policy
and the highest P25,000, the
nding upon salary received and
e than P50 a month being
of ₱1,000. The type of
t-nonparticipating. It is
ociation members to take
Greater rigor could be
outside the government.
 Philippines, very sucncome from his business
: 20 years ago. He left
ne United States, during
mismanaged by those
te returned to the islands
And some debts to pay


besides. It was discouraging, and he had to
stretch every peso as far as he could. But, his
first obligation being to his family, the first
thing he did was to insure his life for P20,000.
In a very short time, now, that insurance will
mature; he can either draw it down or let it
stand. Meantime, particularly during the hard
sledding, he has had the protection of this amount
for his family. He now carries a great deal
more insurance, his policies totalling ₱150,000.


it is to be had from the government at P10 the
hectare. But every planted hectare mounts
in value enormously by the time it is ready to
yield, and it is this earned increment on which
the planter gambles. Meantime he should hawe
insurance protection. His risks are great in
any case, but insurance reduces them to the
minimum.
In all agricultural companies financed by
stock, and partly perhaps by mortgage, the life
of the manager should be insured in favor of the
company. Experience has demonstrated invariably in these islands that the success of


he Insular nife Assurance Co., Ltd.





MANILA, P. I.
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oansonrealestatesrepayable monthly instalments, at
ow interest


If a mindful man with a fixed salary dies, he
will only leave a small saving to his family

FOR ABOUT 131.00 ANNUALLY
our company guarantees the payment of ₱1,000 to your wife or sons in
case of death, or to the insured himself if he survives the policy.


HOME OFFICE


Call or write for particulars to:


4th Floor, Filipinas Bldg.
Plaza Moraga, Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 128


C. S. SALMON
3rd Floor, Gaches Bldg.
Escolta cor. T. Pinpin 115
P. O. Box 734, Manila


V. SINGSON ENCARNACION, President
J. MCMICKING, Manager


Another man, down in Zamboanga, went in
with a partner and purchased a coconut plantation partly developed. He is making the
plantation liquidate a loan and pay the annual
premiums on an insurance policy for P25,000.
This is sensible in him. He is married.
Can it be that any man similarly engaged in
plantation pioneering in the Philippines has
failed to have his life adequately insured? Such
would be an oversight almost inexcusable. As
raw jungle the land is worth practically nothing;


est Coast Life Insurance Company
offers
a full line of modern life insurance
ontracts designed to meet every need
business or personal protection.
articulars and quotations consult the
ne Branch Office


st Life Insurance Co.


Manila, P. I.


ne 2-36-74


plantations hinges almost entirely, if not quite
so, on the manager in actual charge on the
holding. If he is competent, the project succeeds; if he is incompetent, he can soon bring
to ruin even a flourishing enterprise. Competent managers of plantations are hard to find.
though they are fully as important to any such
project as a fertile soil and assured rainfall.
When one is secured, the company should guarantee itself against the loss of him. And it
should do so amply, since in the usual course of
events there will be losses enough before a
reliable successor to him is found.
In short, insurance will minimize the hazards
of plantation investments; it should cover the
life of every man essential to the effective administration of the property.
Sealed Bids, indorsed “Bids for fuel oil storage tanks for Central Power Plant, Specification No. 5499 will be received at the Public
Works Office, Naval Station, Cavite, P. I. until
11 o’clock a. m., January 24th, 1929, and then
and there publicly opened for providing and
securing in place two 75,000 gallon fuel oil storage tanks and piping, together with an enclosing
wall, complete and ready for use. Specification
No. 5499 and accompanying drawings may be
obtained on application to the Public Works
Officer, Naval Station, Cavite, P. I. Deposit
of a check or postal money order for $10.00,
payable to the Chief of the Bureau of Yards and
Docks, Washington, D.C., is required as security
for the safe return of the drawings and specifications.
L. E. Gregory, Chief of Bureau, June 29, 1928,
E. E. Diot, an oldtimer in business in Manila,
has returned to the islands from Seattle and
opened offices in the Peoples Bank building
under the firm name of the Pacific coast agencies,
representing coast-city manufacturers and coaststate growers. A. S. Coffin is associated with
him in the company and handling the Seattle
end of the business. The Journal welcomes
Mr. Diot -back to town; he and his partner are
both favorably known here.


CHAMBF'


ANG ERGE R


S HEMP MARKET
L. SPELLMAN
and Company


This report covers the
Manila Hemp market
for the month of December with statistics
to December 31st, 1928.
U. S. Grades:—The
market has been firir
throughout the entire
month with prices steadily advancing. The
high prices ruling have
checked buying in the
consuming markets but
the local speculators
keep on raising prices.
month the nominal prices
tere as follows: E, 14-3,44


cents; F 11-142 cents; G, 8-3/4 cents; I, 10-344
cents; J1, 9-1,4 cents; $1, 11-1,4 cents; S2,
10-1,2 cents; S3, 9-1,2 cents. By the middle
of the month New York selling prices were: E,
13-3,8 cents; F, 12-142 cents; G, 9 cents; I, 12
cents; J1, 9-142 cents; $1, 12-1/4 cents; S2,
11-142cents; $3, 9-1/2 cents. By the end of the
month prices were very firm due to the fact that
only a small quantity of hemp was being offered
and nominal prices were as follows: E, 14 cents;
F, 13-1,2 cents; G, 9-1/8 cents; I, 12-1/4 cents;
, 9-3/4 cents; $1, 13-1,4 cents; $2, 12 cents;
S3, 9-3,4 cents.
The Manila market for U. S. grades advanced
steadily throughout the month. There was
only a small amount offering and there was
keen competition between local buyers, speculators and exporters. Opening prices were:
E, P33, F P26; G, P18; I, P23.4; J1, P19;
S1, P25; 82, P23; 83, P19. By the middle
of the month buyers were paying E, P37 F
₱28.4; G, P19.6; I, P26.4; J1, P21; 81, P28;
S2, P26; $3, P21. By the end of the month
buyers were offering E, P37; F, P29.4; G, P20;


 Telegraphing Use
e Radiogram Route


OREd
ABE
TREDESS
ION OF THE PHILIPPINES
AZA MORAGA
Always Open


N 


Manila Cordage Co.
Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 131
TOWLINE BRAND
High Quality Pure Manila Rope
CROWN BRAND
Good Quality Pure Mani'
PLCW BRAND
Mixed Fiber Rope Low in
DRAGON BRAND
Made of Pure Philippine Magt
Ask for Prices


I, P27; J1, P21.4; 81, P28.4; 82, P26.4; 83
₱21.4. Sellers were holding off and it is quite
possible that buyers would have paid from 4
reals to P1 over these prices.
U. K. Grades:—The London market opened
firm with buyers at the following prices: J2, 427.5;
K, E35.10; L1, E34.15; L2, E27.10; Mi, E28.15;
M2, E26;DL, E25.10; DM, E24. By the middle of
the month quotationswere as follows: J2, E37.5;K,
237.10; K, 235.5: Li, E35; L2, E27.10; Mi,
#28.10; M2, E26; DL, E26: DM, E24.10. At
the close of the month there were buyers at
J2, 239.10; K, 238; Li, E37.10; L2, 230.10;
MI, [31.5; M2, E28; DL, E26; DM, E24.10.
The Manila market for U.K. grades was
strong throughout the month and prices generally ruled higher than the equivalents in the
selling markets. Prices were purely nominal
at the beginning of the month owing to the fact
that dealers were holding off: J2, ₱16; K, ₱14.4;
LI, ₱14; L2, ₱10.4; MI, P11.2; M2, P10;
DL, ₱10; DM, P9.4. By the middle of the
month buyers were offering: J2, P18; K, ₱16.4;
LI, P16.2; L2, ₱12.4; MI, P13; M2, P11.6;
DL, P11.6; DM, P11. At the end of the month
buyers were paying J2, ₱18; K, P17; Li, P16.4;
L2, ₱13; MI, P13.2; M2, P12.2; DL, P12.2;
DM, ₱I1.4.
Japan:—The demand from this market is
steady and a fair amount of hemp has been sold
at prices in accordance with the quotations
above.
Maguey:—This fibre has advanced in price
in sympathy with Manila and the demand has
been steady. Production has started in Ilocos
Norte and Ilocos Sur but as yet supplies are
limited. There are between 15,000 and 20,000
piculs of last year’s crop in the district which is
coming on the market. Cebu Maguey finds
ready buyers from both the U.K. and Japanese
markets and prices have advanced P1.50 a
picul during the past month.
Production:—Receipts are full but there has
been no marked increase due to the ty-'
It was expected that during
January produgtion woulo
the cleaning


THE RABBIT AND THE CROCODILE
(Continued from page 2-
find out how to plan my attack.”
“Good! Your request is granted,” replied the
crocodile. “We will all be here in the morning.
So, the next morning, the rabbit came down
to the beach; and there, sure enough, he found
the crocodiles ranged side by side in a great line
which extended as far as he could see. “I did
not realize there were so many of you,” he said
to Ukub, who was first in the line, “But I will
keep my word. I shall have to walk across your
backs to count you, and then I will return to
shore and begin the battle.”
“Go ahead, chuckled Ukub, sure of victory.
The rabbit ran out nimbly across the great
backs of the crocodiles; but the line was so long
at it extended from the coast of Tawi Tawi
o the coast of Borneo. It took the rabbit
nearly all day to count the crocodiles. When
he had reached the Bornean coast, he explained
to the crocodiles that the battle would have to be
postponed until he returned over their backs to
Tawi Tawi. This was agreed upon, and after
a little rest he again approached the long line
f crocodiles.
But the rabbit had visited a friendly Rajah
 Borneo, and from him had secured a heavy
velin, with a sharp pointed head of obsidian.
he returned he struck each crocodile with
in a certain vulnerable spot at the
ain so that each died instantly
a struggle. So quietly did the
s deadly work that not one of the
codiles had a suspicion of the grim
was upon him, not even the wiliest
1, the wicked old Ukub.
was the end of the battle between the
id the crocodiles which served to rid
rict of Sulu of many treacherous foes,
cement a long lasting friendship between
nd rabbits; for the rabbits never forgot
indness of the good Rajah who had given
javelin to their brother and had shown him
7 to kill the crocodiles.


Jear Mr. Robb:
"Dining at Miss Yule’s last night I heard
your name mentioned in connection with the
history of old Manila, and with the Chamber
of Commerce Journal, and when taking my
departure Sunrises and Sunsets in Manila—
your presentation copy—was slipped into my
bag. Just this moment I have laid down that
charming little book from my first perusal, and
presently an order will be written for some
copies; no doubt it is on sale at The Philippine
Education Company.
“What would you have written, I wonder, if
you had seen Banahao as she was a few mornings
ago, and as she never appeared before, at least
to these eyes. Usually Banahao veils her face,
not in shame, not in sulkiness, but in a certain
self-consciousness of majesty, half revealing,
half concealing her charms, as though well
knowing that when the cloudy fabric is removed
she will seem all the more radiant and desirable.
“But on this particular morning she had
invented a new and rare revelation of herself.
There was no perceptible mistiness in the atmosphere, and every line of both Mother Banahao and little Daughter Banahao was absolutely
distinct, yet there was a something that might
have been many layers of chiffon in various
pastel shades suspended before her by the hand
of Day, which made one vast, opalescent, radiant
glorious pearl the shape of Banahao so that she
herself might have been one of the Twelve
Gates.
“Who will do for Banahao and Maquiling
what you have done for the sunrises and sunsets
of Manila? True, Rizal wrote of Maquiling,
so that it is not her legend that is needed, but
her epic. “An itch I have to write, a tang,
but not the pen of a ready writer, yet someone
ought to do it; and it will be done sooner or later.
“But the object of this communication is to
thank you for writing the pleasant booklet, and
to ask you to send me a price list or sample
-any of the Journal with aview to a subsorip

TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarelle
Manufacturing Co.


Raw Leaf:—The local market has been weak
throughout the year. The demand from the
larger factories, which are welf-stocked up, was
but small in view of the poor quality of the last
two cropSX Export of scrap tobacco to the
United States and of Union tobacco to Japan
were satisfactory. Prices of the latter advanced,
while Cagayan tobacco remains low. Total
exports (raw leaf, stripped and partly manufactured) were—


1926................. Kg. 14,800,000
 23,700,000
1927........ . . . . . . . . .
1928. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ca. " 19,000,000


Japan....
North Atlantic (Eure
South America....
Spain......... . . . . . .
Straits Settlements...
Tonkin
  
United States.......


Cigars:—Shipments to
while slightly higher than d
year, were not as satisfactory
expected, the competition
keen. Comparative figures
December 1928........
November 1928........
December 1927........


Figures for December 1928 are as follows:
Algeria.................. Kg. 17,255
38,717
China........
Hongkong............ “ 14,091


Year 1928.......... ..
Year 1927...........
Year 1926...........
Year 1925. ..........


ABAEBAB
PREMSER
ACROSS AMERIC.
Route your shipment via Great Northeri
between the Pacific Northwest Ports of
Minneapolis, St. Paul, Chicago, New Yorl
Eastern Points for safety, promptness, a
Also, our Import and Export OffiDouglas Building, Seattle, 79 West
cago, 233 Broadway, New York, or
services, without charge whatsoever, t
less delay, trouble and expense. Cotime.
M. J. Costello
Western Traffic Manager
Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hillrail


A 


E VIRGINIA LEE (English
Acriculture.)


ITION


jed noses. Their dialect, too, though
; liberally of the Tagalog speech of their
s all round, contains many Mardican
nd Mardican corruptions of Spanish.
enerally they marry among themselves,
ir customs and religious practices are
fferent from those of the Tagalogs of
vince.
have, however, persisted in one ancient
ay, in veneration of the Holy Child of
e. This is the sacred regatta, held an; when the image of the Christ is taken
richly decorated boat, to lead the procesf similarly adorned boats up and down the
and along the coast. No doubt it is a
fication of a pagan rite in humble suption and propitiation of the god of the sea,
aps also of the god of storms. But this,
is to be found at all, will be discovered in
Jesuit relations of the Ternate mission.
voted to the protection of the image is a
radia, a confraternity, which has had a case
court with the general congregation. (12th
lilippine Reports, 227, December 12, 1908).
he supreme court of the Philippines has solemn

t this dispute, that throughout
ly furcu;
the year the image shall repose in the church,
but that on the occasion of the holy regatta it
must be given into the custody of the cofradia,
which,—if memory plays not false,—must
return it to the church before the setting of the
sun!
This erudite decision seems to have given
satisfaction to all Mardicans during twenty
years. The history it recounts is its more interesting element. “The Moros landed from their
war boats and danced with their shields and
big bolos. The whirling sands made them
almost invisible. When the men of Ternate
saw them, they got out their own boats and
prepared to fight. The Mardicas were very
brave, it was said they were invulnerable; there
was a dreadful battle.” The quotation is from
a tradition published in the monograph of
Tomas T. Tirona of Cavite, An Account of
the Ternate Dialect, to which the Journal
is indebted for its data. It is a good piece of
work. Such was the origin of Ermita, born of
one of the political travails through which
Manila has passed.


The Rabbit and The Crocodile
FRANK LEWIS MINTON*


Now this is a story of the very long ago,
before the coming of the Arabs, before the comg of Indarapatra and Sulayman, who slew
e monsters and established man as the king
sthe earth; even before the great deluge, when
ilu, Mindanao, and the north islands were all
ne great continent, even before the climate of
he country had been changed. In those days
nan and the animals spoke a common language
and lived, usually, in peace and amity
And in those days rabbits also lived in Sulu;
not the tiny rabbits such as are today imported
from foreign lands, but great rabbits nearly
*For the theme of this story, the writer is indebted to
the Hon. Carl M. Moore, former provincial governor,
who gave generously of his knowiedge, and his time
during my recent visit to Jolo and the southern islands.


as large as a man. They were then very strong
animals, strong and fleet of foot, the messengers
who carried news and letters, and notices of
wars between the tribes of men and beasts.
For at that time man had not made friends with
the fowls of the air, and taught the fleet pigeons
to carry messages.
There were many monstrous crocodiles along
the rivers and beaches of Sulu, and their King
was an exceptionally wiley and deceitful old
beast named Ukub, who lived in Tawi Tawi.
The crocodiles preyed upon unsuspecting animals
and men by charining them with soft words,
begging help in cleaning their great teeth. When
a victim had been inveigled to domne quite close,
the crocodile, with a sudden snap of his powerful
jaws, would crush them and devour him.


One day old Ukur a
low, brackish water at the me
river which emptied into the sea no
site of Dungun.
“Good morning, Friend Carabao
crocodile.
“Good morning,” replied the fearle.
“My friend,” gasped the crocodi
exhausted, “I have been swimming
hours, and I am so weak that I fear
reach the shore. If you will carry m
will pay you anything you ask.”
“My price will be reasonable for si
ice,” returned the carabao, “But
swear the sacred oath that you will I
me.”
So the crocodile swore the sacred
the carabao allowed him to «
powerful back. When they co
the carabao said, "Here we a
place. Please get off my bac.
"A little farther, friend," ple
dile. So the carabao went on a 1
and stopped.
“Now,” hissed the crocodile, "1
kill you and eat you.”
“So,” replied the plucky caraba.
the way you would repay me for se
Very well, I will defend myself as b
but if I should succeed in killing you
burn in hell forever, because you ha
the sacred oath.”
The carabao braced hiinself for the
attack; but the crocodile hesitate
a clumsy fellow, although of gbll
and it was difficult for him to attadn
Moreover, he was afraid for the moni
knew that if he should lose his life in
he would burn forever in intense fire.
“But,” said the carabao, taking co
us settle this thing according to lava sacred tree, inhabited by the spir
We will inquire as to our respe
Then the carabao called to the -
(Please turn to page 23, 2nd


Cel The habid


of drinking a glass of sparkling
OAIN
after every meal, and note how your pep
and vitality will be increased!


Of course there's a reason—
TANSAN
besides being the purest natural water known
—free from every trace of bacillary life
and earthy deposits—has been conclusively
proved to be an invaluable tonic owing to its
RADIO-ACTIVITY!


TANSAN is on sale all over the Philippines. Should
however any difficulty be experienced in procuring it remember
TANSAN can always be got from the
Sole Distributors
F E. ZUELLIG, INC.


ILOILO


MANILA


CEBU


Protect it with
RARA
Metal or wood can be made to re
appreciably longer service when coated
Our GAS TAR PAINT. Resists rus.
decay; repels attacks by destructive in
lasting, resilient, economical.
Call or Write for Prices
GAS COK
If your needs require steady
heat, use GAS COKE. Prices
on request. Write or call
Manila Gas CoCalle Otis
P. O. Box 1206 MAN


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN CH


ARK& Co.


AUAEEA
MANILA.
ESCOLTA
MASONIC TEMPLE


AMeans TOAn Ena


WE very often hear the expression, “I
need glasses.” This is quite true in a
way, but the thing that is needed before
glasses is advice—competent, professional
advice—such as CLARK & CO. Optometrists
are able to give.


Glasses or lenses are only the means of
translating correct optical service into concrete usable form.
Always the best in quality
but never higher in price


e Age Relics Here Proved Valuable


e consent of the Philippine governP. O. van Stein Callenfels of Java
month in Manila studying the archeection of Professor H. Otley Beyer,
ologist and anthropologist, of the
of the Philippines, whose paper
he third meeting of the Panpacific
Congress in Tokio in 1926 revealed
t time to archeologists generally that
been a stone age in the Philippines.
Dr. Beyer were afterward published
zine under the title Man Tracks
Spines Ten Thousand Years
k has resulted in material revision
acerning the antiquity of human


habitation of the islands, and likewise the antiquity of their civilization.
As Dr. Beyer publishes very little, the work
as yet being inadequately provided for, when
those who are pursuing similar research in
neighboring countries wish to know what is
going on here, and how much has been discovered
and verified, they simply have to come and see.
It is this situation which prompted Dr. Callensfels’s visit, but he is greatly desirous, as he
said in the interview had with him, of there being
established here a prehistoric research entity
affording opportunity for the regular publication of data and the systematic and convenient
study of collections of archeological material.


“This year,” he said, "the panpaci.
ence will be held in Batavia, in May.
hope that three years from now it ma,
in Manila.”
Every reading man knows that ar
is of major importance as news; the n
which would come of a conference in
would attract to the city for that oco
number of correspondents of national rtheir respective countries, and would be
value to the islands.
These scholars who espouse researc
human antiquities, following the injunctio
the proper study of mankind is man, nev
of turning up some fact of peculiar and g
interest, however brief one’s conversation
them may be. Thus Dr. Callensfels fe
discoursing on a mighty Malayan mari
state that flourished from about 600 A. I
1200 A. D. Its capital was Cri Widjaya, 1
what is now Palembang, on the coast of
matra at the tail-end of the Malacca stra
It controlled the straits, and levied on the co
merce between Persia and India and southe
China, the result being that merchants settl.
at the capital, which became a great emporiu
and a magnificent city adorned with schoo
and a university.
Scholars gravitated to Cri Widjaya, just a:
they more anciently did to Memphis, to Alexandria and Athens; just as they now go to Oxford
and the London museum, Harvard, Heidelberg
and the Sorbonne. China had embraced Bu
dhism; there were constant pilgrimages to ti
shrines of the faith in India, and Chinese schola
stopped by the way at Cri Widjaya to acquire
knowledge of Hindu and, more essential stil
of Sanskrit. They finally took back with then
to China the books of the Buddha, and made thi
translations which, retranslated, serve the
modern world.
Who thinks Raffles had an original idea in his
dream of founding Singapore, must think again;
Cri Widjaya, just across the channel, had risen
and waxed strong, and fallen into a faint memory
six centuries before Raffles broke ground at
Singapore. Her fall was due to religious conservatism. Mohammedanism kept spreading,


HE WIMIEEMRESSOf TETClriO


EMPRESS OF FRANCE
RESS OF ASIA
EMPRESS OF RUSSIA
16900 tons
16800 tons
18400 tons
To CANADA, UNITED STATES and EUROPE


QUICKEST TIME ACROSS THE PACIFIC


DIAN PACIFIC STEAMSHIPS
MANILA, P. I.


MENTS PLEASE MENTION   


1929


  OF


EVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
By RICHARD E. SHAW
anager International Banking Corporation


Throughout the entire month of December
the selling rate for U.S.S
TT held steady at
1-1,85 premium except
for occasional cuts made
by banks in order to
strengthen their current
cash positions. Buying
rates fluctuated between
3,45 premium and
5,8% premium for December delivery, with
an 1,'8 cent lower quoted
for January settlements.
The undertone of the
Mmarket was firm at the
close.
Purchases of telegraphic transfers from the
Insular Treasury since last report have been as


follows:
Week ending November 24th. .. . .U.S.$ 350,000
Week enling December 1st..
100,000
Week auding December 8th
300,000
*k OMding Decerbeer '5an
Nil


U.S.$ 750,000
The Sterling market nas been featureless
ith rates unchanged from last month, i.e.,
ellers of TT a: 2. -3.8 to2. 7416 and general
uyers at 2,-9 16.
The New York-London cross-rate closed at
185-3432 on November 30th, remained at a
low of 485-1/16 from the third to the sixth of
December, inclusive, touched a high of 485-548
on December 19 and closed on December 29
at 485-348.
London bar silver was quoted at 26-9/16
ready and 26-548 forward on November 30,
remained unchanged on December 1, which
was the high for the month, dropped to a low
of 26-3416 ready and 26-5/16 forward on December 17 and December 21 and closed on
December 29 at 26-7/16 ready and 26-172
forward.
New York bar silver closed at 57-344 on
November 30, rose to a high of 57-748 on December 1, dropped to a low of 56-748 on December 10 and on the last business day of the
month was quoted at 57-348
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on December 29th: Paris,
12.40; Madrid, 166-144; Singapore, 116; Japan,
93-172; Shanghai, 77; Hongkong, 101-344;
India, 134-144; Java, 122-172.
UNIVERSAL BATTERIES
P26.50


One Year Guarantee


CARO ELECTRICAL SERVICE
Tel. 5-69-44
110 P. Faura


RAIL COMMODITY MOVEMENTS
By M. D. ROYER
Traffic Manager, Manila Railroad Company


The following commodities were received in
Manila, November 26, 1928, to December 25,
1928, both inclusive, via Manila Railroad:
1928
December
November


113,750
Rice, cavans.....
331,744
Sugar, piculs...........
3,720
Tobacco, bales..........
219,900
Copra, piculs..... . . . .. .
Coconuts............... 1,147,300
234,900
Lumber, B.F...........
13,120
Desiccated coconuts, cases


90,250
173,040
6,840
221,600
2,687,300
483,300
18,696


REAL ESTATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition


ceeded the business done in
is encouraging, especially
that Real Estate offers an in
perity, or lack of it, uned
other single commodity, ar
reliability, even in the Un
well-recognized steel index.


1928 was by far the
best year since 1920,
which was the last year
of the postwar boom.
It will be noted that
after the decided drop
in 1921, Manila real
estate sales gradually
rose each year until
1926 and 1927 when
considerable ground was
lost. That 1928 not
only recovered from the
slump of the two previous years but ex

Santa Cruz...........
Binondo........... . .
San Nicolas..........
Tondo........... . . . .
Sampaloc............
San Miguel..........
Intramuros...........
Ermita.......... . . . . .
Malate......... . . . . . .
Paco.............. . ..
Santa Ana........ . . .
Pandacan..... 2
Quiapo........... . . . .
₱1,6


1919


1920


1921


1


January............


......... ₱ 2,245,966


₱ 1,796,733


₱ 1,631,492


₱ 1,2


February............


2,047,354



1,637,883


492,768


65


March........ . . . . . .


1,428,242



1,142,594


855,620


690


April........ . . . . . . .


1,556,352
*


1,535,135


401,997


70


May....... . . . . . . . .


1,256,183
*


1,004,946


466,258


69-


June........ . . . . . . .


2,136,515



1,609,212


499,569


66


July............ ..


1,103,369



882,695


480,105


1,02.


August......... . . ..


2,357,558



1,886,047


558,491


69:


September..........


1,651,737



1,321,489


1,022,093


1,04(


October............ . . . . . . . . . 1,483,342


1,186,673


857,446


812


November...........


1,004,831



803,865


475,699


746


December..........


......... 3,588,123


2,870,499


486,321


1,071,


Yearly Totals.......


..... P21,859,572


₱17,677,811


P


8,227,859


₱10,082,08


1924


1925


1925


1927


January........... . . . . .


....₱ 1,879,030


₱ 883,818


P


1,128,773


₱ 1,215,5:


February............ . . .


840,673



972,578


919,150


594,903


March........ . . . . . . . . .


1,137,176



1,673,455


1,373,079


1,733,105


April......... . . . . . . . . . .


689,218



1,196,751


1,298,722


673,760


May......... . . . . . . . . . .


791,276
*   


1,284,940


749,975


600,547


June....... . . . . . . . . . ... .


868,874



749,122


738,503


1,045,121


July.............. . . . ..


975,450
* *4


1,635,527


1,843,930


894,39*


August......... . . . . . . . .


795,260
*


1,295,260


585,519


649,66


September.......... . . . .


1,652,377
 


1,164,819


1,167,921


722,04


October.......... . . . . . .


1,543,486
*


2,358,825


752,130


1,311,38


November............. .


1,092,858
 


1,292,416


1,480,889


1,154,1


December........... . . .


773,183
** *


897,231


672,075


1,400,5


Yearly Totals......


..... ₱13,038,861


₱15,404,742


₱12,710,666


₱11,995,


Philippine Trust Compa
COMMERCIAL AND SAVINGS BANK


Offers every Banking and Trust convenience. Genuinely
conservative Banking is our aim, and we emphasize the
Business -Building Service we extend to our Depositorg
Frequently we are able to put our customers in possessay
of facts that bring them profit or save the n loss
4% per Annum on Savings Accounts
Interest on Fixed Deposits upon Request
We would be glad to meet you personally and talk ove
your banking requirements.


We serve as:
Trustees
Financial Agents Transfer Agents
Guardians Executors
Receivers
Registrars
Administrators Attorneys-in-fact
Depository for Securities
Rendering a specialized service in the
management and settlement of estates, etc.


Wm. T. Ne
Monte de PicuPlaza Goiti—N
P. O. Box 1
Tel. 2-12-


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN C


AL AIVE


BER OF COMMEKOE JOURNAL


ganua


, District in Manila: Its Founding


There is perhaps scarcely a reader of this
magazine who is entirely indifferent to the
history of Ermita, one
of modern Manila’s
principal residential districts, which is now
becoming as well an
important shopping and
apartment-house district. Ermita 270 years
ago was about what the
district immediately
south of it, Malate,
was when the American
occupation occurred in
1898; that is, it was a district of swamps through
ams meandered to the bay,
poasted elevation, of less than
of the constant filling of the
ersion of them into lots for
g so shallow, wherever any
ning over of the soil occurs,
delve with the certainty of
the school garden of Ermita,
many ancient artifacts and
nens have been recovered—
nem up with their hoes. Many
le very early history of Manila
ed by these specimens, and
ounded in 1662 as a place of
ne special defenders of Manila
em the Moluccas by order of
arique de Lara, then governor
neral of the islands. It was not
rmita (a name derived somewhat
hermitage established there), but
originally as Bagumbayan, the
e for new town; and the street
it toward Manila proper became


known as calle Bagumbayan, which, having
been built into one the city’s best and broadest
avenues, is now calle P. Burgos.
Padre Burgos, a Filipino, was one of the
secular priests whose tribulations are involved
in the revolutionary period which preceded the
American occupation. Held to be a martyr
to the cause, the street is his memorial.
The people who had come up from the Moluccas in response to de Lara’s call were Malays,
as the people of the Philippines are, who were
known as Mardicas, from the similar Sanskrit
word maharddhika, denoting "men who had
certain privileges on account of their having
adopted the Christian faith.” The Spanish
had a presidio and Jesuit mission at Ternate,
an island off the west coast of Halmahera, in
the Moluccas. De Lara ordered the abandonment of the various presidios (in Mindanao,
Palawan, Ternate, and elsewhere) and the
concentration of all Spaniards in Manila for the
urgent defense of the city. This he did in vain
defiance, though it proved fortuitously otherwise, of the Chinese corsair Koxinga who, having
driven the Dutch out of Formosa and established
an upstart empire there, sent an embassador
to Manila and demanded the submission of the
colony.
Upon de Lara’s refusal, he prepared to invade
and conquer the islands; only his death, which
may have been caused by poison, since he was
a brutal tyrant, prevented his certain triumph,
but fate thus intervened for the colony’s salvation. China herself had cowed abjectly
before him, and by imperial edict her towns along
the coast, which he had repeatedly ravished,
were moved inland to their present sites. When
he died he was by way of making himself the
master of the East, whose boldest warriors
joined him in hordes.
Who will go with us to Manila to oppose this
wretch?” asked the Jesuits at Ternate of their
neophytes.
Hundreds willingly responded, and were


brought along with the missionaries
patron saint of their church, the Holy
Ternate. These Mardican warriors 1
mediately encamped in Bagumbayan, a
where, had Koxinga actually attacke
would have been the first line of defens
all attacks on Manila from the sea are fro
direction, the shore north of the river be
shallow and shelving for the convenient 1
of troops. But with the death of Koxing
expedition was abandoned, though the
remained terrorized with dreadful expecta
for a long time before it learned of its prov
tial deliverance.
Meantime the Mardican camp becam
bamboo village. The Spaniards, their pro
tors, having definitely abandoned the Moluc
the Mardicans were doubtful of their fate un
the aggressive Protestant Dutch and preferi
to remain on in the Philippines in the enjoyme
of their Catholicism. But around them
Bagumbayan (Ermita) were the native Tag
logs, with whom they quarrelled so incessantl
that they made no little trouble for the govekn
ment; and their loyalty recommended them to
the public service. They were therefore removed
to a reservation on the shore of Cavite opposite
Corregidor, where they founded the village of
Ternate, named for their native island in the
Moluccas. For a long time this village was a
barrio of the neighboring town of Maragondon,
but it was later erected into an inder en
municipality. Contingents of the Mard
were also stationed on Corregidor, where, u
signal fires, they apprieed Manila of the :
proach of ships and the presumed national.
and intention of these vessels.
Thus they heralded the arrival of many
galleon with the silver subsidy from Mexico anc
the payment for cargoes exported, and they
notified Cavite of incoming fleets of junks from
China and southern Asia, or of Moro pirates
in the offing. It was their particular job, throughout the century of the Moro, to give timely
warning when suspicious craft were sighted.
In Ternate their descendants are living today,
one distinguishing physical feature being their


A! The
AM A
S
A
rounger

Gor

4
Generation



2
all show a decided
SEAR BBAND!
preference for the
E
world-famous
var Ban MAMA
they make a wise choice, for it contains all the
nts which are so essential for sturdy growth
Yorous health of the infant—minerals from
he bones and teeth are made—elements
produce strong muscles—and above all,
se valuablevitamines whichward off disease.

”
Insist on Bear Brand!


Luzon Stevedoring
CO., Ino.


Lightering, Marine Contractors
Towboats, Launches, Waterboats
Shipbuilders and Provisions


SIMMIE & GRILK
Phone 2-16-61
Port Area


NTS PLEASE MENTION   OURNG


ALIMOT


CHAMDER OF COMMERCE JOURN AL


January, 1929


utions of Manila. Until the
nedied, Welfareville will be de1 important detail of its work.
o say that Welfareville is not a
institution; for it surely is that.
it when the girls grow up they go
seemingly this is usually as
eme are adopted, when it is ast the families applying for them
f the charge. Other expedients
to, but everything put together
pare with the opportunities these
lave in middle-class and upper
mes, if their parents were living
been their good fortune; and it is
Iwhathit ought to be. Even at
ociety is penalizing these girls for
orphanage. Or, in another way,
y is liberal, it takes much charity
enough.
ver the office door proclaims that
was founded December 3, 1925.
the midst of Leonard Wood’s terin
general. Welfareville has bettered
asurably for the wards of the gond for delinquent boys. It is a
the humanitarianism that adorned
career of General Wood. But the
the place was, of course, the advent
a sovereignty here. The American
kes charity and education state
1 in this as well as other important
ers from the Spanish procedure
ives such responsibilities chiefly


upon the subject and the Church. Progressing
from war and insurrection, the American scheme
brought Dr. Fabella to the fore and finally
maintained him on a liberal allowance during
the several years devoted to a study of welfare
work in the United States. Then it returned
him to Manila and created, by edict of the
legislature, the welfare commissioner’s job for
him. It did similarly for his associates, and out
of all this came Welfareville—competently
staffed, and quite liberally provided for in the
appropriations. Out on the green hills of San
Felipe Neri rises the little village, one of great
hopes and justifiable expectations. On the occasion written of, the honor delinquents were erecting a bandstand. Every girl big enough to ply a
needle or bend wire and rattan and paste paper
was busy making things for Christmas.
There is a band, and it makes gladsome and
stirring music. There are Boy Scouts, and
perhaps a chapter of Campfire Girls. There
is surety, among 144 boys and girls, that they
shall escape the contamination of their leprous
parents. Welfareville is, in all its departments,
a laudable beginning. Far beyond it, crowning
other hills, are the first buildings of the new
insular insane aslyum, for whichP200,000 is
next year’s allotment. Some patients are
already there, removed from San Lazaro; and
soon San Lazaro will be keeping only to its
stricter and proper function, that of a hospital
for sufferers from contagious disease. Charity
takes on system, subsists on taxes and becomes
practical.


le Tetuan: Its Chinese Industries
By GERTRUDE BINDER


II the wants of life can be satisufactory, a sugar refinery, a
urniture maker’s workshopled together in the one short
an whose single row of build1. Shops and factories are
and dim. Stock and raw
nged with meticulous orderliness
Hidden away on upper floors


or behind the barrels of molasses, sacks of rice
or cans of oil are the beds and living quarters
of the Chinese craftsmen and traders who have
made a center of anachronistic handicraft and
home industry on this side street just a step
removed from Manila’s progressive modern
business district.
There is no large scale wholesale business here.
General stores, with more varieties of stock than


Popular Member


Manila's Carnival and
Industrial Fair:
January 26 to
February 10


one wou 1 believe it possible to put into the
cubbies which they occupy, take up most of the
space. There is one at the very beginning of the
street. It has a lunch counter from which cakes,
bread and poisonous-looking liquids are eaten
and drunk by neighboring workmen with tirne to
kill or hunger pangs to still. On the shelves
behind and along the walls beside the counter are
baskets of rice, bunches of bananas, sacks of
chicken and horse feed, tins of canned goods from
America, boxes of biscuits from China and
bottles of Philippine soda water. Small lots
of sandals, tobacco, pipes and toys are offered
to those whose needs are not concerned with
nourishment. Of most other trades calle Tetuan
has single examples, but replicas of this store
are separated from each other by only a few
doors.
There are other specialized stores. One sells
crude molasses and finely-ground fodder to be
mixed into a mash for horses, another has gunny
sacks. Two are gleamingly up-to-date, one
with cans of American gasoline and petroleum
and the other with electric lamp shades. The
most curious of all looks as though it is divided
into two branches. It occupies two large rooms
open to the street and at least one other, with
no outer opening, where goods are stored. On
one side of the part that customers enter there
are boxes of unhusked rice and dried corn for
chicken feed and ceiling-high heaps of sacks full
of polished rice. The other side has a corner
where horse fodder is displayed; all the rest of
its space is filled with coconuts and coconut
husks. The nuts sell for four or five centavos
each. They are used as food. The husks are
more valuable. They are put up in bundles
worth twelve centavos each. Bibinka makers
buy them for fuel. The bibinka is a cake very
like a pancake that is cooked on street corners
during breakfast hours. Everywhere, in Manila
and in provincial towns, little open fires light
up the roads just before dawn commences, and
keep burning until even the laziest folks are sure
to have put away all thoughts of breakfast.
The flour, sugar and water batter of which
bibinkas are made is poured on one banana
leaf and covered with another. Then it is
placed between sheets of tin and fires of coconut
husks lighted above and below it. The vender
knows just when it is done enough and she takes
it away from the fire, or rather, the fire away


WIOSI GOOO CiuDs


BEAIBONS
SICHWHISN

They will gladly serve
you if you will take
the slight trouble to
ASK FOR IT
STREIFF,Inc.
butors


Tel. 2-39-36


Brewed By


SAN MIGUEL BREWERY


PLEASE MENTION 


Welfareville: A Leonard Wood Memorial


One drives out through San Juan del Monte
and turns constantly toward the right and San
Felipe Neri, along the river, until he confronts
a guarded gate where the boys on duty in khaki
uniforms take note that his collar has been
laundered and allow him to pass into the grounds,
where a signboard at a crossroads informs him,
You are now in Welfareville. Here the
office building can be seen and is presently
reached. One learns that the institution is a
governmental one, that it is devoted to the
reform of delinquent boys and the rearing of
orphan boys and girls and the children born
clean to leper parents isolated on Culion, the
leper island. On the hillsides one beholds
spacious buildings, well constructed and of good
material: some are dormitories, some are classrooms, some are shops.
Skirting the reservation are the properties
of several of the officials of the institution,
residences they have built on lots on the bordering
street. These are good residences, and the
arrangement keeps the officials on call at all
hours. Rearing orphans and training delinquents by the hundreds isn’t something that
conforms to office hours. There are 713 delinquent boys at Welfareville, 249 orphans, 144
Culion children, and 118 employes. The delinquent boys are building the roads, not all as
yet completed, improving the grounds and
putting up many of the buildings.
Few if any of the boys are incorrigible.
Under the rigorous Spanish criminal code, still
the law of the islands, it is not a bit hard to
become a delinquent boy. In making the rounds
of the dormitories and shops set apart behind
high barbed-wire fences and more of those guarded
gates, several of the boys were questioned.
Here are the results:
I
“My Chinese master said I stole money, but
they did not find even one centavo."
Did you steal money?"
"No."


OX Y GEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure


HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hydrogen
99.8% pure


ACEIYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes


WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops


BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
Electric Storage Batteries


Phiippine Acetylene Go.
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.


II
“I stole.”
"What?”
“Two coconuts.”


III
“I hugged the girls.”
IV
“My friend whom I had known as a chauffeur
in Negros met me in the market at Iloilo and
told me to take away a basket of eggs that


IS THERE A SANTA CLAUS?
When our daughter, nine, confronted us with this question at
yuletide, we did not have at hand
the classic rejoinder written long
ago by an editor of the old and
reputable New York Sun; but it
comes to us now from the Minnao Herald, so we reproduce it in
order that all readers may have it
in their files. William Allen White
has reprinted it every year, since its
original appearance, in his Emporia
Gazette. The piece is a world classic, addressed to mankind regardless of creed and nationality.—ED.
Once a little girl wrote this letter to
the editor of the New York Sun:
Dear Editor:
“I am 8 years old. Some of my
friends say that there is no Santa Claus.
Papa says, 'If you see it in the Sun, it’s
so.' Please tell me the truth. Is there
a Santa Claus?
“VIRGINIA C. HANLON.”
And the editor of the New York Sun
made this reply to Virginia and to all
true believers everywhere:
Virginia:
“Your little friends are wrong. They
have been affected by the skepticism of
a skeptical age. They will not believe
except they see.
"Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa
Claus. He exists as certainly as love
and generosity and devotion exist, and
you know that they abound and give
to your life its highest beauty and joy.
Alas! how dreary would be the world
if there were no Santa Claus. It would
be as dreary as if there were no Virginia.
There would be no childlike faith then,
no poetry, no romance to make tolerable this existence. We should have no
enjoyment except in sense and sight.
The eternal light with which childhood
fills the world would be extinguished.
"You might get your papa to hire men
to watch all the chimneys on Christmas
Eve to catch Santa Claus, but even if
they did not see Santa Claus coming
down, what would that prove? Nobody sees Santa Claus. The most real
things in the world are those that
neither children nor men ever see. Nobody can conceive or imagine all the
wonders that are unseen and unseeable
in the world. You may tear apart the
baby’s rattle and see what makes the
noise inside, but there is a veil covering
the unseen world which not the strongest that ever lived could ever tear apart.
Only faith, fancy, poetry, love and
romance can put aside that curtain and
view the picture—the supernal beauty
and glory beyond. Is it all real? Ah,
Virginia, in all this world there is nothing
so real and abiding.
“No Santa Claus! Thank God, he
lives, and he lives forever. A thousand
years from now, Virginia—nay, ten
times 10,000 years from now—he will
continue to make glad the heart of
childhood.”


belonged to a man whom he said
he would yoke. I took the
arrested me. The judge sent me
“They said I killed a man."
"Did you?”
“No.” (He didn’t look as if
man, but youth yields to fits of
in the Philippines).


VI
“They said I stole."
"What?”
“A peso and a half."
“Did you?”
“Yes.
Another, from Cabanatuan
had been really bad and stole
he was sent to Welfareville on
sentence. The welfare com
associates advocate a juvenil
the patent abuses of the presen
ing Welfareville with more
most committed nothing
misdemeanors than with the
The juvenile court seems n
boys, 239 are from Manila;
94; and Occidental Negros 1
industrial centers furnish the
The boys are segregated
cording to their conduct and
commitment: honor boys,
looking toward the honor ro
99; probationers, 209. T
kitchen at Welfareville; gr
fish and vegetables were beil
boys’ appearance indicated
simple but substantial me
number of either delinquents
the infirmary, where a few
teeth gone over.
But Jimmie was there, lyi
in the corner, where a kino
sently covered him with a li
the brisk breeze off the hili
to be everyone’s instant con
came on him. He had been
his emaciated body was still
eyes were dull and glared.
up for three pennies, then tu
blankly at the wall agair
be done for Jimmie. P
insane asylum. "His fatwa
soldier,” they said.
But Jimmie is not neglect
nature that has given him so litBack to the delinquents.
They are taught trades
manufacture of wicker f
carpentering, etc., until the -.
or the attainment of their
them. At least some of thel
living at these trades when t
life again. All those who w
mitted they were getting go
good training. They also h
classes in school and advan
grade; some, when they leave,
of high school. The regimen
work, half a day for study anc
Of course the orphans and th
are not behind the barbed-wi
enjoy the utmost freedom, a
patible with institutional life; th
to go about anywhere and their
models of cleanliness and neati
have individual little cupboards
beds, stacked full of clean dre
It seems to be a matter of :
them. If any charitable pe
wishes to do so, let a phono
given to the girls of Welfar
dormitory ph
They likewi
has money
then let "
It is e
than
bel:



IN. RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERIC


muli for human progress.
Thanks to the principle of individual liberty
(-is now well settled that even with the original
sin as our inheritance, a person is guided in the
majority of cases by the light of his own conscience, and that is is possible to create by means
of education sufficient internal restraints which
shall serve as his safeguard and the safeguard of
others. Under the influence of such an enlightened conscience a person may be left alone to act
in accordance with his own good impulses,
without the necessity of subjecting him to a
reign of fear which has characterized and which
still characterizes all systems of religion and
government. ) Experiments performed with prisoners and criminals conditionally freed on parole
and the betterment of conduct through industrial and agricultural work in the modern penitenciaries have produced sufficient evidences
that human nature even in its state of degradation, still preserves the divine spark of intelligence and good will by which it knows how to
appreciate acts of kindness and to respond to
trust reposed in it.
We must produce a state of culture which
gives the most complete freedom to the individual
and at the same time creates ample inhibition
within himself to avoid what is bad. As long
as the restrictions are from without and proceed
from fear of punishment either in this or in th
other life, they will not strengthen in the
science the sense of responsibility and
imbue the individual not with the
positive good but with the idconsequences of punishmlittle to the individnthe moral and pa
discovered.?
ver
nultiplv
within
pettggravation
encouragement
Astitutions, and the
aypocrisy which is the
ue desire to hide infractions
ravesty of it all!
-pire to achieve a morality
 less formalistic and less
rder to attain this, it is
 2. our ideas and conceptions
 amamitted to us for centuries,
S Y *
 our effort. We are sub" geg mder a t ent of hypocrisies and congrotiamali as
-h does not permit us to
nistinguish between good and bad conduct.
This is the resultant effect of our education which
is based on fear and which makes us slaves to
appearances rather than to the substance and
spirit of actions.
There is a place in all this for constructive
riticism and an original made of thinking.
ndoubtedly ancient formulas and precepts
ave had a great value and it is for this reason
at they served to educate our past generations.
S their value for the present and the future
ust be judged only in so far as they respond
o the actual demands of society, to the conditions of the times, to the ideals and aspirations
of the present generation. In so far as they are
not in accord with these, subserviency to them
is questionable. There is nothing permanent
and unchangeable in this life inasmuch as life is a


es
versi.
mnent e
ysicians,
1,593 are
A
in law.
corroborates
Perez, chief of t
tion, of our educ.
‘In the
figures.
enrolled 134 stude
fishing fleets in Manil.
IN NSPONDING


y careers of Imperial
business, 9,967; govnool teachers 4,963;
1,152. In Waseda
rce and only 247
f Rizal avenue
ys Gilbert S.
ational educasends in the
sheries are
odores of
waters.”


EMENT


"MR. ALI
(Continued fra
plantations, where they
families, they stayed at
time sleeping off the bo
one of them had playe
that he did not even g
out. He would fix
fellow would enjoy
remaining provisio'
the oil stove. S
renewed her waili
He had forgotte"
Just as he st
the utter stilln
the other roon
sob. Amazec
of the compa
sound like
sob from t
with one )
door. W
stupefiec
On his a

mestizo


le door,
hour came, . n
sigh, then a stifled
cood in the middle
ntly. That did not
Kittredge. Another
another. Mr. Alloss,
ver and tore open the
ooted him to the floor,
a young Filipino


woman, weeping; the black
had tumbled about her shou
heard him, apparently, for sla
He looked at her, dumbfo'
thing seemed desperate w
there had been women
. Alloss never claimed to be a saint. But iione
dever acted like this. He strode over, touched
er on the shoulder, and she sprang up, looking
at him wildly.
“Oh, Mr. Alloss! Mr. Alloss!” She was wringing her hands in distracted appeal to him.
What is it, girlie, what is it? What can I
do?” he said gently, very much nonplussed.
She was not more than sixteen, if she was
that, a bud, a delightful promise of a woman,
exquisite in her own Malayan way, with big
black eves in the satiny smoothness of her olive
face. Mr. Alloss was a judge of such beauty.
With a very tender gesture, taking her young
hands into his freckled ones, he made her sit
down on the locker again. He had never seen
her before, so she could not belong to this barrio.
'What is it, pobrecita?” he asked, his voice


pillaratlloMtrc.


In our Machinery display rooms, Pacific Bldg.
A NEW size of Cate rpillar that combines all the famed
Caterpillar fe es of power, traction and dependability in a sctor—that’s the new Ten.


Rugged simplition against dust and dirt
easy to
aintain—surprisingly low
operatir
s.


On the famoy
th
Co


ad maintenance—earth
A and municipal work—
and opportunity for it to
r, Quicker, Cheaper.
w Caterpillar Ten. Let us
ave men, money and minutes.


nmercial Company


"HE


 F JOURNAL


exactly of this world, it is necessary to understand first this world in order to see Him in His
Kingdom.
The idea of God is not denied by the modern
world. Neither does it pretend to nurse the
germs of impiety and atheism within the cloisters
of its schools and colleges. The idea of God
persists and will persist, but the form of worshipping Him and the knowledge of His precepts
and of our duties towards Him will change with
effhranced information and a better and closer
understanding of the workings of Nature and
Man: We will no longer consider it a sacrilege
to—drive tunnels through the mountains, to
excavate the earth for mines, to reclaim large
tracts of marshy land and build splendid cities
on them, to utilize electricity for making day of
night, to explore the secrets of the atmosphere
by means of balloons and airplanes, and to find
out in workshops and laboratories new combinations of substances and elements to gratify
the multitudinous needs of civilization. It will
no longer be our supreme standard of virtue
and perfection to isolate ourselves from the rest
of the world in order to avoid the temptations
nor to consider the flesh as an abominable and
forbidden thing; nor marriage as an institution
capable of maintaining the conjugal tie in spite
of the absence of love and material or mental and
spiritual contact between the spouses; nor that
poverty and penury, caused by our own neglect
and indolence, constitute a privileged status
that deserves the sympathy and help of the
whole world; nor that morality depends upon
the observance of a regular external conduct although the motives and designs within are
responsible. But religion and morality will be
permanent and lasting forms, surviving all those
changes in beliefs and worship, and they will
cling to the human conscience with a tenacity
that cannot be obliterated even by the fallacies
and denials of the most obdurate and cynical.
Notwithstanding the mental and moral gap
that separates the Middle Ages from our davs,
it cannot be said that the restraints of morality
and religion have diminished in the ways of the
modern man. ,For instance, the fundamental
principle of all morality and religion resolves
ditself into charity. ¡Charitable organizations
and institutions of beneficence are growing both
in number and quality and their influence is
daily at work in the modern world. (The asylums
and hospitals which, in the past, were exclusively
in the hands of ecclesiastics and other religious
bodies have increased with the help given by the
government and private institutions to succor
and alleviate human suffering. Philanthropy for
scientific research, museums of arts and other
enlightening influences have never been as extensive and abundant as in our days. It may be
that the new era of greater liberty, of individual
religion, of free criticism, and of scientific scrutiny has brought simultaneously with it new evils
and wrongs; but in general human sentiment has
been enriched and softened, and even in the most
heinous crimes of man, like slavery and war,
treatment of the vanquished, the prisoner and
the slave, has been very much humanized.
What is happening in our country is a replica
of that which obtains in the rest of the world.
The spirit of revolt and restlessness which has
dominated youth, and their challenge to established norms of conduct and of ancient practices
are the product-of the evolution which is slowly
but surely modifying the old society, lending it
added worth and new tendencies. The trend
of humanity has always been for the better, and
this slow and imperceptible onward march
towards new conditions is generally accompanied
by new evils and sufferings which incite man to
struggle and to find new avenues for a better
life and wiser course of action.
The faithleseness-arc-immorality with which
youth of today has been indicted and the addiction to luxury, comfort, and pleasure are the
Tesults ofi a new readjustment which is taking
ace, noitwithstanding denunciations to the
ntrary, ibetween the old order of things in clash
th the itendencies and worth of a new order.


The Revolt of Y outh
By RAFAEL PALMA,
President, University of the Phili ppines
(Continued from page 5)


Not only thee young, but also people of maturer
age, who w ere educated under the traditional
authority o f the Church, are suffering the effects of this sotrial readjustment and are gradually changing therr ideas and conduct and are
feeling a revolt again st old norms and precepts.
There is no reason to exaggerate the evils of
the present nor fear trhat the religious and moral
principles that we co nsider as the basis of our
society suffer eclipse simply because outwardly
man shows less inclination to observe the customs
and habits of former epoichs. The old teachers
and those of us who hav,2 been educated under
them believe that we have a monopoly of truth,
when in reality, truth is a Jiniversal patrimony
available to all, and we are prone to consider as
immoral and iniquitous anyth ing that does not
conform to our beliefs, which’ are themselves
second-hand information impart ed to us by our
parents and grandparents who a cepted them.
But life has to follow its course, insensible to our
preachings and admonitions, and unless we
desire to see life as it is and not as we dlesire it to
be, our idealism and aspirations will be s hattered
to pieces when the inevitable clash with the rocks
of reality comes.
As long as the agencies established to l rotect
Religion and Morality work together to wvipe
out the immorality and the wickedness of man,
I expect that the moral and religious ideals in
our country will be maintained alive. In fact,
our churches are not deserted on Sundays and
on holidays and all the traditions and practices
of the Christian religion still exert a strong influence on the mind of our people. But we need
new ideas and new conceptions which can betterl
respond to the needs of the day, to the new
conscience which has been produced by the
industrial progress and the economic wonders
of our age. What is lacking is a new spiritual
guidance which is in consonance with life and
which knows how to solve our actual problems
and not the problems of the past. If there is a
loosening of the spiritual hold that the Church
once exercised over the educated man, this ig


OXYGEN
Compressed
Oxygen
99.5% pure


HYDROGEN
Compressed
Hydrogen
99.8% pure
ACETYLENE
Dissolved
Acetylene for
all purposes
WELDING
Fully Equipped Oxy-Acetylene Welding Shops
BATTERIES
Prest-O-Lite
Electric Storage Batteries


Philiopine Acstylene Co.
281 CALLE CRISTOBAL, PACO
MANILA, P. I.


RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AM


JACOD LEY Y
PHILIPPINE HATS
Buntals
Bamboos
Calasiaos
Balibuntals
Correspondence Solicited
227 Calle David
Manila, P. I.
Cable Address: “TEXTILES”


due to the conservatism and reluctance of the
Church to accept new doctrines and truths
We do not take into consideration that the
modern man is a product of a long intellectual
evolution, and we want to govern him with the
same moral and religious code which he knew
in his infancy and which was good for him then
in his status as an infant but not now as an adult.)
Is it any wonder that the efforts of the government and of the church to control licentiousnes
and incontinence meet with disappointment?
Our moral and religious code cannot be the same
as the one believed in by our grandfathers when
the industrial machine, the telephone, the
moving picture, the automobile, the aeroplane,
the radio and uhe many other inventions and devises which have served to change radically
human relationships and which have opened
vast avenues for good as well as for evil, were
still unknown. I do not sec how we can exr
tricate ourselves frem this age and go back.
several centuries to
ideas and points of
It is a Utopia.
forge ahead and shchanges that we wit
augury that we chan
do not submit thems
hindrances which the
and which we in tu
progeny as a legac
bring originality into their thougues anaand acquire new experiences which have been
denied us. After all, the youths of today will
be the citizens of tomorrow, and they have the
right to remodel the things which they find out
of place or out of step with the times. In thi
country we are alarmed by any novelty, to suel
an extent that recently certain ladies in one o
the cities in the South have considered a certai
work of art consisting of marble statues of nake
women as an offense against modesty. I respethe feeling which has given rise to the indignat
and protest of our women, but I think it is :
gross injustice to attribute to the imagination
of the public such perversity that it can no longer
gaze upon nude statues without reflecting upon
the modesty of womanhood. Or, is the modesty
of our women so sensitive and fragile that it
cannot resist the mute assault of some lifeless
images made of stone? Our youth ought to find
the truth above the conventionalism and the
cowardice of our forbears, and endoaver to be hetter morally and less hypocritical. We are guilty
of hiding much wrong-doing and shamefulness
under the old system by not deviatin g from the
rut which has been followed by our grandfathers,
by beeping the appearance of a respectable morality without the respectability of truth and sincer.
ity. It is high time that our young people thinfor themselves and not accept as final and pen
fect the body of fossilized thoughts and ides
which we have accepted without due examinatic
and without critical analysis.. Nothing is perfe,
and final in this life because there is always some
thing beyond which on account of our natural,
imitations we cannot reach. KThe teacher who
lvocates that youth has no moral alternative
to submit to the discipline whicb has been
lesire to
sed by its elde  o
its own ci. ..
its own

E "I
powerful
rations, depi

ROF CAM
URNAL


deep was the despair of his enen. o
they prepared for their journey back
to the island of Rota.
“Ucudo and his lovely bride lived


—ppily ever safter, establishing the
community north of Dededo on the
island of Guam which is known as AsUcudo even to this day


INJRMATION FI
INVESTORS


Origins of the Roman Catholic Church
GIBBON—(Continued from Ma ch)


II. The writings of Cicero represent in the
most lively colors the ignorance, the errors, and
the uncertainty of the ancient philosophers with
regard to the immortality of the soul. When
they are desirous of arming their disciples against
the fear of death, they inculcate, as an obvious
though melancholy position, that the fatal stroke


of our dissolution releases us from the calamities
of life; and that those can no longer suffer, who
no longer exist. Yet there were a few sages of
Greece and Rome who had conceived a more
exalted, and, in some respects, a juster idea of
human nature, though it must be confessed that,
in the sublime inquiry, their reason had been
often guided by their imagination, and that their
imagination had been prompted by their vanity.
When they viewed with complacency the extent
of their own mental powers, when they exercised
the various faculties of memory, of fancy, and
of judgment, in the most profound speculations,
or the most important labors, and when they
reflected on the desire of fame, which transported
them into future ages, far beyond the bounds
of death and of the grave, they were unwilling
to confound themselves with the beasts of the
field, or to suppose that a being, for whose
dignity they entertained the most sincere admiration, could be limited to a spot of earth, and
to a few years of duration. With this favorable
prepossession they summoned to their aid the
science, or rather the language, of Metaphysics.


The
Philippine Guaranty Company,
Incorporated
(Accepted by all the Bureaus of the
Insular Government)
Executes bonds of all kinds for
Customs, Immigration and
Internal Revenue.
DOCUMENTS SURETYSHIPS
For Executors, Administrators,
Receivers, Guardians, etc.
We also write Fire and Marine Insurance
ow rates
iberal conditions
ocal investments
oans on real estate repayable
by monthly or quarterly instalments at low interest
Call or write for particulars
Room 403, Filipinas Bldg.
P. O. Box 128
Manila, P. I.


They soon aiscovereo that, as none of the properties of mecier will appiy to the operations of
the mind the tuman sow' must consequently be
a substane distinet from the body, pure, simple,
and sp aual, incapable of dissolution, and susceptible of a much nigher degree of virtue and
happiness after the release from its corporeal


prison. From these specious and noble principles the philosophers who trod in the footsteps
of Plato deduced a very unjustifiable conclusion, since they asserted, not only the future immortality, but the past eternity of the human
soul, which they were too apt to consider as a
portion of the infinite and self-existing spirit
which pervades and sustains the universe. A
doctrine thus removed beyond the senses and the
experience of mankind might serve to amuse the
leisure of a philosophic mind; or, in the silence
of solitude, it might sometimes impart a ray of
comfort to desponding virtue; but the faint
impression which had been received in the schools
was soon obliterated by the commerce and business of active life. We are sufficiently acquainted with the eminent persons who flourished in
the age of Cicero and of the first Caesars, with
their actions, their characters, and their inotives,
to be assured that their conduct in this life was
never regulated by any serious conviction of the
rewards or punishments of a future state. At
the bar and in the senate of Rome the ablest
orators were not apprehensive of giving offence
to their hearers by exposing that doctrine as an
idle and extravagant opinion, which was rejected
with contempt by every man of a liberal education and understanding.
Since therefore the most sublime efforts of
philosophy can extend no further than feebly to
point out the desire, the hope, or, at most, the
probability, of a future state, there is nothing,
except a divine revelation, that can ascertain the
existence and describe the condition, of the
invisible country which is destined to receive the
souls of men after their separation from the body.
But we may perceive several defects inherent to
the popular religions of Greece and Rome, which
rendered them very unequal to so arduous a
task. 1. The general system of their mythology was unsupported by any solid proofs; and
the wisest among the Pagans had already disclaimed its usurped authority. 2. The description of the infernal regions had been abandoned
to the fancy of painters and of poets, who peopled
them with so many phantoms and monsters, who
dispensed their rewards and punishments with
so little equity, that a solemn truth, the most
congenial to the human heart, was oppressed and
disgraced by the absurd mixture of the wildest
fictions. 3. The doctrine of a future state was
scarcely considered among the devout polytheists of Greece and Rome as a fundamental
article of faith. The providence of the gods, as
it related to public communities rather than to
private individuals, was principally displayed on
the visible theatre of the present world. The
petitions which were offered on the altars of
Jupiter or Apollo expressed the anxiety of their


Expert, confidential reports ma
on Philippine projects
ENGINEERING, MINING,
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY
LUMBERETC
Hydroelectric projects
OTHER COMMERCIAL A
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISE.
BRYAN, LANDON CO
Cebu, P. I.
Cable address: "YPIL,” Cebu.


worshippers for temporal happiness, and
ignorance or indifference concerning a futur
The important truth of the immortality o
soul was inculcated with more diligence, as
as success, in India, in Assyria, in Egypt, anc
Gaul; and since we cannot attribute such
difference to the superior knowledge of the bi
barians, we must ascribe it to the influence
an established priesthood, which employed t
motives of virtue as the instrument of ambitic
We might naturally expect that a principle
essential to religion would have been revealed
the clearest terms to the chosen people of Pale
tine, and that it might safely have been intrus"
to the hereditary priesthood of Aaron.
incumbent on us to adore the mysteriou
pensations of Providence, when we discove
the doctrine of the immortality of the s
omitted in the law of Moses; it is dark!
nuated by the prophets; and during t
period which elapsed between the Egypti
the Babylonian servitudes, the hopes as '
fears of the Jews appear to have been co
within the narrow compass of the presen
After Cyrus had permitted the exiled n
to return into the promised land, and after
had restored the ancient records of their relig
two celebrated sects, the Sadducees and
Pharisees, insensibly arose at Jerusalem.
former, selected from the more opulent and
tinguished ranks of society, were strictly att:
ed to the literal sense of the Mosaic law, and
piously rejected the immortality of the sou
an opinion that received no countenance f
the divine book, which they revered as the e
rule of their faith. To the authority of Scrir
the Pharisees added that of tradition, and
accepted, under the name of traditions, sespeculative tenets from the philosophy or rel
of the eastern nations. The doctrines of
or predestination, of angels and spirits, and
future state of rewards and punishments, wel
the number of these new articles of belief; an
the Pharisees, by the austerity of their mani
had drawn into their party the body of the
ish people, the immortality of the soul bec
the prevailing sentiment of the synagogue ui
the reign of the Asmonaean princes and pom
The temper of the Jews was incapable of cont
ing itself with such a cold and languid assen
might satisfy the mind of a Polytheist; anc
soon as they admitted the idea of a future st
they embraced it with the zeal which has alw
formed the characteristic of the nation. Th
zeal, howevar, added nothing to its evidence,
even probability: and it was still necessary th
the doctrine of life and immortality, which hi
been dictated by nature, approved by rease
and received by superstition, should obtain
sanction of divine truth from the authority
example of Christ.
"ernal happiness
When the promise
tion of ado
proposed to mankin
DES
the faith, and of o'
gospel, it is no won
offer should have
bers of every rel:
province in ti


Boobies on Tubbataha Reef, where the expense of the lighthouse is under investigation.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERICAN CHAMBF


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent, Dollar Steamship Line Co.


We are in the height
of the movement of
centrifugal sugars to
the Pacific, Atlantic and
Gulf ports of the United
States. Very little, if
any, free space was
available during March
to the North Atlantic
and Gulf. Any amount
of space could be found
for the Pacific coast.
Practically all space
A
 occupied with sugars to
the atlantic coast was
ged for by seasonal contract.
ch year the millers seem to speed up milling,
w increased quantities into the freight
ket for immediate shipment. The result
been insufficient tonnage during the months
ebruary, March, April and May and an ever
ving insufficiency of tonnage during those
aths. Many tramp charters have been closed
hippers to relieve the situation. This conn has been further tightened by the ship; of approximately 75,000 tons sugar to the


Atlantic seaboard, that has in past years been
shipped to refineries on San Francisco bay.
Space to U. K. and Continent likewise during
the month under review has been difficult to
arrange for immediate shipment. Only those
shippers who have contracted for their requirements well in advance of shipping dates have
been fully protected. The outlook for April and
possibly through May leads shipping firms
to believe that there will continue to be somewhat of a dearth of tonnage available to the
U. K. and Continent, although there have been
additional German boats placed on the berth.
While transpacific to Canada and the United
States there is ample tonnage for the cargo offering, there likewise has been a noticeable
shortage in some classes of transportation;
that is, the demand for space in express liners
has exceeded the space available. Much cargo
that normally would move in express liners is
being handled by the slower freight lines temporarily
Freight lines are enjoying an ever increasing
movement of lumber and logs from the Philippines to Japan and the Pacific coast of the
United States.
Passenger traffic for the month of March
continued heavy, there being a total number of
652 first class and 2.015 steerage passengers
departing from the Philippines. The movement
during the month is made up as follows: (first
figure represents cabin passenger, second figure
steerage) To China and Japan 346-247; to


Honolulu 12-769; to Pacific coast 189-926; to
Singapore and Straits Settlements 27-3; to
Mediterranean ports 75-70 and to Europe via
America 3-0.


G. P. Bradford, Philippine agent of the Columbia Pacific Shipping Co., left Manila March
30 aboard the President Grant bound for the
homeland and a well earned holiday. Mr.
Bradford will visit with officials of his company
at Seattle, Portland and San Francisco, then go
to Los Angeles to join his family, who went to
the United States several months ahead of him.
Mr. Bradford expects to return with his family
to Manila in July or August.


G. A. Harrell, district passenger agent of The
Robert Dollar Co., Manila, spent the last week
of March in St. Luke’s hospital with a serious
throat infection. Mr. Harrell was able to leave
the hospital on March 31 and, under doctor’s
instructions, proceeded to Baguio, where it is
expected he will remain a week or ten days until
recovery is complete.


Hecter Hunt, agent for the Columbia Pacific
Shipping Co. at Kobe, Japan, arrived in Manila
March 10 and has taken over the local office of
the same company during the absence from
Manila of Mr. G. P. Bradford, resident manager.
Mr. Hunt brought his wife and infant daughter
to Manila with him.


W. B. Pennington, freight agent, The Robert
Dollar Co., Manila, recently announced his
resignation from April 30, to enter the services
of Erlanger & Galinger, local Manila firm. Mr.
Pennington is also taking over the management
of the Community Players, a local semiamateur
play producing organization.


V. M. Smith, assistant director for the orient,
United States Shipping Board, passed through
Manila aboard the President Garfield the middle
of March en route from Shanghai to India. Mr.
Smith has been in China the past two or three
months closing out the affairs of the Merchant
Fleet Corporation in Shanghai and, under
instructions from Washington, will make a complete survey and investigation of traffic conditions in and around India.
A. R. Lusey, accompanied by Mr. V. Hoke,
Pirassoli and Mr. Anthe, arrived in Manila
from San Francisco aboard the President Johnson March 26. Mr. Lusey and his fellow radio
engineers, of the firm of Heinz & Kauffman,
Inc., San Francisco, will erect The Robert
Dollar Co. Manila commercial radio stations.


Geo. M. Ivory, United States Shipping Board
disbursing officer for the orient, who has been
identified with the Manila office the past seven
years, resigned his position March 31 to accept
an offer from E. J. Nell & Co., the well known
local machinery house. It is reported that Mr.
Ivory will find less time for golf in this new
business life.


THE TOKONAMA STECIE BANA
E LTD. En
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
100,000,000.00
Capital (Paid Up)
105,500,000.00
Reserve Fund
9,346,622.43
Undivided Profits
MANILA BRANCH
34 PLAZA CERVANTES, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager
PHONE 2-37-58—GENERAL OFFICE
TER


TISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


SHIPPING REVIEW
By H. M. CAVENDER
General Agent,
THE ROBERT DOLLAR COMPANY


Durin g November
there was a total ship

ment from the Philippine Islands of 91,425
tons, as against October
with a total of 105,028
tons. This does not
reflect the true condition, as there were several large freighters
which loaded during
November but did not
sail until early Degcember. Freight space
is still in demand for
lhipments, although there is no difficulty
care of the higher class commodities.
-adition is expected to continue until
after which there should be sufficient
laccommodate all shippers.
brdance with his policy of improving
onditions in the Philippines as much as
¡Governor General Stimson has appointadvisory board on ports and harbor
fments. Members of this board are:
bnorable Filemon Perez, secretary of
fce and communications, chairman, Lieut

enant-Colonel Max C. Tyler, U. S. Army, Ramon
Fernandez, Captain R. C. Morton, Mr. Vicente
Madrigal, Mr. Lorenzo Correa and Mr. Howard
Cavender. This board will examine into the
conditions of the port and harbor facilities of
the Philippines and will prepare a comprehensive
report outlining the necessary improvements,
with special regard for interisland commerce
and shipping. The board has circularized all
interested parties, requesting information and
suggestions to serve as a basis of their investigation.
T. P. Gallagher & Co., Inc., of New York
have announced the establishment of a monthly
service of tankers between New York and Manila
under the name of the Atlantic Oriental Tank
Line, Ltd. This service is established primarily
for the transportation of vegetable oils from the
orient to the Atlantic and Gulf ports of the
United States. A monthly service will be
maintained, with six 8000 ton steamers, of which
the first, the Darden, is now in port. The
other vessels of the line are the Romulus,
Gladysbe, Cedarhurts, Vaba and Dora.
From statistics compiled by the Associated
Steamship Lines, there were exported from the
Philippines during the month of November 1928:
To China and Japan ports 7,554 tons with a
total of 43 sailings, of which 2,421 tons were
carried in American bottoms with 12 sailings
to the Pacific coast for local delivery 24,85
tons with a total of 12 sailings, of which 23,940
tons were carried in American bottoms with 9
sailings; to the Pacific coast for transhipment,


E TOKORAMA STECIE BANK
LTD. E
(ESTABLISHED 1880)
HEAD OFFICE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN
Yen
100,000,000.00
Capital (Paid Up) 
Reserve Fund
102,500,000.00
Undivided Profits
8,281,611.36
MANILA BRANCH
34 PLAZA CERVANTES, MANILA
K. YABUKI
Manager
ONE 2-37-59—MANAGER
PHONE 2-37-58—GENERAL OFFICE


2,518 tons with a total of 10 sailings
2,086 tons were carried in Americar
with 7 sailings; to the Atlantic coa
tons with a total of 14 sailings, of wh
tons were carried in American botton
sailings; to European ports, 30,956 to
total of 18 sailings, of which 3,450 t0
carried in American bottoms with 3 sail
Australian ports 1,067 tons with a tot
sailings, of which American bottoms
none, or a grand total of 91,425 tons,
total of 70 sailings, of which American:
carried 38,727 tons, with 16 sailings.
Regular passenger traffic during th
of December showed an increase over
November, there being a total of 1450 pa
departing from the Philippines during Da
as against 1193 during November.
passengers departing during Decembe.
(first figure represents cabin passengers,
figure steerage): To China and Japan 284
to Honolulu 4—566, to the Pacific coast 51-
to Straits Settlements 7-0, to Mediterra
Ports 5-0.
We are mighty pleased that Mr. R. C. Mo
director of orient, U. S. Shipping Board, wh
confined to his home seriously ill, is again
at his desk.
H. M. Cavender, general agent, and G.
Harrell, district passenger agent for The Ro
Dollar Co., Manila, made an inspection
through northern Philippine provinces du.
December in the interests of steerage passer
travel for their company, having establis
passenger offices at Laoag, San Fernando
Union) and Dagupan in addition to the alre
established office at Vigan.
F. M. Chalmers, of W. F. Stevenson 6 t
in charge of the shipping department, depart.
on vacation in England during December. Mi
Chalmers is being relieved by J. M. W. Munro
O. D. Martinez, oriental operating manag
for The Robert Dollar Co., arrived in Mani
November 26 aboard the s.s. President Linco
on a business trip and returned to Shangk
December 8 aboard the s.s. President Clet
land.


V. M. Smith, assistant director for orie
U. S. Shipping Board, left Manila Decembe
aboard the s.s. President Pierce for Shang
to take charge of the shipping board offic
that city.
Hugh MacGowan, connected with
passenger department of The Robert D
Co., Shanghai, arrived in Manila Janua
aboard the s.s. President Taft to be tempo
connected with the Manila office.


L. Everett, Inc., have announced the
of offices at Cebu and Iloilo. H. W. 1
be in charge at Cebu and Robert Hill


ONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OF COMMEPCE T


THE AMIRA


OI

THE RABBIT AND THE CROCODILE
(Continued from page'21)


Christianity of the early
era declined in China; and,
AeCri Widjaya remained entrenchism, which linked the state togele tributary monarchs one by one reBuddhism for the militant faith of the
hey at the same time renounced their
to Cri Widjaya, which intransigently
away.
Java grew great, though never so great
idjaya had been, not being so strategicalted on a vital link in a principal trade
ist and west; indeed, the East involved
one of the typical sectarian conflicts
y of mankind, and. . . the Portuguese,
ntch, British and Fiench came
with ease whatever they saw and
ting it out among themselves for
ssion and sovereignty. From the
er conversion to Mohammedanism,
no more stupendous femples; her
wn skeptical, fanatical and quarreljungle claimed her magnificent ane population is increasing there now?”
is more than 40,000,000 on Java alone.
is room for them in Sumatra.”
lo you get them there?”
building roads and railways. They
relcome interference; they prefer to be
te; but they will go wherever a road is
a railroad. The men who do this work
land, send back word of their prosperity,
relatives follow them into Sumatra.”
a for Mindanao!
the Madjapahit empire in eastern Java,
near what is now Surabaya, that rose to
wer and eminence when Cri Widjaya
1. Western Java was unimportant until
atch founded Batavia. The Madjapahit
was from 1294 to 1530; its time of greatest
r was about 1400.—W. R.


it could give no definite answer. Then he
asked advice from the spirits of a discarded
sleeping man and a decaying banca, but even
they gave him no satisfaction, since the crocodile claimed that the carabao was his prey by
right of capture.
But just as the crocodile was about to attack,
a huge rabbit came leisurely down the beach
for his daily bath. “Ho, friend rabbit,” hailed
the carabao, “Can you settle our dispute?”
“Come up closer so that I may hear you,"
commanded the rabbit.
So the carabao came nearer the rabbit, and
the disputants stated their cases. The rabbit
looked at them reflectively, for a few moments
as though studying the matter; but in reality
he was determining the best way to save the
carabao’s life. Suddenly he sprang high in the
air as though in terror, and shouted, "Run!"
The startled carabao gave a mighty bound
and was off toward the forest in lurching flight;
while the equally surprised crocodile lost his hold
and tumbled ludicrously off the carabao’s back.
The rabbit laughed. .. loud and long.
As for Ukub, he was consumed with rage at
the trick played upon him by the clever rabbit.
He lumbered off to the river vowing revenge
and plotting means of taking the swift rabbit
unawares. The next day the crocodile concealed himself in the bushes on the rabbit’s
favorite feeding ground; and when the rabbit
came for his late afternoon meal of succulent
leaves and herbs, Ukub sneaked upon him silently
as a snake, and with a sudden snap of his jaws,
caught the rabbit’s leg.
“Now, I’ve got you,” he grunted. But the
rabbit never moved a muscle. He looked
curiously at the crocodile, and then burst out
laughing as tho greatly amused.
“You fool,” he giggled, "You have caught a
branch of this shrub in your mouth. I didn’t
know you liked wood as a diet."
The crocodile, taken by surprise, relaxed his
grip for another and better hold upon his intended prey; but as he did so the swift rabbit


sprang out of his reach with lightening
and again he laughed and taunted the er
crocodile.
On the following day the rabbit came a.
to his feeding ground; but he paused at a
distance and called to the bushes to tell hil
an enemy was concealed among them.
ceiving no reply, he thought, "I wvonder why
bushes do not answer me. Someone mus'
hiding there to do me injury."
Then the hidden crocodile exclaimed,
there is no enemy here. Come and eat!”
rabbit, well knowing that trees, shrubs,
grasses do not speak as do we, but only
whisperings, and moanings, and certain si
again laughed at the crocodile, taunted I
and called him a fool.
On the third day, the rabbit came to
feeding grounds, and approaching the thic
bushes, asked, "Is anyone there?” Thno answer. The crocodile was not goi
fooled again. But the rabbit, knowing
enemy was lying in wait for him, gat ere
some large, sharp stones with which he p
the sluggish brute so unmercifully that he
with all his lumbering speed back to the wat
A day or so later, as the rabbit was goin
the river for his bath, he met the crocodile,
had come out for his afternoon siesta on the
Old Ukub insulted him, and began cursing
roundly. A hot quarrel ensued, and fir
a challenge to fight. “I have declarea war
the rabbits,” finally concluded Ukub
your tribe together, for now it is war to tl
“My people are to busy for war,”
the rabbit easily, "And it would be unjt
to call them; for I, alone, will fight ali
codiles in Sulu.”
“You mean that?” gasped the a
crocodile.
‘Yes,” replied the rabbit. “My onll
dition is that before the battle begins you
all range yourselves side by side in a line, s
I may count you. Only in this manner
(Pledsc turn to page 27, col. 1)


Goodrich
Highflex
Belting
WIl Give
Cood
Service
on
Difficult
Drives


VL  NG ANEEENE TEAN CANNEN TE ENAN CENEN O ONNN


OUR LOGGING PROBLEM
can be solved readily by some type of
HINGTON LOGGING ENGINE
hington Simplex Yarder above leads
ers in ease of operation and low cost of upkeep.
lington Iron Works, Seattle, U. S. A.
Agents for the Philippine Islands
e Edward J. Nell Co., Ltd.,—Manila.


K


Commercial Printing is a silent but
powerful messenger, and your letterheads, billheads, cards, envelopes, etc.,
when well printed, all help to build
up that feeling of confidence so much
desired in this modern business age.
Close personal attention to every phase
of a printed job is an invariable feature
of McCullough Service, and our reputation for producing govd printing
merits your patronage.


MCCULLOUGH PRINTING CON
424 RIZAL AVE. Phone 21801 MAN


SER SUGAR REVIEW
ORGE H. FAIRCHILD


review, sales of Philippine centrifugals in the
Atlantic coasts, afloats, near arrivals and for
future deliveries, amounted to 23,580 tons at
prices ranging from 3.89 cents to 3.98 cents
landed terms.


New York Market:


(Futures).


Quotations on


the


New York


(Spot) On the whole


Exchange fluctuated as follows:


the American sugar


High


Low


Highest


market for the month


December,


1928.. 2.13


2.01


2.01


under review was quiet


January..


..... 2.10


1.92


1.92


and dull. For the

March....


....... 2.15


2.01


2.01


first six days of De

May......


...... 2.23


2.09


2.09


cember the market was


July......


........ 2.30


2.15


 2.15


steady but quiet with


September


........ 2.38


2.20


2.20


only small sales of


December,


1929.. 2.33


2.26


2. 26


Allowling for the loss as a resu
a crop of 375,000 tons may
Negross, which may be exceed
nuance of favorable weather c
Philippine Exports. Expe
the Plnilippines for the 1928-
Novenhber 1, 1928, to Decen
amounited to 55,099 tons, part
follows!:


Ce Atrifugals
Muiscovados
Refined.....


Cubas for prompt shipment at 2-3.16 cents
c. and f. (3.95 cents
1. t.). On the 7th the
market became weaker
parcels of Cubas, prompt shipment,
at 2-5432 cents c. and f. (3.93 cents
which price further sales of Cubas
ed on the 10th and 11th. The market
ght improvement on the 12th when
se of the day small sales of Cubas
ted on the basis of 2-3,16 cents c. and
ts I. t.), but thereafter buyers became
1 prices reverted to the 2-5,32 cents
93 cents 1. t.) level on the 14th and
the following ten days the market
ar and prices fluctuated between
s c. and f. (3.93 centsI. t.) and 2-3,'16
d f. (3.95 cents 1. t.). During the
of December the market was in a
condition and, at the close of the
to the large offerings of Cubas and
announcement that no restriction
nade on the Cuban crop, prices sagged
cents c. and f., equivalent to 3.83 cents
ms, with declining tendency.
tocks in the U. K., U. S., Cuba, and
statistical countries at the end of
were 3,575,000 tons as compaled
000 tons at the same time in '927
)0 tons in 1926.
les Sales). During the mont'
ONDING TO ADVEP


Local Market: In the local market for
centrifugals, parcels for exports were negotiated
at prices between P9.00 and P9.25 per picul.
In sympathy with the depression in the American
sugar market, the local market for centrifugals
becarne weaker toward the close of the month.
Due to the small quantity of muscovados
available for trading, the muscovado market
was quiet with prices on the downward trend
at the end of the month. Quotations of Chinese
dealers ranged from P6.50 to P7.00 per picul
on the basis of No. 1.
Philippine Crop Prospects. On Luzon, the
crop that is being harvested in some districts
shows the effect of the typhoon, the purities
having declined. Beyond this, however, the
cane appears in good condition indicating that
it has not suffered extensive damage from the
last typhoon
On Negros, the damage done to sugar cane by
the typhoon of November 22nd was greater
than on Luzon. This typhoon was considered
the severest since 1912. Some of the rivers
overflowed their banks, resulting in considerable physical damage to a few haciendas. The
strong winds broke the stools of cane in places
resulting in the decrease in the tonnage per
hectare. Nevertheless, the damage was not as
great as at first reported and on the whole the
loss in crop as a result of the typhoon may be
estimated at 525. The estimated production
of Negros before the typhoon was 400,000 tons.


Total..
Java Market: In the early part
the Java market was dull at slit
quotatioms, viz.: Gs. 13-148 for Sup
Gs. 12-1 /4 for Heads, equal to P7.09 a
per P. MI. picul f. o. b. respectively.
the last three weeks of the month,
market was steady at unchanged prices, al
the Trust reduced at the end of the monti.
prices foi the 1929 crop Superiors to Gs. 13 per
100 kilos, ex-godown.


“I received the sample copy of your journal
which yosa kindly sent me and which I found
very useful and instructive. Kindly therefore,
enter my name as your subscriber for one year.
Herewith check No. 17635 for P4.00 in payinent
of my subsscription cominencing with the January
number ass indicated in your circular letter.
I am availing myself of this opportunity
to extend to you and your family my sincere
good wishees for a prosperous and happy New
Year. I sttill have vivid recollections of the days
when you were in Bacolod, Occidental Negros,
with Mrs. IRobb during the time I was yet schooling in the Occidental Negros high school. It
would be of interest to you to know that I am
the actual manager of the Philippine National
Bank brancch in Cebu and have recently been
admitted teo the Philippine bar. If I can be
of service te ryou in any of these capacities please
do not hesit ate to tell me so.
—R. M. Rosales.


PLEASE MENTION   


put so lar this extra hemp
s not materialized. It is too early to determine just what effect the storm will have on
production in Leyte, Samar and Sorsogon. The
other districts were not damaged to any extent.
Statistios:—The figures below are for the


period ending December


31st, 1928:


1928


1927


Manila Hemp


Bs.


Bs.


On hand January 1st....


139,624


112,382


Receipts to date........


1,400,246


1,276,229


Supply to date........


. 1539,870


1,68,611


Shipments to—


U. K............ . . ..


349,263


335,934


Continent............


223,641


151,098


U. S............. . ...


406,145


399,185


Japan............ . . . .


 320,657


259,908


All Others........ .. .


46,227


48,854


Local Consumption....


54,000


54,000


Total shipments....


1,399,933


1,248,979


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling
Corporation


Copra.—The November month end firmness oi the local copra
mrarket continued thruout the month of ¡December up to the Chiristmas Holidays. Prices
advanced steadily! at
primary points duje to
heavy buying presssure,
and on December 24th,
the Manila equivialent
at provincial points was
at least P13.00 for'resecada copra. Fronh De

id of the month, pressurfe was
id prices declined to approxecada bodega delivered Mianila.
tion but what speculatiton as
tage during the spring months
responsible for the artifi cially
ices, particularly in view 'of the
ed in all foreign markets.. It is
iat January will register a furrices until levels in parit y with
uropean advices are reached.
at Manila during the month
ags as against 199,870 bags for
Undoubtedly the entir e copra
ilippine Islands during 1928 has
reaking one and the copra; equivitire coconut crop is probaloly well
ons. Latest cable advices; follow:
n corriente, P10.75 to ,P11.00;
2.00 to P12.25; San Francisco,
0$.)4-7,8; London, f. m. m., 8:24J040,
uiet.


ut OHl.—The month opened wi th good
jor this item and prices were: quickly
dto 8-1/4 cents F. O. B. Coast. Under
selling pressure, buyers withdrew from the
arket about the middle of the month arad prices
dropped almost immediately to 8 cents F. O. B.
Coast, at which level a fair volume of business
passed up to the Holidays. There is lilttle snap
to buying demand as the month closes, 'and with
continued selling pressure, today’s cables indicate 8-1/8 cents C. I. F. New York as the best
price obtainable. Although the majority of
competing Fats and Oils in the U. S. naarket are
weaker Cottonseed Oil continues firml. Latest
cable advices follow: Manila, in druims, ₱.34
per kilo asked; San Francisco, P.08 f. jo. b. tank
cars, market quiet; New York, $.08-118 c. i. f.;
London, no quotation.
Copra Cake.—December on the ¡Continent
was the worse month of the year for Cjopra Cake
from the standpoint of consuming; demand.
Buyers were evidently under the imprjession that
large stocks were shipped unsold duriing December to obtain the advantage of the 10928 Freight
Rate which has been advanced 5 sh illings per
ton beginning January, 1929. Ther e seems to
be little justification for this attitud e as unsold
stocks afloat are reported to be connparatively
mall and we belicve there will be ari improved


inquiry for the January-February-March positions, when all December shipments pass into
consuming channels. Latest cable advices follow:
Hamburg, January-February-March, E9/1570;
Manila, buyers P68.00 to P70.00; no sellers.


THE RICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija
Director, Rice Producers' Associalion


Prices of both palay
and rice have lowered
due in part to the arrival
of some 55,000 sacks of
Saigon rice at quotations slightly lower than
those of the previous
month. These prices
will, it is expected, advance as soon as available supply moves to
market. Palay at terminals at present ranges
S 
from P3.60 to P3.90
with rice selling at from
₱8.70 to P9.40 according to grade.
The total estimated crop for the 133 towns in
the five exporting provinces of Nueva Ecija,
Tarlac, Pangasinan, Bulacan and Pampanga is


20,550,000 - a decin
cavans from the crop of
ment for the above province:
000 cavans, leaving over ten mimnon
interprovincial expgrt, of an approxin
of P35,000,000. The crop for the abo
was from some 603,000 hectares, with lo
to stem-rot of about 35 to 45; droug
plantings and floods about 35, and loci
other insect pests less than 15; or 7
decrease. Taken together with the es
from the smaller rice-growing provinces, t
crop is not expected to go over 44,000,000
which is less than the crop of 1925. Pri
consequence, ought to be on the same g
later in the season the spread will be to
The typhoon of late November arrester
threshing and delivery of the early crop ar
milling stocks necessitated importations.
at present writing have depressed prices lov
those obtaining in 1925, with less visible
There is no carryover this year; a large
of the crop will be needed in the province
it is grown. Greater imports may be .
In connection with the rice industry
stated that the net recovery of rice fron
crop harvested will be further lowered
disease known as stem-rot. This
spreading all over the rice region. T
more noticeable this year, duand in those districts affected



North
Coast
Limited"
"Finest"-
“the finest train in the world and I have
traveled on all that are worth talking
about"'—Samuel Hopkins Adams,
Auburn, N. Y.
“Best”
“equipment the very best, service splendid—a wonderful train"—N. A. Peterson, San Francisco.


TOW on a new, fast schedule—68 hours between
IN the North Pacific Coast and Chicago! Leaves
Seattle at 11:00 A. M. for all the principal cities of
the United States. Two days of sightseeing through
America’s greatest mountains.
A particularly satisfying feature of Northern Pacific travel is
diner service. New-style Observation-Club car with deep, res
lounge—cushioned chairs—library—writing corner—club roon
showers—and maid and valet service.


The Japan Tourist Bureau, American Express Company, Thi
Cook & Son, Shanghai Commercial G Savings Bank, or any tra'
Pacific steamship company willgladly furnish additional informatie
E. E. Blackwood, G. A.
Oswald Crawford, G. A. R. J. Tozer, A. G. P. A.
912 Government Street
200 L. C. Smith Bldg.
01 Granville Street
Victoria, B. C.
Seattle, Wash., U. S. A.
Vancouver, B. C.
Northern PacificRailwa
"First of the Northern "nscontinentals"
(352)


N RESPONDING TO ADVERITISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION THE AMERIO


OF COMMERCE


lient Facts about Lumber Industry In 1928
By ARTHUR F. FISCHER, DIRECTOR OF FORESTRY


md the activities of the 37 important sawmills
in the islands for the month of January. 1929,
as compared with similar month last year:


Philippine Hardwood Logs:
Our latest lumber review deals with the
lumber industry of the
islands for the last five
years, while the present
covers the activities of
the business for the
month of January, 1929
Lumber production
during January, 1929,
continues normally compared with the preceding
month, but exceeded by
over 3,000,000 board
feet that of correspondas, ar, "sed on reports received
e 37 important sawmilis in the islands.
luary, 1929, cut is 20,940,007 board feet
177,88,178 board feet for January last
This increase in production which is
to continue throughout the present
due to the increased efficiency brought
improvement made in the old mills and
iction of new ones.
le reports also point to the increased
ransactions of the different mills during
month of this vear as shown by the
ipment of 20,078,637 board feet against
board feet for the same month last
the above total of lumber shipped


Nothing Small About 'Em
during the month, nearly 10,500,000 board feet
were consumed by local markets.
The lumber inventory made at the end of
January, 1929, gives the total of 36,566,413 board
feet as compared with 31,237,618 board feet for
the same month last year. This indicates that
there is enough stock of lumber in the yards of
the different mills, and unless unforeseen circumstances present to cause the shut down of the
mills, it is safe to conclude that there is enough
lumber supply to meet the demand of foreign
and local markets.
Foreign markets are active judging from record of shipment for January, 1929, which gives
an export of 9,629,040 board feet valued at
P572,795 as agamst 7,145,248 board feet valued
at P530,149 for the same month last year or
an increase of approximately 355. In volume
of export trade, Japan replaced the United States
in quantity of Philippine lumber consumed
but in value the United States maintains the
lead as the exports to Japan are round logs.
Prices for lumber abroad seem to be satisfactory while local market prices remain stationary. It is interesting to mention in this
month’s lumber review that efforts are being
made by the leading sawmill operators to standardize their lumber grading to keep up with
their export trade.
The following table shows the export trade


1929
1928
January
Destination
January


Board Feet Value Board Feet Value


United States 3,344,936 P265,982 3,715,088 P268,908
Japan....... 4,181,488
148,122 2,036,896 148,761
655,080
76
China....... 1,517,920 106,1
57,744
482,088
16
27,804
343,016
Australia...
26
12,662
Great Britain
136,104
225,144
0,880
5,600
Canada......
2,048
3,084
Italy..
E
1,900
Netherlands..
0,352
12,296
Egypt......
1,465
30,952 2,900
Hongkong...


Total..... 9,629,040 P572,795 7,146,248 P530,149


For 37 Mills
Lumber Inventory
Lumber Shipment
Losi
1928
1928
36.306.418 31237618
20,078,637 18,136,961


Mill Production


1929


1928


20,940,007


17,788,178


A Baker Memorial Professor p has Leen
established at the agricultural college by action
of the regents of the University of the Philippines for the perpetuation of the memory of Dr.
Charles Fuller Baker who as dean of the college
made it into the creditable and most valuable
institution it was at his death some two years
ago. The Baker professorship provides for the
services of a man from abroad who shall be in
residence at the College eight months at least
and shall carry a teaching load of five hours a
week. It is the purpose to secure specialists
in the sciences allied to agriculture. The wisdom
of the regents is most commendable. In the past,
the agricultural college has suffered from parsimony in providing for its needs, the Baker
professorship may be the turning point toward
the generous support our leading and only basic
industry ought to enjoy.


COPRA AND ITS PRODUCTS
By E. A. SEIDENSPINNER
Vice-President and Manager, Copra Milling Corporation


Copra.—There was a noticeable decrease in
copra arrivals at Manila during the month of
March, which, of course, was expected by the
trade in general. Prices for the entire month
were practically unchanged although the market
was decidedly steady as the month closed. All
outside advices indicate very heavy supplies of
copra both in Europe and in the United States,
and there is little demand for nearby offerings.
Notwithstanding anticipated light arrivals during
April, it is quite improbable that prices will advance appreciably unless foreign markets improve.
Total arrivals for March were 247,384 bags as
Icompared with 157,409 bags for the same month
in 1928. Latest cable advices follow:
Manila, buen corriente, P10.25; arrival resecada, P11.50; San Francisco, $.04)4 to $.0436 nominal; London, F.M.M., E22/776.
Coconut Oil.—Foreign markets for coconut oil were featureless during
the entire month of March and further weakness in this item as well as
competing Fats and Oils in general was reported. There was no change in
the position of buyers who maintained their independent attitude in the
face of plentiful supplies. Cables received during the month indicated
that an unusual acreage of Cotton is anticipated. This expectation has
caused considerable weakness in the Cotton Oil market, and with free offeringsithroughout the whole Fats and Oils list, improvement in the very near
future seems unlikely. Latest cable advices follow:
Manila, in drums, P.32 per kilo; San Francisco, $.0714 f.o.b. tank
cars; New York, 8.0756 to $.073a c.i.f.; London, no quotations.
Copra Cake.—Both U. S. and European markets registered an unexpected decline during the month of March due, in the main, to lack of
buying interest on the part of consumers and heavy resales by speculators.
Local trading during the month was comparatively small because of the
follow:
Latest cab!
reluctance of mills to trade at current priceS. noto: Se
Asco, meal,
Hamburg, afloat, E84070; futur
$34.00 per 2,000 lbs.


ISEMENTS PLEASE MENETL N THE AMFRICAN


WORLD'S LARGEST LOCOMOTIVE
The locomotive pictured above is owned by the Northern Pacific Railway, patrons of the Journal, and helps in getting Philippine freight swiftly across the United
The engine, with tender, is 125 feet long; its weight is 1,116,000 pounds. The tender carrics 21,200 gallons of water and 27 tons of coal. The wheel base of the engine al
66 feet and 8 inches; the fire box is 266)6 inches long and 114l4 inches wide; the cylinders are 26 inches in diameter with a stroke of 32 inches, and the diameter of the driver
inches.


George Simmie, the daddy of all’stevedores
and stevedoring companies in the Philippines,
sailed for the Homeland March 30 aboard the
President Grant. Mr. Simmie will stop over in
China a week or two en route. He is expected
back in Manila the end of this year.


A. T. Simmie, better known as Bertram, and
his famu,, ro left for San Francisco, aboard
the President Grant March 30. He expects
to remain in the United States for a full year of
travel and vacationing.


Manila to New York via Suez and Europe
See the Old World on your trip home. Stops of
several days in many ports. You can travel
through Europe and catch our boat for Ne
York via Southampton, England, at Bremen.
“The Most Interesting Trip In The Worl?'


R. M. Johnson, superintending engineer of
the Merchant Fleet Corporation in the orient,
was recently transferred from Japan to Manila.
Mr. Johnson is to remain here permanently
in charge of the operation of Board vessels in
the Orient.


90 Rosario, Manila


NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig 8 von Knobelsdorff
Agents


Phone 2.


AMERICAN MAIL LINE
DOLLAR STEAMSHIP LINF
COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


The "President” Liners Offer
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


SAII
ONC
WI


TO SAN FRANCISCO
AND
LOS ANGELES
Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu
SAILINGS
ALTERNATESATURDAYS


24 Ca'le David


ROUND THE WORLD


President Wilson


April 24


President Van Buren -


May 8


President Hayes -


May 22


President Polk -


June 5


Sailings every fortnight


MANILA


VICTOR
AND
SEAT
via
Hongkong, Shan
and Yoko


SAILI'
Or
ALTERNATES


S A EAE O NNNEN


The Manila Stock Market During December
By W. P. G. ElliotT


The Market.—Trading during December
was very brisk, notwithstanding the holidays.
Increased public interest was shown in banks,
mines and industrials, with sugars a bit easier.
Banks.—Bank of the Philippine Islands
continued active and firm with no sellers at
better than P210. The bank expects to pay
a dividend early in January and we learn from
authentic sources that the financial condition
after payment of the dividend will be stronger
than at any time since the postwar deflation.
Chartered Banks are firin with buyers at E22.
China Banks have buyers at P90 and expect
to declare a dividend of 3-1/225 for the last six
nonths, making a total of 725 dividend for the
vhole year. Hongkong-Shanghai Banks have
leclined slightly and closed at HK$1300 buyers
Mercantile Banks have sellers at P43 but buyers
are only inclined to offer P41. This bank also
expects to pay a semiannual dividend of 35 very
shortly, making a total dividend of 625 for the
year.
Insurances.—Compania Filipinas have continued firm throughout the month with buyers
at P3200. Insular Life and Philippine Guaritee are also unchanged with buyers at P320
respectively. Unions of Canton
* slightly and closed at HK$360
Bacolod-Murcias on fairly large
is were placed at P8 with further
this price. Bago-Medellins have eased
ay and a small lot are offered at ₱19.
igars remained stationary with sellers
 and no transactions reported. Bais
gain declined slightly and there are now
 at ₱1000. Carlotas are offered at P240
a fair amount of Tarlacs were placed at
5. Central Luzons are offered at ₱160,
ecline of 5 points from the last transaction.
iwaiian-Philippines are offered at P57 172,
nd it is expected that an extra dividend in


addition to the 35 quarterly will be declared
during the next quarter. This is, of course, not
guaranteed, but is the rumour. Isabelas have
buyers at P15 and there are sellers of Kabankalans at P275. Lopez sugars are wanted at
₱115 and a small lot of Luzon sugars are offered
at ₱1000. Malabons are nominal at P23 142,
while Mount Arayat’s are offered at ₱110.
Pasudecos have been done at P48 and Pilars
on moderate transactions were done at ₱1450.
San Carlos have sellers at $33 and TalisaySilays on fairly large transactions were placed
at P25. Victorias common changed hands at
₱165 and Victorias preferred are firm at ₱110
sellers.
Plantations.—Pamplonas were placed at
P85 and a small amount of Polos were done at
P400.


Mines.-
active, sel.
closing firn
buy...
and paid a o
bf 5 cel
the 20th of the month and t
are very bright for continua
dividend policy. A progres
mill construction and a num
projects made at the stoc
states that the Colbath drain!
completed. This will facilit
of the mill power in drainin.
mines by gravity, thereby -
to work in the lower levels.
Benguet Consolidated unt
surplus for the financing of
and also the Northern Luzon
which is a hydro-electric pr
eventually furnish all elect
mining properties in the Ben;
project is now nearing con
expects to begin operations


Manila to New York via Suez and.


See the Old World on your trip home. Stops
several days in many ports. You can trat
through Europe and catch our boat for N
York via Southampton, England, at Bremi
“The Most Interesting Trip In The Worlo
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD
Zuellig 8 von Knobelsdorff
Agents
90 Rosario, Manila


AMLRICANMAL LAINA
BODLARSIEAMS EA


COMBINED TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE


SAILING
ONCE A
WEEK


The "President” Liners Offer
Speed—Service—Courtesy—Comfort
Excellent Food, Comfortable Cabins, Broad Decks,
American Orchestra, Dancing, Swimming Pool, Sports


TO SAN FRANCISCO
AND


ROUND THE WORLD


VIC


LOS ANGELES


President Van Buren - - Jan. 16


SE


Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe,
Yokohama, and Honolulu


President Hayes -
Jan. 30
President Polk
Feb. 13
President Adams
Feb. 27


Hongkon
ar


SAILINGS


March 13
President Garfield -


SA


ALTERNATE FRIDAYS


Sailings every fortnight


ALTERNA'


24 Calle David


MANILA





Seen offered
. Itogons
state that
and w
90, has been
 iwing report of mill
N
ION3 of November will be of
operated 29 172 days
th; 2,145 tons of ore were
O tons were treated at an
alue of $10.20.
n production amounted
, valued at P40,154.78.”
ilippine Education common
60, but sellers do not seem
It is rumoured that a final
these shares, making a total
5 for the year 1928. Educave been done at ₱106 cumcations sales for November,
582.99 as against sales in
163,345.92. The sales for
od ending November 30,
₱2,277,380.51 as against
he same period of 1927.
y have declared a final divida total of 175 paid during
: 85 bonds have been very
practically the whole issue
,000,000 has been subscribed.
bonds have also been selling
small lot of Carlota 85 were
ed with a firm undertone with
sugars which are easier, the
h aggregating 35,092 shares.
clared and Paid.—Benguet
ntavos per share.—Kabankaer share.—San Miguel Bre1928.—Hawaiian-Philippines,
rter.—Philippine Education
for last quarter.
overbs from the island provthe eastern Bisayas, where
rmen, farmers and grazers:
arent of ill fortune.
- from his face.
ing to obey.
lorns shall you reap.
gets the worse of the


Mindoro Turns Corner: O'Malley Retires


In December a change was effected in the
presidency of the Philippine Trust Company,
from which Michael J. O'Malley retired and to
which Wm. T. Nolting succeeded. This bank
had enjoyed unprecedented patronage and
prosperity under Mr. O'Malley, even with the
handicap of his prolonged illness, and of course
it has also gone into careful management under
Mr. Nolting, who has plans which he has not
yet announced.
An important change in the bank’s position
under Mr. O'Malley was that effected in the


company, in this vital problem, is being approached. It is believed that the final loss was
that of last season. Not only is a net profit
anticipated this year, but the assurance is entertained that more tenants will turn up for"employment in the fields, more planters able to
finance their operations will apply for lands,-
and this every year,—until the estate fulfills
the promise of its remarkable natural fertility
and concommitant advantages: its compact
extensiveness, its shipping port, etc. Indeed,
milling records up to date this season indicate


BABCOCK & TEMPLETON, INC.
IMPORTERS—EXPORTERS
MAGUEY
COPRA
PHILIPPINE PRODUCTS
HEMP
FINE LITHO AND PRINTING INKS
Agents for
JOHN KIDD & Co., Lrd.
LONDON
CEBU
MANILA
NEW YORK
SAN FRANCISCO


administration of the Mindoro Sugar Estate,
Ltd. In behalf of the bondholders, the bank
assumed administration of this sugar property,
which includes the first central built in the
islands, in September 1922, when a crop of
54,000 piculs was taken off. Immediate competency in estate management was not found, but
the fortunate selection of N. V. Sinclair for this
position was made by Mr. O'Malley in October
1924; and since that time there has been a
constant improvement in all departments, beginning with very discouraging prospects.
There are now on the estate some thirty planters
who finance themselves, replacing those who had
been depending upon the company—kept more
or less at their mercy. Immigration of Ilokanos
has begun again, and there are now some 400
tenants on the estate who are growing cane on


an average of more than 70 piculs pe
the crop on 2,800 hectares, a total
200,000 piculs, well over 10,000 tons
while the planted area for next season


Watching Investmenta
Buying Sound Securities
is the Beginning of Safe
and Profitable Investing
Inquiries Invited
Hair and Elliot
Members
Manila Stock Exchange
P. O. Box 1478
34-B Plaza Cervantes, Manila


OF INDIA. AUSTRALIA
ERED BANK
AND CHINA


vital and Reserve Fund........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . E7,000,000
erve Liability of Proprietor.................. 3,000,000


MANILA BRANCH ESTABLISHED 1872
UB-BRANCHES AT CEBU, ILOILO AND ZAMBOANGA
ion of banking business transacted. Branches in every important town
China, Japan, Java, Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States,
Siam, and Borneo; also in New York.


anticipated to be 4,000 hectares, this because
of the pending planters’ applications for lands
and the fact that the pioneering in reorganization
of relations with planters and tenants, as well
as in other branches of administration, has
taken place under Mr. Sinclair.
To his position Thomas J. Ford succeeds.
He has been assisting in the management of the
Asturias central on Panay.


Head Office: 38 Bishopsgate, London, E. C.
T. H. FRASER, Manager.
Manila.


FOR RENT:—Store space, Calle David
and Dasmarinas, 179 square meters.—
Entrances on both streets.—Excellent


il.
-he tail follows.
lon’t plant, what shall
if the horse has died?
as bees always find
1 be caught at the
ounterparts.
r.
r, the rich man of
by Juan Rotor,
led by Bisayans,
are also some
d to be a labodialect spoken
Ilokos, Cebu,
3 provinces.”
otor for his


the share system and finding satisfaction in their
new homes.
The incidence of malaria is now actually
lower than the average in other cane regions of
the islands, and the ideal hoped for by the


show windows. Apply, John R. Wilson, Secretary, American Chamber of
Commerce, 180 David, Phone 2-11-56.


THE MANILA HOTEL
LEADING HOTEL IN THE ORIENT
Designed and constructed to secure coolness, sanitation
and comfort under tropic climatic conditions
Provides every Western convenience combined with every Oriental luxury
Finest Dance Orchestra in the Far East
Management - WALTER E. ANTRIM


TISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OF CA




HE   L


January, 192,


BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DIRECTORY


Kerr Steamship Co., Inc.
General Agents
E
"SILVER FLEEI
Express Freight Services
Philippines-New York via Java
and Singapore
Roosevelt Steamship Agency
Agents
Phone 2-14-20
Chaco Bldg.
Manila, P. I.


PHILIPPINES COLD STORES
Wholesale and Retail
Dealers in American and Australian
Refrigerated Produce
STORES AND OFFICES
Manila, P. I.
Calle Echague


 *A PP
CHINA BANKING CORPORATION


MANILA, P. I.


Domestic and Foreign Banking
of Every Description


HANSON & ORTH, Inc.
Manila, P. I.
Buyers and Exporters of
Hemp and Other Fibers
612-613 Pacific Bldg.
Tel. 2-24-18


New York—


BRANCHES:
-London—Merida—Davao


MADRIGAL & CO.
8 Muelle del Banco Nacional
Manila, P. I.
Coal Contractors and
Coconut Oil Manufacturers
MILL LOCATED AT CEBU


Mr. MANUEL VALENTIN
TAILOR
Formerly Chief Cutter
for P. B. Florence & Co.
244 Plaza Sta. Cruz
Manila, P. I.
Phonc 2-61-30


Myers-Buck Co., Inc.
Surveying and Mapping
PRIVATE MINERAL
AND
PUBLIC LAND
230 Kneedler Bldg. Tel. 2-16-10


MACLEOD & COMPANY
Manila Cebu Vigan Davao Iloilo
Exporters of
Hemp and Maguey
Agents for
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO.
Agricultural Machinery



LA URBANA"
(Sociedad Mutua de Construccion y Prestamos)
Prestamos Hipotecarios
Inversiones de Capital
111 Plaza Sta. Cruz Manila, P. I.


SALEEBY FIBER CO., INC.
Fiber Merchants
Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 1423


Room 318, Pacific Building
Cable Address: “SALEFIBER”


Derham Building
Manila


Phone 22516
P. O. Box 2103


MORTON & ERICKSEN, INC.
Surveyors
AMERICAN BUREAU OF SHIPPING
Marine and Cargo Surveyors
Sworn Measurers





Os


da
E


y


Rosenberg’s Garage
TELEPHONE 5-69-55.


P. O. Box 1394
Telephone 22070
J. A. STIVER
Attorney-At-Law Notary Public
Certified Public Accountant
Investments
Collections
Income Tax
121 Real, Intramuros Manila, P. I.


No Irregularities


Society of All Nations, International in
Scope, Civic, Educational, Charitable, Fratemal, socialand induscial"
A Branch in your Community will help
its progress in every way.
After an existence of six years in the
Philippines, the Bureau of the Treasury of
the Puuioeie Goveminent Gramiaca e
books and recerdo of this orgamization and
iound e tobe one of une lew larse batenal
ana mucal atd societies winonk neitian
ites or anemale.
Red Rovers of the World
of the P. I., Inc.
De la Rama Bldg. "'o. 2—Room 23
Manila, P. I.
P. O. Box 1141


The Earnshaws Docks and Honolulu Iron Works
Sugar Machinery
Slipways
Machine Shops


Port Area


Manila, P. I.


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   OU.


anuary, 1929


AHiE Pivilitwrain Crrrrl


PRINCIPAL EXPORTS


Commodities


November, 1928


November, 1927


Monthly average for 12 months
ending November, 1928.


Quantity


Value


28


Quantity


Value


2


Quantity


Value


22 


ugal.


11,069,878
*..


,796,91


8.3


14,675,641


₱ 2,352,350


48,610,039


₱ 7,993,898


31


 .* *......... . . ...... .........
Hemp.
*.


....... ..... 15,347,116


4,395,834


20.7


12,756,782


4,545,877


2


4,007,311


,553,83


3.0


Oconut Oil..


11,087,099
.*


3,670,994


17.2


2,919,387


4,428,826


¬


12,051,666


2,614,9-


.2


opra.
* .. *.... *... *. .......... ............ .


22,602,9
........


4,320,874


20.4


134,4


2,674,64


13.6


19,778,77


3,511,48


igars (Number).....


17,712,866
.......


2,421


.4


9,344,801


378,044


17,957,013


80,2


nbroider
* .....  *. ... ...............
y....





32,610


4.


7,364





629,841


*..............
guey.......
*


1,436,916
...... ....


285,9


1,238,439


277,902


1,479,086


290,615


eaf Tobacco..
. .............................


1279,790
.


1,259,





3,147,643


966,468


4.


1,810,083


538,92:


esiccated and Shredded Coconut..................


1,901,714
.


700,921


1,379,9


518,017


2


1,673,943


581,550


*  ........ * ... * . *............
ats (Number).


175,471
........ ..


766,284


5,78-


404,789


2.


103,4:


30,939


umber (Cubic Mater)................ ... . . . . ..


3,975
*. 4


479,712


.2


16,23


59
3,012


2


13,6.


463,426


1.


Spra Meal.


7,205,488



53.


2.4


9,384,324


582,234





8,183,887


501,610


rda



549,631
*...........


2


1.3


366,150


214,082





533,766


0,432


otted Hem
.........


,249



98,4


368


28,043


,191


32,706


O.1


arl Buttons (Gross)....
*............4


49,575
*.......


41,853


WE


,532


61


74,603


7,154


nton (low grade cordage fiber).................



450,979



,9


538,271


133,368


730,823


136,702


Other Products .....


**.........


1,010,525


4. 7


544,651


2.7


2,425,728


tal Domestic Products...............................


.


21,040,702


99.4


19,630,495


99.6


25,342,688


99.8
2


lited Scates Products.................................


*...


133,129


0.5


51,743


0.2


101,513


preign Products...............


......


21,349


O.1


37,968


O.2


39,838


0.1


Grand TOta


₱21,195,180



100.0


₱19,720,206


100. 0


₱25,484,039


100. 0


NOTE:— All quantities are in kilos except where otherwise indicated.


PRINCIPAL IMPORTS


Articles


November,


1928


Monthly average for
months ending
November, 1927
12
November, 1928.


Value


28


Value


Value


25 


Cotton Cloths..........


₱3,157,48


15.8


₱ 3,652,092


18.4


₱ 3,401,814


15.3


Dther Cotton Goods....


1,236,165


6.2


1,313,112


6.7


1,268,686


5.6


ron and Steel, Except


Machinery ..........


679,92


1,847,53


1,963,839


8.7


Rice...................


1,363,78


36,50


202,491


O.8


Wheat Flour..........


810,28


644,350


824,154


3.6


Machinery and Parts of.


1,493,6


1,
743,12


1
18,1


Dairy Products........


09,





41,909


66


Gasoline...............


3,85


8,66


Silk Goods .......... . . .


691


3.


26,2


4.7


Automobiles.

er


1.2


2


Vegetable Fi
joods...


PaR


1.8


415,12


Meat Products..........


1.9


2,113


1.9


Illuminating Oil.........



55


fish and Fish Products.


96


2.8


Hen


318,5


frude Oil.............


64


50,145


oal.........
* *......


321,016


1.5


113,5


0.6


365,152


1.5


hemicals, Dyes, Drugs,


EUC..


10,48


1.8


406,098


1.8


ertilizers..............


96,58


.o


334,1
8


table.
 ..


264,539


H


310,328


6


307,537


1.3


ods, Except
per (


OkS


280,732


1.3


285,593


1.5


447,574


2.0


bacco and Manufa


ures of......
*....


333,263


586,755


5


499,532


2.2


ctrical Mach



241,350


La


316,772


1.6


336,208


1.5


ks and Other Printed


atters.....


127,998


0.6


236,384


1.2


333,844


1.4


s and Carriages, Ex

t Autos..
.....


201,480


0.9


141,348


0.8


24,319


1.0


omobile
2S......


231,42


.0


6,160


77,102


1.


its and Nuts........


209,4


152,86


254,486


S


85,176


185,242


149,414



S...


148,081


0.6


220,377


.2


269,620


1.2


d ther ot

MC


227,190


1.0


367,098


1.8


207,382


ffee................


189,321


0.8


158,557


0.8


150,779


0.6


eadstuff, Except


heat Flour.........


143,381


O.6


155,372


167,274



*
ry


107,223


0.4


154,412


O.8


170,207


0.7



ind Other


let Goods.........


162,260


120,741


142,993


0.5


cating Oil.......


101,298


82


58,875


33


194,824


0.8


o Manufactures, Ex

t Candy ..........


17,891


O.


49,95


130,903


0.5


and Glassware...


126,403


0.5


125,830


63


157,214


O.7


Pigments, Var


, Etc..........


118,699


0.5


153,811


141,098


0.6


ot separately listed.


103,303


0.4


111,065


sa


146,116


0.6


en
tones and


inaware..
..


128,205


14,413


118,784


.4


ssories..
mobile A


181,412


24


119,527


0.6


151,822


0.7


ond and Other Pre


us Stones Unset...


208,807


O.


63,346


O.


123,791


3amboo, Reed,


100,695


0.4


57,149


0.3


90,367


3


ttan....
* .. . ...


Rubber Goods....


98,845


149,179


0.8


125,0-


.........


102,852


2,140


0.4


hes...


58,5


67,858


0.4


0.3


* **... ..........
sives..............


23,38
69,33


O


21,603


0.1


enlL........


28-


O


62,006


0.4


r and Molasses.....


18


.3


88,144


74


23


on Picture Films...


18,208


9,117





2,31


Imports......


1,440,728


7.1


1,388,264


6.S


1,855,390


8.0


tal


₱20,779,614


100.0


₱19,683,957


100.0


P22,318,279


100. 0


PORT STATISTICS
TRADE WITII THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Monthly average for
November, 1928 November, 1927
 months ending
November, 1928


Value


2


Value


2


Value


22


67.3
nila................. P28,422,642 67.7 P28,409,705 71.
P32,103,10
4,148,043
15.0
3,256,316
7,531,0:
0
10
,381,328
17.6
1.5
6,701,3.
bu
94,75
554,86
229,195
58,554
1
1.8
iboanga.............
O.
130,569
67,013 0.2
0.4
68,788
*..... .......
25
1,178,454
1,225,96
 2.0
1,156,418
AO....
O.7
897,27
862,981
318,382
2.1
la
15p1...


—1900 P39,404,163 100.0 P47,892,948 1.
Total..-


CARRYING TRADE


IMPORTS


Nationality of
Vessels


November, 1928


Monthly average for
12 months ending
November 1927
November, 1928.


Value





Value


22


Value



8


American...........


... ₱10,059,960 49.8


₱10,329,228


2
51.


₱10,361,242


British..............


.. 5,945,06


29.


5,538,896


7.9


6,400,0:


Japanese...............


76


1


17,990


.0


,093
1,051


Dutch...............


53



.3


53,433


4.0


German.............


1,508,88
* .


1,472,885


7.6


1,518


Norwegian.............


580,827


1,479


Philippine............ . .


4,028


0.1


43,843


O


51,808


3


Spanish..............


0,82
**


19,744


0.6


163,127


Chinese..........


320,584
* .


1.2


7,664


0,20:


0.3


Swedish............ . .





13,628


annish............


**


13,011


Csechoslovak...........


French..............


232,254



1.0


16,285


0.1


By Freight..........


... P20,050,626


96.7


PIO DE1O


97.4


P21,883,006


97.8


By Mail.............


728,988



3. 3


—488,795


2.6


443,616


2.2


Total



- ₱20,779,614


100 0


₱19,683,957


100 0


₱22,326,622


100. 0


EXPORTS


Monthly average for
November, 1928 November, 1927
12 months ending
Nationality of
November, 1928.


-


Value


22


Value


22


Value


28 


American..........


.... ₱ 8,610,205


40.9


₱ 9,724,805


48.9


₱11,808,345


47.


British.............


996,938



38.0


5,828,334


29.2


7,871,634


31


Japanese...........


1,145,704



4


1,281,096


6


2,177,732


erman...........


918,398



4.3


1,088,876


5.6


881,6-


Norwegian.........


137,365
..


).6


465,913





Spanish............


411,331
.


1.5


441,016


2.4


103,675


0.4


Dutch.......... . ..


536,265
*4





663,328


3.5


426,981


Philippine..........


37,435



0.2


56,313


0.4


146,73


Chinese............


* *


16,129


2,059


Swedish............


53,937
* ..


0.2


492,455


1.9


French.......... . . .





1,880


Dannish...........


*...


-53,200


0.2


By Freight.........


.... ₱19,847,578


94.6


₱19,099,897


96.7


P24,817,860


97.4


By Mail...........


1,347,602
*


O.a


620,309


3. 3


666.178


2 6


Total.


P21,195,180


100. 0


₱19,720,206


100 0


P2 


Mra


TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN CCLARIES


Mon


riage fos


Countries


November, 1928


November, 1927


:
12
NC



ending.
ibar. 1928
-


Value
22


Value 


N


  


United States.......... P25,624,559 61.1 P25,205,245 63.1 P3 27.04
69
United Kingdom........
tapan......
China.......


French East Indies.....
Germany...............

Spain..................
Australia...............
British East Indies .....
Dutch East Indies......
France................
Netherlands.........
Italy..
4,934
6,48.
Hongkong..............
6.
6,7
683,166
Belgium...............
.4
178,0:
Switzerland.............
159,65:
0.4
Japanese-China......
0.2
36,776
41,653
Siam............
144,64
o.3
161,323
Sweden................
0.2
111,97
,162
Canada..............
7,130
0.3
Norway................
109,596
30,39
,812
0.1
Austria........
28,00
7,138
O
)enmark..............
1
0.4
166,587
167,115 o. 4
Other Countries.......
P41,974,794 100 0 ₱39,404,163 100 0 P₱al,8u3,945 100.0


2,010,904


3,262,66


80,0


1,363,40:


43


1,293,527


2,111,61


448,46-


647,62


401,822


20,596


8,204


2.0


218,813


¬


2,987,5


,321,8:


"


1,435,54


as


30


6


Ag


28,8


0a


55,5


4
04.384
5.

TA27.548
193,a4

G.8
19.22
V.S1

19
,06



y*
$5
s.

M
o29

*1


THE PICE INDUSTRY
By PERCY A. HILL
of Munoz, Nueva Ecija,
E Director, Rice Producers' Association
N
Prices for both rice
and palay remain about
the same as in last review
the former firm at P8.20
to P9 according to
class and the latter
P3.50 to P3.90 according to grade. Saigon
rice is averaging P8.70
per sack, delivery either
Manila or Cebu. Imports of the latter were
in December 8,758,164
kilos valued at approximately P1,336,415 and
ary 7,559,464 kilos valued at P1,153,603
ports for the last two months slightly
do-Asian markets report firm demand
rope and oriental countries. The civil
t threatens to reign in China will no
iffen export prices.


There has been quite a lot of parrot-crying
about diversification in crops. Irrespective of
the economic loss by change and that of the
climatic and physical limitations of the country,
or rather its special regions, we are inclined to
view the abuse of this word diversification as
a pastime of politicians and misled agriculturists,
at least in the Philippines. As regards the rice
industry there are only certain provinces where
this function is correctly named. These are
the ones where the volume of production is such
that the greater part is given over to, a money
crop, supplying the less fortunate provinces
through the channels of trade.
These provinces are in central Luzon. Other
provinces producing the cereal, consume the
major portion, and depend on export crops for
cash. In the balance of the provinces the production of rice is negligible. It must not be
forgotten, following up the diversification idea,
and eliminating the nine million pesos annual
import of flour, that Cebu, the most heavily
populated province, depends upon corn as its
vital food, the soil and climate not being adapted
to rice. They have over 164,000 hectares producing nearly two and a half million cavans of
corn valued last vear at over eleven millions of
pesos. This is also true in the case of Leyte,


Negro.
the pro. uction or
rice. P iversification nf crops has

not con ained in the education of tue polit
the spelibinder or the fixer.


TOBACCO REVIEW
Alhambra Cigar and Cigarette
Manufacturing Co.
Raw Leaf:—Trading in local grades during
March was quiet. An increased demand for
cheap Cagayan export types has been observed.
The greater part of this tobacco was shipped
to Belgium and Holland. Shipments abroad


during March were:
Raw leaf, stripped tobacco and seraps
Kilos
Australia..................... ..
20,710
China.....................
14,103
Dutch East Indies..............
2,710
14,803
Hongkong............. . . . . . . . . .
79,170
Japan.........................
78,711
North Africa...................
North Atlantic (Europe).....
335,800
730,360
Spall..........................
2,551
Straits Settlements..............
214,057
United States............... ...
9,614
Uruguay.................. . . . ..


1,502,589


March, 1928................... 1,779,095


Cigars:—The business with the United States
has not been very satisfactory during the first
quarter of 1929. A decrease of about 10% over
the corresponding period of 1928 is noted. Comparative figures for cigar shipments to the United
States are as follows:
March 1929, 12,985,111; February 1929,
11,903,454; March 1928, 15,821,696 all in units
of cigars, not thousands.


WILLIAMS TO MADRID


Stanley and Mrs. Williams with their children
left Manila April 5 on
the Empress of France
for the United States,
en route to Madrid where
Williams has been sent
as branch manager for
the National City Bank
A
(still, by exigency of
law, operating in the
Philippines as the InA ternational Banking CorAAIporation, an opinion of
the attorney general
holding that only the Philippine National Bank
may use the word national in its title in these
islands). Stanley Tiny Williams, as tall as a
pine sapling and as sturdy as a New England
whaler, first came to the Philippines in 1906.
As a vigorous young shavetail just graduatedfrom
Bowdoin college, whence the I. B. C. draws
numbers of its men, that institution had employed him for station in Cebu. Since that
time he has spent 1414 years with the I. B. C.
in the Philippines, and seven years with them
in Mexico, at Panama, and in San Francisco.
On some of his vacations he has traveled in
Europe, and Spain is not unfamiliar ground to
him. But it is in the Philippines, where he has
long been manager for the I. B. C., that he
developed into as able a catch-as-catch-can
international banker as any man seeking an
overdraft would wish to encounter, or any
depositor or stockholder would desire to have in
charge of his cash. Wishing him and his family
the best of health and fortune, the Philippines,
where they leave hosts of friends in every element
of the population, diffidently invite attention
to the luggage stickers—Cebu, Manila, P. I.—
and to the fact that men of Williams’s excellent
stamp can be, and are, rounded, in the varied
overseas and domestic business of this archipelago, to a calibre of experience and ability
rating them with the best. Manager R. E.
Shaw, already favorably known here, succeeds
Williams at this post.


When Telegraphing Use
The Radiogram Route


66


ORED
IDE.
IRELLSS
O CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES


25 PLAZA MORAGA


2-26-01
2-26-02
2-26-03


Always Open


ERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION   


REALSO TATE
By P. D. CARMAN
San Juan Heights Addition
March was ,the big
gest month in Manila
real estate of which we
have record with the
one exception of December, 1919, when sales totalled P3,588,123.
Even this could properly be disregarded as
a comparison of general
conditions since in 1919
there was relatively little suburban business.
E
The records of the present very large suburban sales are not available. Most of these sales
are made on the installment plan over long
terms and are not recorded until titles are issued.
It is obvious that much of this would appear as
city business, if suburban sales were negligible.
With the January and February figures exceptionally large the Manila sales during the first
quarter of 1929 exceed those of any similar
period since 1919 and point to a record-breaking
year.
February


March


Sales, City of Manila


1929


1929


Sta. Cruz..........


₱ 333,429


₱ 844,183


Binondo...........


546,680


61,700


San Nicolas........


9,000


523,000


Tondo.............


96,858


119,748


Sampaloc..........


76,983


40,445


San Miguel........


40,300


345,800


Quiapo........... .


45,680


80,800


Intramuros.........



115,625


368,000


Ermita........... .


246,850


Malate........ . . . .


71,944


415,598


Paco........... . ..


13,328


6,652


Sta. Ana......... . .


6,300


47,446


Pandacan..........


1,500


25,640


Sta. Mesa..........


28,598


26,000


TANA


P3,160,862


REVIEW OF THE EXCHANGE
MARKET
By RICHARD E. SHAW
Manager International Banking Corporation


The first week of
March found the buying rates for USgTr
again on the decline but
a reaction soon set in
and, as the Banks’ cash
reserves strengthened,
they began to compete

eagerly for any exchange
offering. Rates were
thus pushed up until at
the month end there
were buyers of USg
at 3,4% premium for
ready and 548% preel mium for forward delivery. The temporary
ease in selling rates
which was apparent during the first part of
March soon gave way to a distinct firmness which
gradually forced up the quotations for USST
from 1/4%o premium to 1-1/8% premium at the
close.
No purchases of telegraphic transfers were
made from the Insular Treasurer during the
period from February 16th to March 16th.
The Sterling market was exceedingly quiet.
At the opening there were sellers of TT at
24-9116 and buyers at 24-3/4, while at the
close sellers were quoting 2/-7416 and buyers
were offering 2,-9/16 to 27-578.
On February 28th the New York London
cross-rate was quoted at 485-1/4. It touched
a low of 485 3,32 on March 8th and 9th, rose
to a high of 485 17,32 on March 18th and closed
on the last day of the same month at 485 1/4.
The quotation for London Bar Silver on February 28th was 26 1/8 ready and 26 1/8 forward.


During March the market fluctuated within
narrow limits and closed on the 31st at 25 15416
for ready and 26 for forward.
New York Bar Silver was quoted at 56 1/2 on
February 28th, was low for March on the 9th
and 16th instants at 56 1/8, reached a high point
of 56 548 on March 21st and 22nd and closed
at 56 174.
Telegraphic transfers on other points were
quoted as follows on the last business day of
March:
Paris, 12.40; Madird, 155 1,4; Singapore,
114 142; Japan, 91; Shanghai, 78 142; Hongkong, 99 3/4; India, 135; Java, 122 344.


And Our Old Friend "et al"
She (at movies, thrilled by the Hollywood clinch):—But I’ve heard kissing
is not a universal custom.
He:—Well, at least it’s Universal.


Statement of Ownership, Manageme
Etc. of the
  :
Editor
Manarer
WALTER ROBB
WALTER RO
Publisher and Proprietor
  OF COMMERCI
OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Signed: WALTER J. ROBB
Editor and Manager
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 10th
day of April, 1929
Inspection Division, Manila Post Offico


Read the Journal Statist


RSAMABARA
ACROSS AMERICA
You will profit by the extraordinary care given your
shipment on the Great Northern. The service is unusually fast, dependable and prompt be r
Pacific Northwest Ports of Entry and Minnec.
Paul, Chicago, New York and other Eastern Pe
For your accommodation the services of our Im
and Export Offices located at 411 Douglas Bldg., Sea
79 West Monroe St., Chicago, 233 Broadway, N
York, are offered without charge, Consult them free
and save worry and expense.


M. J. Costello
Western Traffic Manager
Seattle, Wash.
Cable address: Hillrail


A Dependab
Railway


IN RESPONDING TO ADVERTISEMENTS PLEASE MENTION