ITy Os F PHILIPPIS
LIBRARY
MAR 19 1951


Vol. II, No. 4
March, 1951


HLASLO aUARIERSN


THE CONTENTS


EDITORIAL
Article 324: The Road to Fascism


Page
3
-


ESSAYS
The Gentlemen Cry 'Peace” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Gabriel Manalac, Jr.
Dawn—1951 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Eduardo Romualdez
The Children’s Hour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Eduardo Lachica
Leaf-Shadows (sketches) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... Gregorio Brillantes
The Good As The Object Of Human Love . . .. ... Antonio Manuud
SHORT STORIES
To Live . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pablo Silva
The Region Of The Pink . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Vivencio Peralta
The Night-Mare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Meliton Salazar
Cristina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Alfredo Tengco
POETRY
Thorn Chronicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Torres
Martyr’s Epitaph . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ricardo Bolipata
To God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lconidas Benesa
Golden Laughter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Torres
Loafer .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Albino Arevalo
Advice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Meliton Salazar
To Our Lady Of Night . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Maximo Soliven
FEATURES


9
14
16
22-
35


11
19


29


10
13
15
18


31


32


34


Drama
Books


Emmanuel Torres, Carmelo Quintero 33
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Torres 40


THE STAFF


Editor-in-Chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51


Managing Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .ANTONIO G. MANUUD, A.B. '52


SECTION EDITORS


Enrique Esquivel Jr., A.B. '51


Robert Wilson, A.B. '52


Erancisco Borja, A.B. '51


Gabino Mendoza, A.B. '53


Leonidas V. Benesa, A.B. '52


Emmanuel Torres, A.B. '53


Gregorio C. Brillantes, Litt. B. '52
Carmelo P. Quintero, A.B. '53
Ernesto Gorospe, A.B. '53
ASSOCIATE EDITORS


Onofre Pagsanghan, A.B. '51


Rodolfo Olivares, A.B. '51


Francisco Borja, A.B. '51


Pablo Silva, A.B. '53


Hector Quesada, A. B. '51


Guillermo V. Soliven, A.B. '53


Ricardo Henson, Litt. B. '52


Meliton V. Salazar, A.B. '54


Eduardo D. Lachica, Litt. B. '52


Business Manager .............


........JOSE L. SANTOS, A.B. '51


Circulation Manager ..........


.......RAYMUNDO SAYO, A.B. '51


THE ATENEO QUARTELY, a literary magazine, is published four times annually
by the College of Arts and Sciences of the Ateneo de Manila. Its editorial offices
are at the Ateneo de Manila, Padre Faura Street, Manila. Philippines lts publicetion office at M. Colcol &. Co.. 878 Rizal Ave.. Manila. Subscription rates are
four pesos yearly, single copies one peso.
This publication was entered in the Post Office of Manila as second class mailing
matter on September 10, 1949.


2


“  "


ARTICLE 324: THE ROAD TO FASCISM
"WORDS derogatory to the authority of the State: Any priest
or minister of any church, religion or denomination or any
other religious worker who shall utter or write words derogatory
to the authority of the State or to the binding nature of the laws
in force, or shall attack civil marriage, the public
“Derogatory"
school, or any similar civil institution established
To The
by the State, shall be repressed with light impriState
sonment or a fine in a sum ranging from the
equivalent of 30 to 90 days earnings."
We quote verbatim.
Whose words are these? Mussolini’s in 1929? Hitler’s in
19342 Stalin’s? Neither. We quote from Article 324 of the
proposed Code of Crimes now under consideration by the code
committees of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
We could also quote, here, from the Constitution of the Philippines. But, after all, every one knows what the Constitution
says. The Organic Law of the land guarantees us freedom of
speech and of religion. Are these Constitutional guarantees to
be burned into a mockery and a farce?
We don’t intend to go off half-cocked. We want to be fair
in our reading of Article 324. But let’s not blink the facts. The
proviso is certainly prejudicial and cleverly aimLittle
ed against the Catholic Church. It means that
"Inconvethought-control and speech-control are no longer
niences"
Russian or Communist monopolies. We are going to enjoy those little "inconveniences" too.
In a Catholic country (at least we used to think it was),
the Catholic Priest can no longer teach that civil marriage is
invalid before God and the Church. The State is now ready to


MARCH, 1951


3


pronounce itself supreme arbiter in matters of faith and morals.
It is further provided that when a Priest who happens to be a
foreigner should commit the “offense" punishable under Article
324, he shall be deported after he has served the prison term or
paid the fine. No more effective gag could be put in the mouth
of the poor foreign Priest who wants to speak out on the Papal
Encyclical on the Christian Education of Youth or pronounce civil
marriage, as it truly is when a Catholic is concerned, null and
void.
Article 324 is very subtly worded. It takes refuge in ambiguity. But that is to prevent the enemies of the Church from
distorting Catholic teachings on education, on
The
marriage, on the authority of the Pope and bringSubtle
ing up the charge that Religion is undermining
the "authority of the State", or attacking the
Approach
“binding nature of the laws in force” or subverting a “civil institution established by the State” Our civil
liberties are dear to us. Through dark centuries of oppression
and struggle, we have fought and shed blood for our freedoms,
like the right to speak the truth and the right to worship without coercion and without fear. We are not ready to have these
rights endangered by the single stroke of a legislator’s pen.
During the past few months, the Church has been the target
of apparently concerted and certainly relentless attack: to mention a few instances, the Palma Book, the Lorenzo
Awake
case, and, recently, Code Commission Chairman
Now!—
Jorge Bocobo’s new move seeking the restoration
Or Never
of “absolute divorce.” According to conservative
estimates, at least 80% of the Filipino people are
Catholics. It’s about time that the 80% woke up to the danger
and did something about it. Those Catholics who sit back complacently and watch Religion and Truth take a beating without
lifting a finger are playing right into the hands of our enemies.
There are too many Catholics today who call themselves "broadminded” when they are only thick-skulled.
We protest against Article 324. It is against the Bill of
Rights. It opens the way to a Police State. It’s a one-way ticket
to Fascism.—M. V. S.


“  "


O EIVE


By PABLO SILVA, A.B. '52


The interisland steamer, M. V.
JOLO, nosed into Pier 10 of the North
Harbor at 8:30 P.M. No sooner
was the gangplank down than the
baggage-hands were scampering up
to the ship like ragged, overgrown
urchins, dark, dirty men seeking a
few desperate centavos. Already
one was carrying two suitcases down
the deck, followed by the owner, a
young man dressed in neat, grey
slacks and white sportshirt. As
this carrier approached the main
gangplank, another fellow cargador rushed
E
to his side and grabE
bed hold of one of the
2
suitcases.

Y
EE
“Never mind, ob
E
jected the young man
?
irritably to the newcomer, “he was first.
He can carry both
alone.
E
P
"“That’s right, Goring, I can carry
2
E
both,” said the first
cargador.
“But Ill take care
of this one," persisted
the stubborn newcomer the one called Goring, and he started to s
move down.
"I said he can do it alone!" shouted the young man, his irritation turning to anger. He snatched the suitcase from the second carrier and
returned it to the first. “Get away.
I don't need you.”


But the rejected fellow, undaunted, ran ahead of them and started
clearing the way for the other two.
The trio made their way down the
main gangplank, while over on the
smaller one more baggage-hands were
pushing their way up to the ship.
The young man was met on land by
his chauffeur, who led the way
through the crowd and the cars to
the young man’s limousine. The
baggage was stowed in the rear, and
the two cargadores stood by, waiting.
S

“Here," the young
A
man handed forty centavos to the one who
had carried the suitcases.
“Twenty more, sir,
EE
the man insisted.
“What — just for
two light suitcases you
want — oh, all right,"
he gave twenty centavos more and started
to enter his car.
"And I, sir,” broke
in the other man, the

one called Goring.
EE
“You! You didn't do
anything," exclaimed
the young man.
“I accompanied you, sir. I led
you, and I cleared the way for you,"
muttered the man in a low voice.
“Well, I didn’t ask you to. You
didn’t have to," and the young man
slammed the door of the car shut.


MARCH, 1951


5


The cargador went forward and
gripped the edge of the car’s window
tightly. “But, please, sir—
“Oh, for heaven’s sake, here!’ he
thrust twenty centavos at the man.
Anything to be rid of the fellow,
the young man said to himself.
"Fifty centavos, sir.”
"Well, of all the —! Let’s go,
driver!” The car slid away.
“But this is not enough, sir... sir
" The man stuck to the car
like a leech, desperately. But the
caf gained speed, and he fell off,
staggering.
The young man settled back in
the cushioned seat. The nerve of
some people! The fool doesn’t do
anything, and he asks to be paid.
Then he’s given twenty centavos for
nothing, in pure charity, and what
he demands fifty centavos. That
beats everything yet. That’s just
the trouble with too many people
they want something for nothing — the easy buck. Too many
lazy people who don’t want to work
for their living. He paused in his
thoughts. But anyway, to turn to
pleasanter things... that had been
rather an enjoyable pleasure cruise
to the south. Two full weeks of
fun and relaxation. He'd gained
seven pounds during the trip.... The
car sped down Azcarraga and turned
left at Legarda, toward Santa Mesa.
The streets were still busy and
brightly lighted. He looked at his
watch. It was almost nine. Just
enough time to make that party at
Lilia’s. A shower as soon as he
reaches home, dress up in a jiffy
yes, he mustn’t forget to use
those new, gold, initial-engraved cufflinks he ordered — P18.50 it had
cost him — take out the Lincoln,
and dash over to Lilia’s house in
San Juan. Would the gang be glad
6


to see him there! Good, mellow
drinks, and the girls — the girls
would be there, and dancing — dancing all night long. He'd lose himself completely in the party, dance
a blissful waltz with a beautiful girl
ah, nothing like dancing to the
soft, sweet strains of a haunting
waltz... out into the terrace, and
the wide, starry sky, and the warm,
sultry night.... living....
ENORING the cargador watched in
silence as the black limousine
roared through the pier gate in a
cloud of dust and vanished into the
night. The twenty centavos still lay
in his thick, brown hands. With a
sigh he turned to walk back towards
the shed. That was the last boat in
for the night. Nothing more to do.
Time to go home. He dug into
his side pocket. Two pesos, twofifty, two-eighty, ninety, three-ten,
three-thirty. Three thirty. Only
three pesos and thirty centavos for
the day. He took down his wornout jacket from the nail on the wall
of the shed, put it on over his dirty, striped T-shirt, picked up his
empty lunch-box, and slowly walked
out of the pier gate. He did not
bother to bid the night-watchman
goodnight, nor even look up at him
in his lantern-lit cubby-hole. He
felt tired. Not that it had ever
been otherwise for all the past nights
as far back as he could remember.
But somehow weariness is something
one never gets used to.
The same dull, aching sensation
over his whole body was there tonight, his limbs seemed to creak at
their hinges with his every movement, his legs still felt as heavy
as lead at every step. Once more
Goring felt like dropping down right
on this spot and closing his weary,
bloodshot eves, and going to sleep
forever. He took out a soiled hand“  "


kerchief and wiped the dirt from
his oily, furrowed forehead. His
skin was so dark and rough one could
not notice the dirt. Only the smudges in his handkerchief revealed it.
Yes, and his skin was so wrinkled
one would have thought him older
than the forty weary years he had
seen. But his body, though not
muscular, was durable and tough
like thick, good-quality leather,
hardened by the rigors of his occupation. His dusty, black hair was
combed in one long stroke all the
way to the back of his head, like a
coxcomb.
“Soria?” he called out to an idle
jeepney in the semi-darkness.
“Soria."
He got into the vehicle and they
chugged down the bumpy road. The
road was dark and quite deserted
and silent save for the rickety creaking of the dilapidated jeepney. There
were three other passengers beside
Goring, but he scarcely noticed them.
Goring was brooding. Brooding
came easy to him. He did more of
it than anything else. In fact, that
was the only thing that came easy
to him. He could help himself to
as much of it as he wished, free,
without effort. Plenty of time for
it, like tonight.
Not like money. Money didn’t
come easy at all. It was hard to
get money. Terribly hard to get
enough to live — enough to feed
Maria and the two children, Totoy
and Tita. Like today, three-thirty.
A measly three-thirty for one whole
busy, dizzy day. A little extra beg
ging here, a little extra speed to
get a customer there, a little extra
wrangling — a little extra effort all
throughout the day, and all it added
up to was three pesos and thirty
centavos.
It was a disgusting and disappointing day, just like all the other days


.... He wondered how three pesos
and thirty centavos would feed four
mouths tomorrow — yes, it could
be done. Tinapa and rice again.
And again in the morning Maria
would sit silently beside him at the
table and eat slowly and watch Totoy and Tita eat. And again Tita
would ask him for more tinapa, and
he would shake his head and say
there was no more. Then she would
look up at him with a happy, childish smile and tickle his chest with
her little boring finger and think he
was joking her, and with a little giggle beg again, "Tinapa, Tatay....
"WHAT'S it this time, Lil?” the
young man gulped in the chaser
and set down his glass on the bar.
“We’re having our frat dance this
Saturday at the Winter Garden.
Wouldn’t you like to come? I’m selling some tickets.
“Sure! How much?”
“Twenty pesos — this ticket is for
a couple."
"Twenty bucks. Must be a classy
affair, huh, Lil? Here,” the young
man pulled out his wallet and took
out a twenty-peso bill.
THE jeepney stopped in front of the
almost-empty Divisoria market.
Goring the cargador paid his fare
and got out. He walked up to Calle
Asuncion toward San Nicolas. In
the lonely darkness his feet made the
only sound as he trudged down the
narrow asphalt street at a weary
pace.
Perhaps there were other ways...
anything to relieve this horrible mess,
this life of hunger and misery which
would stretch on and on till God
knew when. All Goring wanted was
enough to get three decent meals a
day, to live — not to starve. Goring
didn’t even think of wishing they
could transfer from the dark little


MARCH, 1951,


7


hole of a barong-barong that was
their home to something better. That
was much too remote; like an airy
dream.
But only to have enough to eat,
to exist.... He could rob — like
some men he knew — get a gun and
hold a man up on a dark, lonely
night such as this, and just like that
he would have ten or even twenty
pesos in his pocket. No — he couldn’t
do that. 'Not that. Or maybe use
the same gun to blow his brains out
and end everything, end all the
wretchedness and worry. But that
wouldn’t be right. That would only
make things worse for Maria and
the kids. They'd be left alone.
there'd be no one to feed them. Why
then, blow their brains out, too, and
end — you’re losing your mind, Goring, you’re losing your mind... and
he smiled bitterly to himself in the
empty darkness.
THE young man stretched himself
out on the sofa cushions and
watched the other guests dancing in
the softly-lighted terrace. There was
Lilia gliding dreamily on the shining floor with someone... Lilia....
she really did like him — was crazy
about him. It gave him an exhilarating sense of self-confidence and satisfaction to know that. Well, he
did love her too.... he mused contentedly — Lilia would make a wonderful wife, a heavenly wife. But
he wouldn’t ask her yet.
One could go on.... living....
forever....
ENORING hastened his steps a triW fle, for his eyelids were drooping
from a great weight, as though they
were lined with a sticky glue and his
eyes refused to open wide. He reached
the passageway that led to his shack,
a narrow space between two buildings that scarcely allowed two per

sons to pass abreast of each other.
At the other end of this entrance
he reached his barong-barong, one
of half a dozen that were scattered around an empty backyard surrounded almost on all sides by old
accessorias, and reeking with the
smell of wet laundry and foul garbage.
The room was pitch-black. He
groped around on his knees for his
banig, unrolled it on the bamboo
floor, and sat down on it with a muffled groan. He discerned the hunched figures of Maria and the two
children lying fast asleep in the darkness, pitifully crowded into the
other corner of the little cubicle.
He could hear their measured breathing. They were his own. He loved
them. How he wished they could live
ordinarily healthy, human lives... he
pressed his temples with his hands.
He was home once more.
Goring was not only tired in body;
a great weariness gripped his soul.
Now he could lie back and sleep. But
tomorrow before the sunrise, before
his aching bones were fully rested,
he would wake up again and go out
and toil through the heat and the
dust of the day, and return at night,
weary, disappointed, hopeless as ever
... and the next day, and the next
..no promise, no hope of anything
better for the future — nothing
but darkness ahead.
Goring the cargador looked out the
window. Outside was darkness and
silence, deathly silence. Must one
bear this misery forever...? He fell
back on the hard, pillow-less floor
and closed his eyes. If only he
could go to sleep forever and never
more have to open his eyes again and
wake up — to cold, dismal reality....
And outside was the still and
empty night — forlorn, dark ....
.... one must go on.... living....


8


“  '


-he Gentiemen Cry Peace
By GABRIEL MANALAC, JR., A.B. '52


The President of the Philippines
has spoken, not once but many times!
He has boldly announced that there
is no cause for alarm — peace prevails in the Philippine Islands. To
secure this peace, he has asked for
the cooperation of all, repeating time
and time again the fundamental idea
of a unified nation. He has great
plans for his peace program, in fact
he has given it much thought, he has
deliberated upon it with exceedingly
great care, he has talked it over
with ranking officials of the Philippine government, and all have agreed on the merits of the plan. All
have expressed their faith in this
program. Yes, everyone has talked
of the peace program and everybody
agrees with it.
Thus after a great deal of thought,
after careful deliberation and much
talk, peace reigns in the Philippines. One has only to look about
him to be convinced of this fact.
A man can even breathe its sweetness in the air. Everything is so
peaceful!
The current slogan is now
“There is peace in the Philippines!"
You have but to ask the Chief of Police of Manila or any other city in
the Philippine Islands, and he will
explicitly assert that there is peace.
He will tell you that conditions have
improved. Today, he will say, fewer
people are killed by food-poisoning
than by bandits! This kind of news
is very encouraging. Now they have
bat a small problem in coping with
individual as well as organized


bands of hoodlums! Since the "foodpoisoning" problem has been solved,
everyone can relax for peace has
already been attained.
Or if you dislike the arrogant mannerisms of the men on top, then
ask an ordinary patrolman. He will
tell you, with enthusiasm, that he
has played a great part in restoring
peace to the country. He will tell
you the ways in which he squelches
any form of violation. He accepts
bribes from citizens because law and
order must be maintained at all costs
he illegally beats up prisoners
because the law must be upheld.
he idles his time away because there
is nothing better to do, because everything is so peaceful!
But this proves only that peace
prevails in the city. What about
the provinces? We have in the provinces the genial commandant in every Constabulary garrison. Ask him.
He is only too willing to boast of
the peace he has won for the people. He will tell you of the country’s serenity where nothing mars
the peace, save the consistent attacks of Huk stragglers, completely
armed and trained for battle, often
outnumbering the garrison — but
they are only stragglers and there
is no cause for alarm for peace
has been secured.
Or you might talk to the farmer
He will say that conditions were
never better! It is so peaceful! Of
course some Huks come around once
in a while, destroy the crops, burn
homes, and kill a few people to keep


MARCH. 1951


9


in practice — but generally speaking, there is peace!
Yes, the Philippines has never been
more peaceful! This we can attribute to the verbosity of our leaders
who break their heads solving the
traffic problem in the city — who
argue about the merits of a man’s
religion — who talk of trips abroad


at government expense to help in
the unification of the world — who
sport P40,000 Cadillac cars which
they claim befit the dignity of
their rank — these are the men who
have brought peace to the Philippine
Islands. To these men we bow in
humble recognition of a job well
done. We salute the saviors of the
Philippine Islands!


Thorn Chronicle
By EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B. '53


Take no silver for an aspirin
To heal the ills of the wearied flesh;
Nor heed dark music of a jangling age
Full of caps and bells and rakish horns
Crying forlornly, like a jester's broken voice.
Reach not to glinting golden heaps on table piled
With clinking glasses filled with pale
Wine poured from cold gin bottles:
For the sound of gold will soon be stale
And empty like base silver (as the price
For which they hung His mangled body),
Will be jarring rattle as copper-minted coins
Stuffed in pockets. Eyes of fallen man
That once were sharers of the dream
Are blind to heights of man-made towers built
On ash-gray mounds, to false-blown roses
Foul with canker and festering lust
For man's destruction in the tomb.
For we are lost between dark, dreamless walls
In the blind alleys of the mind,
Cursing ourselves,
Because our hearts are choked with thorns.
No — not this temporal pill to cure our wounds,
But this Bread to break
For our blackened mouths.


10


  


The Region Of The Pink
By VIVENCIO PERALTA, JR., Litt.B. '54


She entered the room without a
word. He looked at her calmly
enough. He took one last puff at
his cigarette, then laid it very carefully on the ash-tray. He gazed at
the thin, curling smoke for a while
as if in thought.
"Did I over-tip that bell boy?” he
asked himself with a scowl.
But how was he to know of such
matters? This was his first time
to sleep in a hotel. The Rose Petal
was one of those pink-everything
structures. He did not like the color, but the place had been favorably, even forcibly 'recommended’ by
friends. After all the service was
one for, of, by the best. Pink-aproned
waitresses served you pink dishes.
Pink-cheeked boys greeted you with
a soft, pink-tickling hello, g’d m’ning
and helped you with your things with
a smile that showed a snow-capped
inverted ridge of pink gums. Pink
roses bloomed in the garden. Pink
ceilings, pink curtains, pink blankets,
pink bed sheets, pink, pink, pink,
pink everything everywhere you go.
Pink, pink, pink.
"Damn,” he said.
“Oh.” She looked at him.
“Oh, it’s you.”
“I thought you were angry.”
“I was merely thinking,” he explained.
She sat down on the bed and smiled.
Their eyes met for one fleeting instant, but both looked down at once
at the floor and glued their gaze
there for a long time before either dared to speak again.
Finally, the man stood up. He


did it unsteadily, confusedly, but he
was able to make it look not too ridiculous.
"I’m going down for a moment,"
he said apologetically. "Forgot
something....
She winced as if hurt terribly, but
she tried to hide it with a wan smile.
"I—" she began. But the door had
already closed before her and she
was alone in the pink room, clasping and unclasping hands that were
translucent in their delicacy.
“I hate pink, I hate pink, I hate
pink," said the man tensely as he
strode down the stairs.
He passed Valdez, the soft-spoken
proprietor of the Rose Petal smiling
from his desk, and flung him a smouldering glance and proceeded to the
garden. Outside, he breathed more
freely. The evening wind was lightly scented with ilang-ilang blossoms.
But when he saw the rose-bushes
growing about in profusion, he felt
an impulse to trample them all, to
tear them up by the roots. Instead,
he picked up a withered flower and


MARCH, 1951


11


began to pluck its petals one by
one. He flicked the last one with
a loud snap of his fingers and watched it sail sorrowfully in the air until
it fell upon the ground to rest.
It is always like that, he thought.
One morning the rosebud would
open; it blossoms, and then withers
and dies. Life is like that, too. Everything is like that. Love, beauty,
roses — must all these pass away?
Life, beauty, roses may perish, but
not love really. It could not. It must
not, and yet...
He wanted to shout, to cry, to
kiek something, but he stood still,
one foot on the garden bench, an elbow on his raised knee, and he
looked not uncomposed nor uncalm.
But it was impossible to stay posed
this way.
He straightened up and began to
walk briskly, aimlessly, around the
hotel grounds. The Rose Petal did
not boast of wide lawns and yards,
so that it was not long before he
was back again where he started.
But this time the bench was occupied. In the gathering darkness,
he could see two lovers whispering
into each other’s ear. A feeling of
envy rose in him. Here were two
hearts with love and joy to the
brink of overflowing. Here were
two people so different from himself. He could almost hate them for
being so happy. Yet deep within
him he knew he could not hate them.
He knew what it was to love, how
beautiful, how sweet, how breathless,
how dear it was to say the enchanted words to the one you love. But
now he knew how meaningless and
vain those words were, too, how they
could make one pained, burdened,
confused. How when a crisis came,
they were not enough. They were
chains, those words, and he was
chained, clamped down with restrain12


ing bonds from her — bonds which
no thinking man would dare to break.
And he was, at least he thought himself to be, a thinking man. And that
was the reason for his having to
leave her. He didn’t know how to
tell her what the doctor had told him
not in words that were pink and
frothy. And that was why he hated
pink. It was to him, now, a moronic color.
When he emerged from the gumamela bushes, he saw the unmistakable frame of Valdez, Proprietor,
sitting easily on one of the stone
benches. He wanted to pass him by
unnoticed, but the moon-face turned
and gave him a smile of recognition.
He managed to say a not too impolite good evening.
"I was waiting for you," said Valdez.
"What for?”
"I want to talk to you."
"What for?'
“Look here, son. I know what’s
troubling you. Now, I haven’t been
in this hotel business for twenty
years just for nothing. The, ahahem, Rose Petal has some experience with such matters.
"What do you mean?" asked the
young man.
“If you will sit down beside me
for a little moment...
He hesitated, then obeyed. The
proprietor nodded his satisfaction
and began softly.
“Years ago a couple came here.
The man was a doctor — a specialist
in something. He was young. A
friendly, honest fellow, too. The
woman was—well, a beautiful, delicate lady. High class. But she
was frail. She was sick, sick to death.
And they were so in love with each
other, but the doctor was, well, too,
much of a doctor in every way. He
“  "


did not want to hurt her, but the
way he acted wounded her too deeply for him, for any doctor to cure.
Like you, he was too wise, too much
a philosopher, a logician, a thinker
— and he forgot his wife did not
want any of these. She wanted a
lover. She wanted to be loved. That
was all. She was only a woman
with a woman’s heart and no more.
What cared she if it was polotcolsis
scletophosis or some such label that
ailed her? She loved him. She
wanted him. That was all there was
to it. But the doctor learned this
too late.
“She died. She had to die. Every.
body has to die. But that was not
the thing that counted. She died a
very unhappy woman when she could
have been the happiest in the world,
even dying. The only reason this
did not happen was because it could
not happen. It was not possible.
The man was too blind, too ignorant
to know how to love.”
The silence that ensued was long,
unbearable to the listener.
"If you knew it all along, why
didn’t you tell him? Why didn’t you
tell him he was a — a hopelessly
blind fool?” he blurted suddenly.
“Well, I—"


It was the proprietor’s turn to endure the youth’s intense gaze. He
bowed his head, but he could not find
words. Then he looked at his companion, but he looked down again.
“I am the doctor,” he said at last.
It was a different man that spoke.
“I gave up my practice the day she
died."
"What?”
“Believe me. Believe me for her
sake. Your wife is waiting for you
now. I hope you know what to do.
Good luck.” And fat Valdez glided
into the shadows.
He was left alone in the dark of
the garden. He sat there a long
time looking, thinking, listening to
the night noises. Finally, he stood
up. He turned to a rose and inhaled the flower’s sweet, tantalizing
fragrance.
And it was not the philosopher
nor the thinker that ran to her side.
It was the lover who gave a newlyplucked rose and said to her, “I love
you, my sweet!"
And when he said this, he was in
a magic realm, a realm of pink, pink
skies, pink clouds, pink curtains, pink
everything, everywhere you go.
Wonderful, deep, meaningful pink,
pink, pink, pink.


Martyr's Epitaph
By RICARDO K. BOLIPATA, A.B. '54
Though life be warm and cold the grave,
For freedom’s cause his life he gave,
That men may know how Death can be
As eweet as life for liberty.


MARCH, 1951


13


SAWNLEI
By EDUARDO ROMUALDEZ, A.B. '54


The horizon is a red sky. No,
not a rich, golden red but red of
a sinister hue, the color of blood
newly spilt. I feel the cold and bitter air creeping into my blood and
bones. Is this the way a new year
comes in? No, I would say not; I
remember the advent of the previous
years, they came in very much different ways.
Without being a prophet of doom
the scarlet sunrise could mean Nature’s forecast of a Red-dominated
world. The biting coldness may
very well be the cold and dark
dungeons of a Communist prison. At
this very moment thousands of men
are being butchered behind the Iron
Curtain by the sang-froid of hardened and impenitent hearts.
Now is the time to prepare, prepare for the best or the worst. The
redness and coldness of the year’s
first dawn may presage the inception of an age of martyrdom. What
sounds are carried by the wind of
that first dawn? Muffled thunder
... or big guns in the distance?
The pitter-patter of light rain on a
tin roof... or the tramp-tramp of
hob-nailed boots on some far-away
parade ground? The few white
clouds that hang low and spirit-like
against the red sky, what are they?
.. . . . The ghosts of Korea? Of suffering Hungary? Of bleeding Candaba?
And yet, slowly... very slowly,
like a receding curtain on a giant
stage, the darkness and the redness
slink away from an inevitable brilliance. Watching the sunrise, I
know that soon the scarlet field in
the horizon will be mere patches of
14


red, mere heralds of the arrival of
the sun — the chariot of glory ...
and my heart is not all filled with
dread, but with waiting, and with
eagerness... and with hope. It is
the hour for prayerful matins — for
thoughts turning Fatima-ward, homeward, God-ward. A little while yet
the chanticleer will announce to
the world the advent of light, of
a new year, of a new hope.
The world wakes up to the new
year. Somewhere in the North, just
below the world’s thirty-eighth parallel, soldiers are nursing their
wounds, sorrows and cares. Inside
a big factory a foreman is taking
more than is necessary in laborers"
check-offs. As the cock greets the
new year, from a small and dingy
shack, a bloated Dives is just creeping into bed to sleep off the dizziness from the previous night’s carousing. Across the blood-stained
fields of Central Luzon a farmer
holds his hands against a tiny morning fire before he tills his patch
of fertility, land he has learned to
love, yet not his own.
I see many things in disorder, like
jeeps bunched together on a Quiapo
afternoon. Many things discordant,
like the inane tooting of brazen horns
from limousines, like the incoherent
and rapid tempo of life that is the
child of man’s inhumanity to man.
And seeing these things, man wonders: could this be the redness of
dawn? Blood unspilt but blood wasting away in the disease of social disorder? And could this redness of
dawn last longer than it should?
Could the sky be so red that it might
hang like a pall, a bloody curtain to
“  "


shield the sun’s brilliance from the
eyes of man?
The chanticleer crows even more
loudly, vigorously. And I know that
with inevitable sureness, the sun is
soon to rise and in the heart of man,


a swelling comes — a sudden bigness that could only mean that the
new dawn of the year brings new
hope.
Where now, puny man?


To God
(The Maker Who Makes Poets Who Make Poems)
By LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A.B. '52
Quare tristis es, anima mea, et quare conturbas me?
Come, snatch your harp from the willows
And psalm a song to the Lord.
The world with song is exultant:
Come, pluck the harpstrings, the chords of the heart,
And sing with the world.
Listen to the stars as they choir their matins
In the wide-cyed nightquiet: sing with the stars!
Sing with the eastern hills as they chant
Their lauds of good cheer at dawnburst!
Sing with the mountains mightily shouting alleluias in the morning!
Hear ye not the joying of blossom and new leaf
As they hymn their magnificats in the sun?
The benedictus of the stock-doves
In the temples of the forests?
The nune dimittis of gray leaves breexe-hearsed to their graves?
Hark to the fiery sun
As down on his knees he intones his vespers in the even
To the decp-voiced amen of the seas.
Arise with the harp, master of creatures, my soul,
Of the earth and the sea and the sky:
Arise and psalm a song to the Lord!
Quare tristis es, anima mea, et quare conturbas me?


MARCH, 1951


15


The Cnuorens Lour
By EDUARDO D. LACHICA, Litt.B. '52
“Between the dark and the daylight,
When the night is beginning to lower,
Comes a pause in the day's occupation
That is known as the Children's Hour."


Evening shadows steal up the
path, and into the house creeps the
dust of silences. You hear the
ghosts of yesteryear patter across
the musty attic floor leaving their
faint footprints, and hear the rustle
of sheaves of yellow paper being
handled. You lean back into the
ostermoor, listening pensively to the
metallic counting of the clock. A
smile plays on your withered lips as
you think back on how the gay, cavorting poetry of your bachelorhood
has turned into the prose of marriage
and how you have scrapped the bliss
of life for a life of bliss. "April is the
cruelest month," you sigh, "stirring
dull roots with spring rain—
But the grandfather clock chimes out
the bleary hour of eight and you
realize with a start the grave peril
you are in. It is the children’s hour!
Then the door is flung open before you can barricade it with the
china cabinet and now sudden
laughter has taken the fort.
“Tell us a story, papa!" Marietta cries, kissing you with strawberrystained lips.
“Yes, do!” insists Roberto, slipping
a grass snake into your coat pocket. You have expected this so you
extract the wriggling thing with two
fingers and drop it into a vat of
vitriol which you keep handy for
such emergencies. What fun, those
two! Roberto is a wonderful child;
16


-Longfellow
he may flavor your coffee with pimiento, thereby revealing some characteristics of the ambitious Borgias, but you love every minute of
his simple-hearted mischief. In your
hand is a letter penned by Mrs. Martinez in, it seems, one of her more
desperate moments:
My Dear Parent,
I am beginning to despair of
the conduct of your child, Roberto.
In School Form 56, he wrote after OCCUPATION OF FATHER:
“Safe-aracker", and after SEX:
an underscored "None". Already,
he has organized a clandestine
clique devoted (I quote from their
constitution which I retrieved from
a stoolie): “to crime, crime, and
more crime” Now they rove the
kindergarten yard wearing furtive looks and scowling at the
girls at play. I fear for the children. Could you convince him of
the futility of his evil schemes?
I know he respects you. He saye
you shoot the best tommy-gun in
the business.
Yours in distress,
(Mrs.) Angelina Martinez
Only three days ago, dark rumors
fell on your ears that Roberto was
collecting snakes and keeping them
in the clothes hamper in the kitchen.
You refused to believe this slanderous report until one day the cook
“  "


ran screaming out of the kitchen;
but she, Roberto shrewdly explained,
was only getting exercise, a virtue
cooks generally lack. Take it as the
suspicious nature of old age, but you
marched resolutely to the kitchen and
with an oath threw open the oven
door. Sure enough, there was a beady-eyed coral snake sticking its
tongue out from the sauce pans. But
the poor creature could have been
only trying out the pastries, and so
dropping the gourmet down the
drain, you considered the case closed.
Yet, only three hours
later, a striped garter
snake wiggled in
turugh the Vindov  84
while Roberto’s sixteen-year-old sister

was entertaining two

scholars. The visitors
displayed surprising
agility leaping about
the furniture, giving
vent to some vigorous
college yells at the
same time. And Mrs.

Martinez eventually
received her share of e 
Ophidians when one
with yellow spots turned up among her lesson plans. The
resulting havoc in the Fourth Grade
room was untold. This shocking series of crimes was shrouded in mystery although witnesses have testified to seeing a tow-head behind
window-sills at such times laughing
sardonically to himself.
Once, the family threatened retribution and the cunning little fellow
lapsed into a spell of good behavior.
In the afternoons he would be seen
saying Nones along the garden path
and even when Marietta prevailed
upon him to enliven the afternoon
with some small mischief, he fixed
her with the look of one piously


shocked and, with a brief prayer
for her soul, went back to his holy
work. Peace reigned in the house
while the little darling fluttered back
and forth doing countless errands and
good deeds.
But the ennui of serenity was too
much for Roberto. One night, the
family was rudely awakened when
a frightful clamor issued from the
room of Tia Marta. Someone, went
the hushed and anxious whispers,
had secreted an adder under the bedsheets. That was more
than the household
could stand. Courageously one and all advanced into the kitchen armed with cur
tain rods, broomsticks,

and other lethal wea4
pons. With hoarse
cries they fell on the
current snake menace.
Because of taut nerves
and shifting shadows
accuracy was poor. A
——. horrible fit of indiscriminate whacking
seized all and for
hours the cellar and
kitchen resounded with grunts, curses, and dull thuds. Tio Joaquin had a
mortal fear of snakes and had to be
dragged to the combat. Now from
his death moans, it appeared that he
was in the fatal clasp of an anaconda. Dawn, however, revealed that
Tio Joaquin had entangled himself
in some lengths of garden hose which
had been left lying around. After
clearing away the wreckage of fallen
snakes and relatives, the author of
these vile crimes, Roberto himself,
was apprehended snaking down from
his bedroom window He was held
incommunicado while the bruised relations decided his fate. After a
motion to dip him inch by inch into


MARCH, 1951


17


a cauldron of boiling oil had been
calmly discussed, a compromise was
reached. He would get off lightly
this time: only ten days of bread
and water, on the condition that
thenceforth he would leave snakes
and similar creatures to themselves.
Today, far from lanquishing away
on his new diet, the convict is bouncing on your lap and laughingly rifling your pockets for loose change!
“Tell us about Red Riding Hood,"
coos Marietta, "I like the Wolf. He’s
cute."
And you are the troubadour once
more, rising to heights of Provencal
song, singing malaguenas in a mountain pass, recounting tales of spangled knights in search of the Holy
Grail.
At the crack of a cricket’s whip,
the six white chargers bolt and you
are once more rattling towards the
Prince’s palace, a Remington on your
lap and your keen eyes on the look

out for Apaches. Now, brandishing
a yatahgan, you strike the sultan’s
turret with a shaft of light; the
ivory gates of the mosque fall apart,
and the marvels of the east are before you with background music by
Rimsky-Korsakov. And sailing a
painted ship on a painted ocean, you
fling a challenge to the billowy galleons fading to port as the quarterdeck shudders to the thunder of your
sixty-pounders; and your heart beats
with the sea-gull’s as he breasts the
taleful Trade Winds, skipping over
secret horizons.
Finally, you plod home with your
beaten cavalry over the steppes of
Borodino but the two wide-eyed listeners, surfeited with interest, do
not hear the clock chime nine. Soon
Minda comes to take the children upstairs and you are left alone in a
room where only the ticking of the
clock and the shimmering of wind on
the glass panes break the evening
silence.


-O


Golden Laughter
By EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B. '53
I heard God's golden laughter shake the morn—
Long, leaping bright-fires breaking sapphire skies
Like poniards into clouds! — the giddy cries
Of chuckling birds like bells before the unworn
Brightness of sun, the rustle of graceful corn,
The sudden crackle of orchard boughs, brisk rise
Of the lusty wind smiting jade hills where lies
Gurgling the clear-eyed brook through fern and thorn.
And 1 was swept by the glory that stirred the sod!
The smoky fields dew-gleaming lift in praise
Of waking song their voices. As streams that flood
O'er dappled stones or dawn’s soft-fallen grace,
Touched me with winged joys, He my shining God;
But, oh, with my song I hope to touch His face!


18


“  "


ID TGAR


By MELITON SALAZAR, A.B. '54


On the third day, she told Ben
about the dream again. They were
at the breakfast table; Ben had just
broken a piece of toast, preparatory
to drowning it in his coffee, when
she called out his name in a tone
of voice she generally reserved for
occasions such as when the rice boiled over into their kerosene stove,
or when the neighborhood dogs engaged in a glorious but very muddy
battle on the wash she had spread
out to dry in the back yard. Ben
looked up at her quickly, the browned piece of toast suspended over the
coffee cup.
She had a puzzled frown on her
brow, her lips quivering delightfully,
as she searched for a word. She
was like this, always searching for
words. Ben-the-Patient tipped his
head sideways a little, the way
he always did when he pretended to listen, or was day-dreaming, or
just before he would say, with a
surprised grin, "Lin, what heaven
did you come from? You look specially special today.” This time, he
had an encouraging half-smile and
a quizzical frown half-born on his
brows, and looking at him, Lina
wanted to say, mock-severely,
"Prince Valiant, that broadsword
you shave with is getting rusty.
You’ve cut yourself again.
“Ben," she said again, "remember
the dream I told you about? That
dream. " She bit her lip for a
moment. “It was on.... on....”
“Monday," supplied the admirable
Ben. “The dream was about a mare;


a funny-looking mare with grey
spots. You just couldn’t remember
how it came out. You kept thinking
about it the rest of the day, you
even called me up at the office. I
remember I had to ask poor, overworked, Mrs. Castro to look up a
book on dreams, but she never found
anything about mares."
Lina blushed slightly, smiling resignedly across the table at a husband who was openly triumphant.
Watching her, Ben’s heart skipped
four beats, and the piece of toast
which had loomed over the coffee
like the sword of you-know-who finally met a very soggy end. Ben disposed of it with a flourish. The
office motto was "Presence of mind
at all times," and that, Ben gloated, included even the awesome subject of wives” dreams. He took
up a napkin and wiped his lips with
another flourish.
“Was it Monday?” This was the
female coming out of lovely Lina.
None, of them are free from it.
Ben was positive it was Monday.
“Well anyway, the next night -
the night before last — I dreamed
the same thing."


MARCH, 1951


19


Ben registered unbelief on his
forehead. He frowned incredulously
at her while he worked on another
piece of toast.
"And last night, Lina went on
calmly.
Ben was stunned. This last revelation was a thunderclap. The
world went spinning into the sun;
graves opened and the dead walked
out, singing “Just Say I Love Her".
"Again?” Ben swallowed. "Last
night?
Lina nodded solemnly.
“The same dream? The mare? The
one with grey spots?'
Lina nodded again, her eyes deep
with the evil portent that a mare
obviously was.
Ben speared another piece of toast.
“Well,” he said, "and you still don’t
know how it comes out?"
Lina shook her head.
Ben munched his toast in a cloud
of puzzled concentration. He took
an absent-minded gulp of coffee. “I
just can’t make it out, he said. "It
seems to be a message of some sort,
but from whom? A grey mare?
Do you know any grey mares, by any
chance?”
Lina indicated that she did not.
"What did she do this time,
the same tricks?
“I came into the living room,
Lina said, "and there she was, reading a newspaper.” For three nights
now, she had gone into the living
room and seen a mare, reading a
newspaper.
A hard light came into Ben’s eyes.
“Was that why you woke me up last
night, then changed your mind and
said it didn’t matter?"
Lina nodded, crushed with guilt.
“Why didn’t you tell me?” It was
the inspector questioning the criminal: "Where did you hide the body?
“You — you would have laughed,"
Lina the criminal said, her voice
20


trailing off to a husky whisper.
Ben had a glass jaw when it came
to husky whispers; Lina had used
them to advantage a trillion times.
Ben’s heart tumbled off and knocked against his knees. His Adam’s
apple got stuck and he felt a little
dizzy. She had a way of looking
utterly small and wide-eyed and helpless, and that, timed with the husky
whisper, made a sucker out of
her husband. Ben fought down an
impulse to walk around the table and
crush her in his arms.
"I?” Ben was aghast. "Laugh?'
He reeled at the thought of it.
“Whatever brought that crazy notion into your head?” Righteous indignation rumbled in his chest. The
irate lion, growling at a mouse.
“Why, I — I’ve a right to know!
If this... this dream has been keeping you awake nights, why, it’s like
an illness or a worry or... or anything! You’re losing health, and I’ve
got a right to know! Understand?”
Lina smiled, a warm, sweet, lovely, wonderful smile. The sea turned blue, the birds began to sing,
the grass began to grow and flowers to bloom. Ben turned to his
coffee, his heart going tlot-tlot-tlot
like the highwayman’s steed in the
echoing night.
Around them, Manila was waking
up to a new day. Across the street,
somebody was singing "Mona Lisa”
in an atrocious soprano. A truck
raced its engine somewhere; the radios of the neighborhood carried the
morning request programs loudly. A
block away, brakes clashed shrilly as
a bus ground to a stop. Dust, the
eternal, was already in the air, golden specks afloat and gleaming in
the yellow sunbeams that sliced
across the dark-blue asphalt of the
streets. A thin streamer of smoke
already spiralled into the blue sky,
soon to be followed by the black and
“  "


the brown and the grey columns
from the factories and the breweries of the city. It was the bright
beginning of a hot day, the smells,
the sounds, the fading coolness that
is Manila at seven in the morning.
Ben remembered he had to hustle.
He began to hustle. Between bites,
he waved at the window where the
quadrangle of sky was blue and
bright, and quoted, "Here has been
dawning another new day. Lin,
will we let it slip useless away?
My boss would fry me alive if we
did."
“Ben,” Lina said. “What could
it mean? I think it does mean something."
“Nonsense, Ben mumbled. "I’ve
never given all this hocus about
dreams any thought.” He pointed an
accusing finger at her plate. “Eat,
missus!"
Lina attacked her sunny-side-ups.
A few minutes later, the master
of the house was all set for another
office day. Except for a disconcerting fact. The master had spilled
coffee on his shirt. The missus of
the house was repairing the damage
with the aid of the electric iron.
The missus did not only have a way
with electric irons; she also had a
one-track mind.
“It could be an omen, you know,
Ben," she said.
“Nah.” The master was engrossed in the day’s news.
Lina blushed and chucked her husband under the chin. “Go to your
work,” she said.
“I hope I never wake up.
“You'd better. You’re late four
minutes now."
“Well, got to make money.” Ben
wrestled with his tie.
“Hustle, you poor boy. We have
to get rich quick.


"Not by dreaming,” Ben said.
"And specially, not by dreaming of
mares.
Lina grinned at him. “I’ll forget
all about the dream, she said.
It was later in the day that poor,
overworked Mrs. Castro came into
Ben’s office to tell him the missus
was on the telephone.
“You have to wait a minute or
so, though, she told Ben. “The big
shot is using the main line, and
you don’t want him listening to your
call."
“No,” Ben agreed. "You say it’s
Lina? I wonder why she’s calling at
this hour.”
“Maybe she wants you to buy something on the way home.
Ben shook his head. "Lina never
does that. Must be that confounded dream of hers again."
“The same dream?” Mrs. Castro
remembered the dream books she had
looked up.
Ben nodded. “She’s had the same
dream for the third time, now. It’s
getting her worried.”
“You know,” said Mrs. Castro,
“the only horse that looks like Lina’s dream-mare is Lucy Gray. She
came in first in yesterday’s sweepstakes race.
“Lucy Gray, huh?”
Lina was on the line; the big shot
was off the main connection. “"Ben,
Lina said, and seemed to choke.
“Ben...
Mrs. Castro was frightened to see
Ben’s face change as Lina spoke to
him.
“Mrs. Castro, Ben said slowly, as
he groped to return the phone to its
cradle, "Mrs. Castro, Lucy Gray just
won me the grand prize in the sweepstakes draw."


MARCH, 1951


21


—LAF—SIALOWS
(vignettes for summer)
By GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, Litt.B. '52


1.
The nights in the city, in the room
in the boarding-house, come with
many voices calling to him from the
flowering dusk.
Wakeful in the darkness, he would
listen to the steady breathing of
Fred and Manny and Joe sleeping,
to the other night-sounds in the
world that were like silence: the faraway hum of a car on an empty
street, the whistle of a late train.
The deep river of the night would
swirl and rush and flow about him,
and then the years of his life would
walk through the door into the
room, wordless with grief like veiled, mourning women, and gather
around his bed and stare at him as
though he had become a stranger.
2.
He sat in the classroom, in the


city, and thought of home in the
town in Tarlac.
Midafternoon blazed on the roof,
and he could see, through the windows, the acacia trees growing on
the campus of the girls’ college beyond the stone wall, their foliage
green and cool against the sky,
unmindful of the heat and the glare.
The professor spoke of a place called Troy in some forgotten time, and
the words reached him in fragments,
faintly: Paris... Agamemnon...fair
Helen.. .the city burning... Achilles
weeping on the lonely shore....
He thought of his mother, brave
and sad, somehow, watching him eat
an early breakfast on the morning
he was to go away. He remembered sunlight on the floor in the kitchen, in the yard with wash hung
up to dry, and he walked again past


22


“  


the trellised gate and up the porch
steps into the house, and the piano
stood in the same corner, and the
chairs and tables were as they had
always been, and he heard in memory
the chiming of the tall, ancient clock
on the night before he went away.
The bell rang, and after the Hail
Mary, the class filed noisily out of
the room, and the hot, dazzling afternoon struck him like a slap across
the face.
3.
The town in Tarlac is a small
town: he has known its secret dreams,
the feel and texture of life’s pattern there: the streets and houses
and people.
The Tarlac River flows through
the town. A concrete bridge connects the two banks. It is a busy
bridge, especially on Sundays, when
the people from the barrios come
to town in calesas and jeepneys. But
at night, it is cool and peaceful on
the bridge, and before the government soldiers came and ordered the
early curfew, young men used to
go there, playing their guitars and
singing in their strong young voices
in the moonlight, and looking out
across the dark waters at the fireflies of lamplights flickering in the
nipa huts where the wide river curved
gently, at the end of the town.
In the rainless summer, the river
is gentle and warm, and women wash
clothes sitting on the sandy, sloping banks, and children play underneath the bridge, where the water is
not deep. But in the rain-season,
when the yearly storms slash through
the town, the river becomes violent
in anger and beats against the bridge
and throws its dark bloated fingers
over the dikes, crawling over the
narrow streets into the heart of the
town. Once, when he was in Grade
III in the elementary school, the


river overflowed the dikes, flooding
the town, so that there were no classes and he stayed in the house for
days, watching the brown knee-deep
water lapping against the fences
and the trunks of trees....
The plaza is the heart of the
town. The grass is green there, even
in the summer, unlike the yellow,
stunted grass of the plazas of other
towns. A cemented walk crosses
the plaza: it is lined with acacias
planted many years ago. Beneath
each tree is a bamboo bench. When
he was in the high school, he and
his cousin Cesar and their friends
sometimes spent their afternoons sitting under the trees, talking, the
wind murmurous in the leaves,
watching the girls strolling down the
pathway to the kiosko, who instantly grew aware of their presence and
walked with more care and grace.
In the days before the government
soldiers came, dances were held in
the kiosko, in the summer, when the
young men and women studying in
the city came home for the long
vacation.
The church stands on a low hill
beside the plaza. It is a tall, limestone church, as big as the churches
in the city. Sparrows twitter in the
shadowy depths of the dome above
the altar. Padre Jamias, who gave
him his First Communion, has long
since gone. The bells in the mossgrown tower have rung for countless
baptisms, weddings, funerals. There
was a night one summer years ago
when the bells began to ring grimly, agonizedly. The bells and his
brother Ramon’s excited voice awakened him, and then he saw through
the window the red-orange glow in
the sky. Outside in the street, the
men of the town, his father among
them, rushed to battle the flames
devouring the houses sprawled by the


MARCH, 1951


23


railroad tracks, in the western
fringe of town. He stood at the
window, his head barely reaching the
sill, cold, his heart pounding wildly,
staring at the red sky beyond the
dark house-roofs, the church bells
ringing in the trembling night....
The main street is a broad, asphalted thoroughfare: it used to be
called Washington Street, but now
it is Quezon Avenue. The town’s
landmarks are found along it: the
Municipal Building, the Mabuhay
Theater, the public market, the restaurants and the stores. It is like
Acity-street, with its dust and hurry, its sounds and colors: the calesas
and the jeepneys and the lumbering
buses crowding each other, and amplified phonograph music spewing
out from the lobby of the theater and
mingling with the general hubbub:
the blatant clamor of newsboys and
bootblacks, of people on the sidewalks
and in the stores. But the other
streets are narrow and quiet, with
neat houses fronted by flower gardens and clean-swept yards and sunlight streaming through the acacias
and the ratilis trees, disturbed only
by the passing of an occasional calesa, the fretful crying of a child,
a mother calling to her son in the
midday silence.
Of evenings now, the streets are
hushed and empty in the starlight,
even Quezon Avenue so raucous and
alive in the daytime: it blossomed
with electricity in the nights before
the soldiers came. But in the mornings Quezon Avenue is crowded
with the usual jeepneys and the citybound buses, and young men gather
in the lobby of the Mabuhay Theater and children roller-skate in the
kiosko in the plaza. Only the nights
are no longer the same: before they
were warm and vast and musical,
but that was in the years before the
soldiers came.
24


4.
His father had dark, kind eyes that
twinkled with mischief when he
laughed.
Of the many things that he remembers of his father, his voice will
remain longest in memory. As a
boy, when he was sick, his father
would sit beside him and tell him
many stories about the town in the
north from where he had come. His
father would tell him about the people of the town when he was young,
and his stories were humorous and
sad and tragic. His father spoke
in a low, deep voice, softly, and only
once did his father raise his voice
in anger at him, and that was when
he had quarreled with his sister Teresing.
His father was a lawyer, and the
walls of his study were lined with
shelves of books. Sometimes, he
would watch his father at work, typing, or reading, puffing furiously at
his pipe, and then his father would
see him standing in the doorway and
he would have him sit on his lap and
ask him what he had learned in
school. His father’s hands were
strong and gentle.
He was ten years old when his
father died. Even in death his
father’s lips curved eternally with
the suggestion of a smile. For many
days, in the sala lingered the sick
sweet scent of flowers. He felt for
the first time a great loneliness.
5.
Miss San Esteban, his teacher in
Grade VI, was a beautiful woman.
Her eyes were soft with a vague
sadness. There was a trace of brown
in her hair.
Miss San Esteban often read poetry to her class. Her favorite poem
was Tennyson’s “Crossing the Bar.
He listened to her, carefully, because
“  "


he was beginning to understand the
power and the music that she wanted them to know (Sunset and evening star....), because the sound of
her voice was rich and warm and
alive in the room. She told the
class that they must learn to write,
for words were so wonderful and
lovely. She was a beautiful woman.
He had begun to write then, setting down in slow, labored words the
image of the world growing about
him. In his class-themes, he had
written about war and grief and the
town.
One afternoon, Miss San Esteban
asked him to remain in the room after class. His classmates left, and
dying, slanting sunlight fell on the
vacant desks. Through the windows
drifted the laughter of children playing in the plaza. Miss San Esteban
had her back to him, arranging her
books on the table.
When she turned around, her eyes
were sad, and shining like stars. He
felt confused and awkward, standing in the room, with his classmates
and friends all gone, alone with
Miss San Esteban who looked at him
with eyes sad, and shining like stars.
“You write well, Ben,” she said.
"Thank you, ma’m,” he said, wanting to be out in the late afternoon,
with his friends already in the
plaza, walking perhaps beneath the
trees.
"Never give it up,” she said, her
voice suddenly intense, demanding.
“God has given you a great gift.
Never be afraid to write. Never."
“Yes, ma’m,” he said.
“Never give it up,” she said. "Write
on and on. Please promise me that.
He nodded, not knowing what to
say. Outside the late afternoon was
green and gold upon the trees.
"You may go now.


Miss San Esteban went away to
the city when school closed that summer. When classes opened in June,
she did not return. She was not from
the town. He never saw her again.
She was a beautiful woman, his
teacher in Grade VI, who read poetry
in a warm, quiet voice, who looked
at him one afternoon with eyes sad,
and shining like stars.
6.
It was in the summer when he was
fifteen that the young man from Camiling came on Sunday afternoons
to visit his sister Teresing. The
young man had met his sister at a
dance in the plaza. He was tall,
with broad, square shoulders, and
he smiled and laughed easily, like
a boy.
The young man was in love with
his sister Teresing. His sister, it
seemed to him, loved the young man
too, because she always wore her best
dresses and put fresh flowers in the
vase upon the piano everytime he
came, and when she descended the
stairs from her room and the young
man stood up and smiled at her in
the sala, she looked flushed and
breathless and excited.
The young man always brought
his sister Teresing something on his
visits: a book, a magazine, a bag
of sirguelas or santol. When his sister graduated from high school that
March. the young man gave her a
bracelet with her name finely engraved on it.
His sister and the young man
talked in the sala, on Sunday afternoons. He sometimes heard his sister laughing with the young man. He
often wondered what they talked
about. The young man sat talking
with his sister until it was evening.
Then he would rise to leave, hesitantly, and his sister would see him


25


MARCH, 1951


to the door, and he would walk away
through the gate, straight and tall
in the twilight.
The young man played the piano,
and the songs he played were the
songs of youth then: As Years Go
By, The Lamp-lighter, To Each His
Own. The young man played the
piano earnestly, stepping on the pedal vigorously, nodding his head in
time to the music. His sister would
stand beside the piano while the
young man played, wistful and
cighteen. His mother would come
to the sala when the young man sat
at—sthe piano. She would stay at
the far end of the room, listening to
the young man playing the songs of
youth, smiling.
Then the young man ceased coming to the house. His sister received
many letters from him, from the
city, though he never came again.
Other young men came to visit his
sister. But she did not laugh with
them as she had laughed with the
young man from Camiling.
7.
He was almost seventeen: it was
early May and the town fiesta was
a strong, impetuous song in the summer air.
He first saw the girl Isabel at
the window of the house across the
street. She was leaning out the
window, a playful breeze ruffling
her hair: she was like a white flower against the dark background of
the house. He stood on the street,
looking up at her, and the first time
he saw her, he loved her.
In the evening, he saw her at the
gate of the house, across the street.
He went to her, feeling a great love
for her, wanting to tell her of his
love.
They talked, shyly, and he wondered at her beauty, the youngness of
26


her. She was from the city. She
had come to the fiesta with her
mother. She did not dance yet: She
was sixteen.
His brother Ramon teased him
about the girl, later, at supper. His
brother had seen them talking at
the gate. He became angry with his
brother. His mother said something
about growing up to be a young
man.
He lay awake for a long time in
the night, thinking of the girl Isabel in the house across the street.
He saw her in church, in the morning. The Mass was over, and
people streamed out of the church.
She was with her mother. When
she saw him she smiled: it seemed
to him that she smiled for him alone,
and he felt big and alive with his
love. He wanted to walk with her,
he wanted his friends to see him
walking with her who was young
and beautiful, but the presence of
her mother, proud and glittering
with jewelry, filled him with a sudden helplessness, and he could only
look at her as she disappeared in the
crowd.
The girl Isabel left on the last
day of the fiesta. He had decided,
for some strange formless reason,
against going to her to say good-bye.
After the fiesta, he and his cousin Cesar went to the plaza. They
sat on a bench along the cemented
pathway, under the acacias. The coconut leaves that adorned the lampposts around the kiosko wilted in
the summer heat. The make-shift
circus tents were being pulled down
beside huge freight trucks waiting
in the sun.
8.
He loved Nenita with a love that
was quiet yet fierce with a violent
tenderness. He was in the fourth
“  "


year of high school, and he and Nenita were classmates. There was
something lost and lonely about her:
her nearness awakened inside him a
dark, inexorable god that cried silently to protect her from some unnameable fear.


always thought that she was beautiful.
“Ben, I’m afraid for you.”
“Why?” he said.
She turned her face away and did
not answer.


He told her he loved her one evening in October, while they sat on
the porch of her house with the
street-lights shining through the acacias and tracing leaf-shadows on the
wall and on their faces. He felt
her pulse beating in the hollow of
his hand.
At the class
picnic in Anoling, he kissed
her. He kissed
her behind a —
clump of bamboos, unseen by g
the others
swimming in
AN
the river and g
sitting talking -
on the cool,
shaded sa n d.
His heart
pounded with
fear and love
and confusion. 
Her hair was 
sun-resh and 
wind-dry like
the young summer...
But it was different when at last
he went to see her before he left
for the city. There was no more the
bewildered urgency, the fierce tenderness; now there was only a desolating sense of time and going away.
“I love you, Nenita,” he said. He
stood on the porch, saying good-bye,
going away.
“Ben—" she said.
He looked at her standing tall and
slim beside him, and he knew how
lovely she was, even though he had


"Ill write often, every hour, every
day."
She laughed then. "Please do,
she said.
“I will,” he said, his voice at once
strained. He was sure now he could
not care for anyone else.
He walked

af ternoon.
*y
T
Z
From the railP
road station at
2
the end of the
town came the
E
whistle of a
train. He tried
-2
E
-
to imagine the
city: the thund er of the
streets, the can
yons of buildings, loneliness
in a strange
room. By this
time tomorrow,
he would be in
GGAr

the city: the
thought seeped through him with a
tragic apprehension, when before it
came with a tingling, exultant rush.
In the air drifted the smell of
dead leaves burning. The first May
rains had beaten to the ground the
leaves of the trees that lined the
street. The sun had finally shone
through the last days of the week,
and the fallen leaves had turned yellow and brown, and now they were
raked into piles beside the street
and set on fire, and they burned
slowly, as though some flicker of
life in them refused as yet to sur

MARCH, 1951


27


render to the flames.
In his room, he buckled the suitcase that he had packed earlier in
the afternoon. Finally he sat on
his bed and stared with a numb
emptiness at the calendar on the
wall. He rose and ripped off the
leaf that said May. One more day and
it would be June. He twisted and
rolled the piece of paper into a small
hard ball. The act, somehow was
a gesture of farewell, to the summer
and Nenita. He threw the paper
ball out the window; it settled on
the hard, cracked earth of the yard,
and-in the young twilight, it looked
like a pale stillborn flower bud that
had fallen from some trec.
9.
He came home one summer, after
his first year in the city, to find
his bicycle unused and rusting in the
woodshed behind the house.
He stared at the dismantled bicycle, feeling that something had gone
away forever.
When he was in the high school,
he had biked to the farm in Tibag
on Saturdays, starting out early in
the morning, with the fields unstirring on both sides of the cement highway. The balloon tires sang on the
hard, smooth pavement, and he felt
the surge of power in his legs, the
wind cool against his face, the sweat
breaking out over his body even before the sun had risen.
“It could not be helped, Ben," his
mother said. “There was nobody to
look after it.”
"Ill have it fixed, don’t worry,”
his brother Ramon said.
His brother Ramon forgot about
the bicycle, but he did not remind him
of it. He knew that even if it were
repaired and oiled and painted anew,
28


it would never be the same again.
Something had gone away forever.
Through the summer, he rever
talked of the bicycle again. It remained in the shed behind the house,
dismantled and rusting. He now
drove to Tibag in his uncle Jorge’s
jeep, but even at the wheel, he would
seem to see himself far away up on
the long white road, riding a blue
bicycle beneath a blue sky, swiftly,
young and alone in the summer sun.
10.
He dreamed in the night, in the
city, that he was back in the old
town. He was walking down Quezon Avenue in the dream, and the
street was silent, deserted. All the
people had gone away from the town,
even his mother and brother and
sister. Where will I go now, where?
He walked to the plaza, to the
church on the low, green hill, and
then he saw a woman, a stranger,
in a blue and white robe, weeping.
In the morning, he remembered the
dream. He did not tell 'Fred and
Joe and Manny about it. The dream
belonged to him. Perhaps, they
would only laugh at him for having
such a strange dream.
The dream, somehow, reminded him
of the time a column of army trucks
stopped in the town, in front of the
Municipal Building. The trucks were
filled with tired, dusty soldiers. They
had been in the mangrove swamps
to the east, fighting the men from
the hills. In a weapons-carrier, he
saw two dead soldiers. They lay on
the floor of the roofless truck, and
the woolen blanket that draped their
shattered bodies had slipped away
from the face of one of them, and
he saw the dead soldier’s eyes staring blankly at the midday sun.
He wrote home that day, but he
did not mention his dream.
“  "


CRISTINA


By ALFREDO TENGCO, A.B. '51


The “Candlelight Tavern" (though
its name sounds romantic) was nothing more than one of the hundreds
of bars that thrived in the city
shortly after the Liberation. Reputed to be the rowdiest spot in the
heart of a notorious district, its
customers were GIs, both white and
colored, who considered it a suitable
place to satisfy their racial animosities. Almost every night, MPs had
to rush in there and break up the
brawls with their clubs.
In a vacant room behind the counter, I sat and listened, listened to the
clinking of glasses, the hum of
voices and the scraping of chairs.
Now there were shouts followed by
sounds of a bottle viciously smashed
against a table. Then, the pianist
played "I Dream of You". A heart
broken drunk began to sing. Others
joined in. The noise was simply
maddening! I cupped my hands to
my ears and as the sounds seemed
to fade away, I settled down to
my own thoughts.
“Could I please talk to Cristina?
I had asked the owner of the bar.
“It is her day off," the man had
answered, “but she will be here
in about half an hour. A soldier
is going to take her to a dance. Care
to wait for her?”
“Certainly."
How thoughts about Cristina came
thronging into my mind as I waited
for her in that vacant room behind
the bar! She was an old friend
whom I had not seen since the out

break of the war. That our reunion
would be in a place like this did
not startle me. But to remember
the circumstances that drove her here
was painful.
On one of the first days of the
war, a bomb claimed her entire family and destroyed everything they
had. Death missed Cristina because
the air-raid caught her in the house
of a relative at the other end of
town. Cristina, it is true, did not
die. Yet the hideous claws of war
reached out for this abandoned and
forsaken girl and exposed her to a
fate even worse — moral death. As
the war rolled on and its attendant
evils assailed her, she clung desperately to whatever Faith she had.
Day in and day out, little by little,
however, her grip weakened. In the
end she, too, like so many of her
sister-orphans, was swept away.
Let it be said for those who once
were true and good and are no longer, that in the beginning of the process of their ruin there are moments
when shame and sorrow come like
sudden and painful wakefulness after sleep. Let that be said also for
Cristina. Yet, who cared? The
only people about her were the scum
who dragged her lower into the sink
of iniquity.
Three years with the underworld
of humanity! I thought it was unbeligvable. But come! She could
have been anything in the past. Let
me forget it. Tonight, I only knew
that she was still a human being
with a soul that cried out to heaven,


MARCH, 1951


29


begging to be lifted back to the
clouds of innocence, back into God’s
embrace.
At long last the door swung open
and a figure appeared. I raised my
eyes and looked. No, this figure
was not a vision. This was truly
her. Whatever doubts I had vanished the moment she saw me, the mo
ment her lips parted in surprise, the
moment she greeted me. She asked
me about home and how we were.
Things were running smoothly, I
answered. She asked me where the
shellings and the burnings had
caught us. She pushed further and
asked what had happened to me since
we last saw each other....
What about her? How was she?
Oh, fine. But the tone of her voice
suggested that her answer was not
enough and that if I wanted to,
she was willing to confide in me.
"Are you happy, Cris?”
Well, she still found times hard.
Anyhow, there was no use complaining. But was she happy? She hesitated and then slowly shook her
head. It wasn’t because she could
not have the clothes she wanted,
or money, or things like that. It
went deeper. “Maybe,” Cristina concluded, "it’s because I can’t seem
to touch the stars.
She looked at me wistfully as
though she wanted to tell me not
to laugh because a woman like her
had uttered such a statement. And
I did not because I believed her.
“Cris, have you ever thought of
leaving this kind of life?”
She nodded. “Once I did.” she
shook her head. "Not now."
"“I have an aunt who intends to
open a dress shoppe and she needs
someone who can manage the busi20


ness. Cris, you love to make your
dresses before. You’re the right
person to manage it. When can you
start?”
“It’s not easy to leave everything
behind."
“But this means a new life... a
new hope!"
“You forget," she said in a weary
tone, “that this kind of a life has
left an ugly scar so that whatever
I hope to be, people will judge me
by that scar. No, thanks, I won’t
take the offer."
"Not all people are like that. There
is plenty of sympathy and generosity left in Manila, you know. Look,
Cris, my aunt is in no hurry. You
have all the time you want to think
it over. When you finally decide to
go, just drop by the house.
“I — I can’t!”
“Think it over,” I repeated. "And
pray. Pray hard for the courage
to rise again.
"Pray? To whom? To God?” The
dreamy sparkle in her eyes had vanished instantly when I mentioned
prayer and now I was confronted by
a pair of angry, blazing eyes.
“Three years of misery and poverty and dirt," she said sharply.
“Three years! That’s more than
enough time to turn my conscience
into stone, isn’t it?”
"What are you talking about?”
“God! You talk to me about God!
What’s He done for me? Left me
in the gutters, huh?”
“You've got it all wrong, Cris.
All wrong. God loves you and longs
for you. Oh, it’s true you had some
harsh times, but then He only wanted to find out how true and how
“  "


faithful you could be to Him and
how much you would love and remember Him even in your misery.
It was you who failed to cling to
Him. Call for Him now and I know,
I know He will help you."
She replied with a frightening
laugh.
The girl’s faith was dead. Stark
cold dead. Oh, my God, accept it
from me, please — for her I want
to believe in You. I want to love
You. Give me the strength to break
down the wall that keeps me away
from You. Let me pick up the broken pieces of my life, let me fall into
Your arms once morel
I looked up to see Cristina standing with an American soldier. He
was the man who was to take her
to a dance. Both were staring at
me.


“Who’s he?” the GI whispered.
“Oh, someone who asked me to be
good again. A hard laugh; and
soldier and woman turned away. My
time was up. They were leaving.
And 1? The words she uttered to
the soldier stabbed deeply and drove
me out of the room, out of the bar,
into the open air. My head burned. Beside a tree I halted and waited, waited for a jeep to start, roar
full speed ahead, pass by. I gazed
at it while its tail-light grew dimmer until nothing but darkness was
before me. “Holy Mary, Mother of
God,” my heart and my soul pleaded, "pray for us sinners....
I hope that prayer rocked the
heavens! I said it for you, Cristina... because you are unhappy...
because you cannot touch the
stars....


Loafer
By ALBINO AREVALO, A.B. '54
I like to take things easy,
To stay in bed till noon,
To go on walks at nightfall,
When shines a friendly moon.
Whenever I feel lazy,
There arc no fears in me,
I dare to idle under
The shade of any trec.
I do not like to study,
When 1 could be in bed,
Or wake before the sunrise,
When tests loom overhead,
If I must do some homework,
Or skim over some books,
I find that I have power
To feign some sulky looks.


A


MARCH, 1951


31


Advice


By MELITON V. SALAZAR, A.B. '54
“How shall I be a poet?
How shall I write in rhyme?
You told me once “The very wish
Partook of the sublime.
Then tell me now! Don't put me off
With your 'another time.
From Poeta Fit, Non Nascitur
By Lewis Carroll
Well, you could be a poet,
A very modern one!
Just keep in mind the proven saw:
"Of sense you must have none!
The moment someone says "Pure Greek,
Y our laurel you have won.
And first you write a sentence;
Oh, anything will do,
Just keep your tenses crossed and wrong,
Your genders twisted too,
Lika "Kim Il Sun wrung dry his wig,
And swim the broad Yalu.
You massacre the order
And juggle words around,
Till even you won't recognize
The sense, the tense, the sound;
And by their chaos you'll express
A thought that's quite profound.
You'll need a lot of commas,
They are in vogue, you know,
Just tack them after every word,
Like “Oh, I, feel, just, so,
For if you spare the use of these,
Your standard will be low!
If you would be explosive,
(A word here to the wise,)
You have a very simple code:
"Do not capitalize!"
Like "i was born in rotterdam,
but i love swedish eyes.
Regard the need for meaning as
An ancient, odd, illusion.
We moderns have no use for it,
This seems a drawn conclusion.
The greater now, the masterpiecs,
The greater the confusion!


32


“  '


WORDS AND FRIPPERY
When Richard Brinsley Sheridan wrote “The Rivals” it could well
have been in protest against the hampering conventionalism of an elite
society steeped in frippery and hypocritical pretensions. So it might seem
to a modern audience such as applauded the Ateneo Players' Guild’s performance of Feb. 2nd and 4th.
The action takes place in an 18th century English town called Bath.
The principal characters are a bilious father, Sir Anthony Absolute, who
wishes his young son Captain Jack Absolute wedded to a winsome day-dreamer, Lady Lydia Languish, who does not want the captain at all. The plot
makes a frail but interesting turn when a commoner called Beverly, with
whom Lydia has fallen in love, turns out to be no other than Captain
Jack Absolute himself. Aligned against this affair is a lively pair — a
ceuntry bumpkin and a fighting Irishman — about whom Sheridan is
sometimes lively and sometimes just a little obvious and dull. The plot
needs no further consideration.
But it is only fair, we think, to take Mrs. Malaprop and her abundant, if pleasantly painful horseplay with words, apart from the others.
Mrs. Malaprop is a scatter-brained matron of fairly standard design, airily
tossing classic "malapropisms” unto the audience. To this role, Victor
Diaz gets a very effective combination of lady-like demure and comic abandon. He was almost a supernatural delight from beginning to end, and
we believe, few girls (or boys), if any, could hardly have been as fortunately cast as he.
We are especially pleased with Luis Lorenzo who shone out in his
bilious scenes as Sir Anthony Absolute. The others, though naturally
less gifted with Mr. Diaz’s extraordinary daring and finesse, were, howcver, all in the spirit of the thing and were for the most part electric in their
comic ways. One of the best, we think, was Jose Tuason, whose cavorting
Bob Acres seemed to have been especially cut out for him. Certainly, Francis Moran made a handsome and gentlemanly Captain Jack Absolute. And
like a typical Dickensian figure, Augusto Domingo's Lucius O'Trigger was
convincingly cocky, if not cockney. We still are not sure about Alfredo
Layug whose Lydia Languish struck us as strangely insufficient. But his
rart was most demanding and we are sure he got into the spirit and effort.


MARCH, 1951


33


We were delighted with Jaime Dy-Liacco as Lucy; Ernesto Resurreccion as
the simpleton David; Rodolfo Siojo as Fag; and Orlando Ruiz as Boy,
in approximately that order.
As much a part of the play’s success were the ravishing period costumes
which created wonderful color contrasts and rendered the proper atmosphere
of gaiety and plush. This was heightened by the severe lines of the simple
permanent siylistic setting paneled against a black cycloramic back-drop.
Precise to the split second, the stage crew deserves special plaudits for its
etficiency in altering scenes, so that time and again Tomas Paterno and company took the actors unawares with the swift transformations on the opening night. However great the production, a play is fruitless without the
right people to watch it. Therefore, we consider the gala performance, with
its appreciative audience, the top achievement. To Father Henry Lee Irwin,
S.J., the director and producer, go the choicest orchids for bringing this
classic drama to the Philippine stage for the first time.
EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B. '53
CARMELO QUINTERO, A.B. '53


To Our Lady Of Night
By MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51
Out of the new-born darkness
Of evening you come to me,
Soft as the dew from heaven
And the stir of a sleeping sea;
Framed in the purple even
Your trailing robes are bright,
Wondrous the spangled splendor
Of your cloak of night.
You bring the distant beauty
Of starry blooma that grow
Upon the meadows where the winds
Forever breathe and blow;
Peerless the argent crown that wreathes
Your brow with tender light!
Ora pro nobis. Mother mine,
Our Lady of the Night!


34


“  "


The Good l4s The Object
Or Puman Love


By ANTONIO G. MANUUD, A.B. '52


“I love you truly...” On bended
knee or under the influence of liquor,
in monastery or speakeasy, solemnly
or thoughtlessly, man will at least
once in his life say, “I love you
truly.” It is strange, however, that
not very many people have contested
the claim that man can love truly.
Indeed, very few have even stopped
to think on what is meant by "loving truly". An implied answer is
advanced by Charles Dickens in "A
Tale of Two Cities.” But this answer does not quite meet the question
squarely. Is it possible for man to
love any good without reference to
himself? Is man able to love, not
only particular goods, but also the
Supreme Good, with a disinterested
love? Is it, in other words possible
for man to "love truly?”
And so the question is asked, and
immediately, the world’s Lotharios
and Don Juans protest that man can
and does love truly. They should
not be too hasty, however: for we
speak of love, not of eroticism; and
when we speak of love, we posit as
the object of that love, any being
in general (but the Supreme Being
in particular). It is concerning the
latter that we shall have to deal
largely, especially since the problem
of love comes to the fore when God
is posited as love’s object.
"When God is posited as the absolute Being an absolute Good is posited as well, and, since the good


is the object of love, we are led
thereby to posit an absolute love.”
We can, therefore, deduce from this
that only God demands an absolute
love, and it is only when an absolute love is demanded that we begin
to doubt man’s capability for loving
truly. St. Bernard of Clairvaux
himself saw the necessity for distinguishing between two reasons for
loving God. He held that when the
question “Why God should be loved?”
is proposed, it may be interpreted
to mean cither of two things: “Whether it is God’s title to our love or
our own advantage in loving Him.”
This would seem to indicate, however, that the good saint was, in a
manner of speaking, "side-tracking" the issue. For does not man
love what is good in as much as
he realizes that it is perfective of
his own being — and is this not,
therefore, a love in view of man’s
self? Now, how are we to reconcile this with the fact that God demands an absolute love, a disinterested love — a love entirely in view
of God’s self?
The state of the question is precisely stated in these words: “Is
there any way by which man can
continue to love himself while loving God only for God’s sake?” And
here, we come face to face with a
dilemma — we say “No" and we
cut man off from the End to which
he is ordered; we say "Yes" and we
affirm what appears to be a contra35


MARCH, 1951


diction. How then? Are we to leave
the problem of love unsolved? But
it is exactly the solution to this
problem that we have set out to discover, and it seems that most Scholastics would point to only one plausible answer: they agree that the
“contradiction" in the problem of
love is lost in analogy. Before we
commence to prove this, however, we
must first clarify a few notions.
LOVE DEFINED. To begin with,
we must define Love. Love, according to one definition, is "a Divinely
infused habit inclining the human
will to cherish God for His own sake
above all things, and man for the
sake of God.” The seat of love is
then the human will, and its motive, Divine Goodness. From this
definition (which shall be ours for
this paper), we at once see that
God is posited as the end of human
love. The love of irrational beings
is therefore ruled out from our
treatment of the problem, even
though the quest for the Supreme
End could very well be a quest without knowledge (for despite the fact
that irrational beings neither know
their own acts nor reflect on them
to determine their own end, still
these beings tend toward God: acting as they do in view of a certain
good which is an analogue of the
Supreme Good). In the case of man,
the quest of God is conscicus of itself. Man, though not having adequate intelligence to be able to say
whether Good is accessible, knows
sufficiently enough to realize that
it really seeks the Supreme Good;
and that he has a reason for seeking it. But here we must not confuse the true sense of love with desire pure and simple. Our desires
are all interested; to love, on
the other hand, is to will an object
for itself, to rejoice in its beauty
and goodness for themselves, and
36


without respect to anything other
than itself.
We must therefore divide leve into amor concupiscentiae, or love of
desire, and amor amicitiae, or love of
benevolence. With both kinds of
love, we are bound to love God.
The first is directed towards the
good which one wishes for someone;
the second, towards the person for
whom one wishes that good. What
is loved in the first sense, is loved
for another; what is loved in the
second, is loved absolutely and by itself. Desire is the end or perfection
of sensation. Love of desire is
"a love whose motion is bent, passing from an object it wills to another object, which is loved with a
rectilinear love. Such is good for
use or pleasure, the bonum utile and
the bonum delectabile... with which
we will a particular good to ourselves or our friends.” Love of benevolence, on the other hand, is "a
love which wills an object in and
for itself. Such is the intellect’s
love of truth, or the upright man’s
love of 'moral good,' the bonum honestum... (which) we entertain for
ourselves or others.” From this division, it should be clear that we shall
concern ourselves chiefly with amor
amicitias when we speak of love in
this paper.
OBJECT DEFINED. Object we
shall define merely as aim or motive. But as a motive, with regard
to rational creatures, presupposes a
will, it is best that we also define
what will is. The will is the "rational appetency" or “the power to
strive for an intellectually perceived
good and to shun an intellectually
perceived evil.” Its objects are divided into adequate and formal. The
adequate object includes everything
that is good. Being, therefore, belongs to this object. The formal
object is the good as good (bonum
"“  "


qua tale), provided it be suitable to
the willing subject in some manner.
The will can desire a good object,
therefore, only in so far as it is a
good strictly as such. Whatever the
will desires must fall under the aspect of a good.
THE GOOD DEFINED. Now, to
define Good. Aristotle and St. Thomas say that the good is that which
everyone desires. This does not
mean that every good is desired by
everyone; only that it indicates perfection, and that in itself it is desirable. The good is then ordered
to the appetite. This is not to
say that in its objective reality, the
good is in the order of the intellect
and will. For the good is reality
itself in so far as it indicates the
formal aspect of perfection. "Nothing," says St. Thomas, "is good except in so far as it is by participation similar to the Supreme Good."
Now since men look upon the good
as objects or ends, and since God is
the Supreme Good, God must be the
Supreme End.
In the abstract, Good (or more
properly Goodness) "is the attribute
of an object by reason of which it
has a relation of fitness to an appetence. It is perfective, delectable,
and useful; real and apparent."
Good is being in as much as it
confronts love — the will. Everything is metaphysically good, i.e., apt
to be loved, to be an object of love
to the extent to which it is. A metaphysically good thing is always
worthy to be loved either in and
for itself as a perfection (direct affective love) or as perfecting something else (reflex affective love). According to Aristotle, good is predicnted of many things, not in a purely
equivocal sense but in an analogical sense: (1) all things are said to
he good in virtue of their dependence upon the one first principle of


goodness from which they are all
derived, or so far as they are ordered to that principle as their
ultimate end; (2) all things may be
said to be good proportionately, not
in virtue of this relation of dependence upon their first principle, but
in virtue of the goodness actually
inherent in them (e.g. sight is a good
of the body as intelligence is a good
of the soul). It will be well to keep
this in mind.
THE DILEMMA. And so we
come to the very problem of love.
As was stated above, we have a
dilemma in our hands. On one side,
we say that man loves what is good
in as much as he realizes that it is
perfective of his own being. On the
other, we also say that man is made
to love God only for God’s sake.
Man, having a will, desires naturally the thing that is good for
him — his good. Now, all human
love is a love of God unaware of
itself. And all human love is an
analogical participation in God’s own
love for Himself. In virtue of His
own Perfection, God loves Himself
in view of nothing other than Himself: therefore, as long as we love,
not merely other things, but God
Himself, in view of ourselves, for
our own sake, our love is unfaithful to its own true essence.
THE FIRST HORN. Consider
the first horn of the dilemma. St.
Bernard and his disciples, building
up a doctrine of Christian love, started from the plain reality, i.e, the
common experience of egoism and
sensuality or human desire in all
its naked crudity. Human love, they
maintained, begins of necessity in
egoism and carnality. And the
primary characteristic of human
desire, they commenced to explain,
lies in the fact that it turns immediately to self and all that is related
to self. Man born of carnal desire


MARCH, 1951


37


must live, cannot live without setting up himself as the object of his
own desire. And since he could not
desire himself without desiring all
he needs as well, he therefore loves
himself in the first place, and then
all the rest for pure self-love.
THE SECOND HORN. We turn
to the other horn, and we are faced
with something apparently contradictory to what we have said above
... for now we are about to see that
God, not man, must be as a matter
of fact the end of all created activity. The universe really is a sum
tatal of creatures owing their existence to an act of love. God willed
all things, particularly man, for participation in His glory and in His
beatitude. That is as much to say
that all created activity is essentially and necessarily referred to God
alone as to its end. A thing made
by God, by the mere fact that it
acts, tends of its own spontaneity to
God in virtue of a law written in
the substance of its very being. St.
Thomas narrows down this truth to
apply especially to rational creation:
“Just as things devoid of intellect
tend to God as their end by way of
assimilation, so do intellectual substances by way of knowledge... however little be the knowledge of God
to which the intellect is able to attain, this will be the intellect’s last
end, rather than a perfect knowledge
of lower intelligibles.
How then shall we reconcile man’s
having to love God only for God’s
sake with the fact that man cannot
help loving save that which is perfective of his own being?

THE CISTERCIAN SOLUTION.
In pretty much the same line of
thought as that of the poet who
wrote:
“Heaven is not reached by a single
bound,


We build a ladder by which we rise,
From the lowly earth to the vaulted skies....
--
The Cistercians advanced a solution to the problem. Man, they said,
of necessity loves first of all himself,
and only by gradual steps rises to
the love of God — this is the result
of original sin. But this would require the presupposition of two separate periods of time — one when
man’s love is in an imperfect state;
and another when that love has already arisen from imperfection to
perfection. Again, this would seem
to indicate that the Cistercians would
dismiss the problem merely with a
reference to the element of time. It
is interesting to note that the Cistercians postulate self-forgatfulness
as the necessary condition of all
true love. This self-forgetfulness,
however, would of course come when
man’s love has already attained perfection and when time has already
solved the problem.
THE THOMISTIC SOLUTIONAN IDENTITY OF OBJECT. The
Thomists, on the other hand, do not
dismiss the problem so readily. True,
they admit that fallen man spontaneously prefers himself to God (for
that constitutes indeed his very fall)
but he does not on that account
forget that every created love is
but a participation in the uncreated
love, and that this implies an identity of object. This Thomistic view
(which actually is Greco-Thomist)
is based on the natural and necessary
inclination of all beings to seek their
own proper good before all else.
There is a fundamental identity between love of self and love of God.
Anyone," says Gilson, "who loves
his own good must necessarily love
that without which it would be impossible.” The relation of the divine to the human good is represented as the relation of a whole to its


38


“  


part. If man naturally loves God
more than anything else, and first
of all more than himself, it is because God is the universal good under which all other particular goods
are contained, on which man’s existence depends, and which he prefers
before himself as the necessary condition of his existence and perfection.
THE “CONTRADICTION" LOST
IN ANALOGY. In a Christian
world, in which beings are created
by Being, every creature is a good
and an analogue of the Good. Therefore, at the root of all this order
of relations, there lies a fundamental relation of analogy which rules
every derived relation subsequently
set up between creature and Creator. When we say that God is the
universal good, we mean that God
is the Sovercign Good, the cause of
all good. When we say that each
good is but a particular good, we
do not mean that these particular
goods are detached parts of a whole
which would be Goodness, but that
they are analogues of the creative
Good that gave them birth. Therefore, it is true that to love any
good is to love its resemblance to the
Divine Goodness, and since it is this
resemblance to God that makes this
good to be a good, we say that what
is loved in it is the Sovereign Good.
“To will any object," according to
Gilson, "is to will an image of God,
that is, to will God; to love oneself, then, will be to love an analogue
of God, and that is to love God.”
Furthermore, the whole key to an
understanding of the problem seems
to be this: that if a particular good
is desirable only on account of its
resemblance to the Supreme Good,
it is impossible to desire the Supreme
Good merely in view of this part

icular good; contrariwise, the particular good must always be desired
for the Supreme Good. Therefore,
for all purely physical beings, to
perfect themselves is the same as
to make themselves more like to
God. This is said of beings not
endowed with reason. Now, a fortiore, of an intelligent being such
as man (since it is man’s intelligence above all that confers upon
him both his proper perfection and
his proper analogy to God), this
is more especially true. Add to this
the promise of beatific vision, and
we see that man is destined to reach
simultaneously, and by one and the
same act, both the summit of his own
perfection and all the fulness of
Divine resemblance that is open to
him. This merely is to say that the
key to the problem of love lies in
the doctrine of analogy (g.v, supra).
With St. Thomas, therefore, we can
say that the reason why a thing
tends to its own good is because it
tends to a divine likeness, and not
vice versa.
Thus we see that to love God with
disinterested love is man’s true way
of loving himself. IFor if man is
an image of God, the more like God
he makes himself, the more he fulfils his own essence. If man is
fully to realize his virtualities and
become integrally himself, he must
become this perfect image of God:
man’s love for himself then becomes
a love of God for God’s sake. And
so, we can, with all peace of mind,
say, “I love you truly," and yet
at the same time think of the time
as the Jerome Kern love song
would have it — "when all the things
you are... are mine.


MARCH. 1951


39


THE VOYAGE TO LOURDES
By ALEXIS CARREL (Harpers, 1950)


Within the congested compartments of a jolting train, a young French
surgeon watched the herded sick bound for Lourdes. Almost all were
in the last gruesome stages of some malignant tumor, gangrenous disease,
or consumption, but looking at their wasted faces Dr. Lerrac (the author’s
cwn name spelled backwards) felt "an imperious need to live" and a sudden childlike faith in the miracles at Bernadette’s grotto. Prodded by
widespread reports of spectacular cures from the press and Emile Zola’s
factual account of them, Lerrac decided in July, 1903, to make a systematic
study of the miracles such as never before undertaken. It would be based
on strict biological examinations as seen through the eyes of a famed scientist and unbeliever, and whatever charlatanry and errors in diagnoses of
hopeless cases were detected would be revealed in his report.
Lerrac’s journey turned out to be a suddenly overpowering experience
which shattered his skepticism and cold scientific speculations. The reason
for this spiritual awakening was Marie Ferrand, an eighteen-year-old girl
dying of advanced tubercular peritonitis and the subject of Carrel’s book.
When the stretcher bore her to the grilled, candle-lit grotto, she could hardly
breathe. A cure for her would break his doubts. And yet, seven hours
later, the dying girl was able to sit up and talk. The theories of Kant
and the scientific systems of the Germans fell flat before a single miracle
which could not be explained by mere auto-suggestion.
This posthumous volume, found among his unpublished papers, reveals
an absorbing event in the life of Alexis Carrel, renowned scientist, winner
of the Nobel Prize in medicine, and celebrated author of Man the Unknown.
In profoundly moving terms, he gives an admirably objective account of
how a skeptic and man of science re-discovered a higher intelligence that
could suspend the laws of nature and defy human analysis. No fanatic,
Dr. Carrel presents valid arguments in well-chosen words to challenge the
doubters in his profession. He points out that many scientists of his time
failed to accept the existence of miracles because they lacked the courage
to investigate. Those who had witnessed the miracles were afraid to admit
them for fear of being jeered at by their colleagues because what they
had seen could not be explained by natural causes.
Since his visit to Lourdes in 1903, Dr. Carrel had probed deeply beyond
the pale “border" knowledge of science and was converted to Catholicism. His acceptance of religion, however, was not without the anguish
which besets minds whose trust in mere human reasoning is great; he
had entered into a realm where reasoning was meaningless. “In the face
of life and death,” Lerrac wrote, "mere theories were void. It was not
science that nourished the inner life of man; it was the faith of the soul.”
EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B., '53


40


  "


Elected Members of the ATENEO
QUARTERLY’s Board of Editors for 1951-
1952 are:
Editor-in-Chief
GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, Litt.B. '52
Senior Editors
LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A.B. '52
EDUARDO D. LACHICA, Litt.B. '52
EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B. '53


PA





The ATENEO


THE BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE
THE BROTHERS
THE TYRANNY OF TIME
SUNSET MOODS


EMMANUEL TORRES
GREGORIO BRILLANTES
GABINO MENDOZA
GUILLERMO SOLIVEN


Uri ban Ee)


AUGUST
1951


CONTENTS
AUGUST, 1951
VOLUME 3, NUMBER 1


PROSE


THE BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE
THE TYRRANY OF TIME
THE BROTHERS ........
SUNSET MOODS ..........
THE BELLS OF MURCIA.
NIGHT IN SEPTEMBER .
BOYHOOD ................
PHOOEY ON FIDO .
BLIND DATE ............
KAPITAN BIDA ......... ..


Emmanuel Torres
8
Gabino Mendoza
13
Gregorio C. Brillantes 15
Guillermo V. Soliven 20
Antonio P. G. Manuud 23


27
Jose de Venecia
Eladio Aldecoa
30
Meliton V. Salazar 32
Jaime E. Dy-Liacco 35
Eduardo D. Lachica 41


POETRY


INVOCATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ricardo Nepomuceno 19
HANDMAID OF HEAVEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Romulo Lara
22
WINDSONG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Jaime E. Dy-Liacco 26
O DEATH OF THE BEAUTIFUL FLOWER ... Gregorio C. Brillantes 28
MAN, FROM YOUR DARKNESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Torres 29
MATTINATA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Antonio P. G. Manuud 31
Verse: DEVOLUTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Leonidas V. Benesa 34
ON HOW MY SONGS UNSING ME
40
40
TO L. V. B.


FEAMTURES


THE CAMPUS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Eduardo D. Lachica 46
BOOKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Torres
49


2


  


AROIOTOrX
No man is an Island, entire of
itself; every man is a piece of the
Continent, a part of the main....
—JOHN DONNE


A TESTAMENT
T THE CONVOCATION marking the opening of extra-curricular
Aactivities in the Atenco, announcement was made of the prizes to
be awarded to the authors of the best pieces submitted for the first
issue of THE QUARTERLY.
In spite of the prizes offered, THE QUARTERLY editors received
a mere handful of manuscripts. And doubly tragic is the fact that
only two or three were good enough to merit publication.
The manuscripts submitted for THE QUARTERLY were carelessly written, juvenile, riddled with cliches, ridiculous in form and
content, and lacking in the most elementary technique. Not a few
of the manuscripts were written in an archaic style that would put
even good old Walter Scott to shame. Anecdotes and sketches were
labeled as "short stories" and nursery rhymes that didn’t rhyme naively passed for poetry. The only redeeming feature of the manuscripts
was their passable grammar.
Now we in the Ateneo are proud of a lot of things—and rightly,
too. The gold medals and the loving cups testify to our supremacy
in oratory and debate. We present incomparable stage-plays. We
are in the fore-front of militant Catholic Action with the Ateneo Catechetical Instruction League, and the Social Order Club. We are
heirs to a noble tradition of Catholic leadership. Our basketball
team is the fightingest squadron in the NCAA. The Atenco is the
best college in the Philippines, etc.
It is lamentable that we cannot be proud, too, of our campus
literature. For it is evident, judging from the quality of our campus
writing, that creative literature in the Ateneo has not progressed much
beyond the high school classroom-theme stage.
That genuine creative writing in the Ateneo is veritably an unknown art may be due to many factors. The College of Arts and Sciences
does not hold writing classes. Perhaps, there has been a disproportionate emphasis on the classics (we do not dare question the Ratio
Studiorum) to the exclusion of modern litenature. The students, in
gencral, do not take their writing seriously. Writing is for old fools
with white beards. The students who can write, who possess the
talent, have to attend a dance-party first, and then write their magnum opus hurriedly on the day of the deadline. Some who call


AUGUST, 1951


3


themselves blandly the campus literati carry a violent prejudice
against contemporary literature, paying blind homage to some obscure medieval novelist (and inevitably writing like him) and let
Hemingway and Faulkner and the masters of modern technique go
hang. And with pharisaical aloofness, they have given up Philippine literature for lost, after having read a "sexy” story in a weekly magazine, including sincere and honest practitioners of the art (as
Nick Joaquin and C. V. Pedroche) in their hasty condemnation. Thus
the quality of our campus literature.
We Ateneans exult in the knowledge that in a world of confusion and ugliness, we stand secure on a solid rock of Christian values. Ours is the truth, and the philosophy. We are the clear-headed thinkers in an age of false prophets. So that it is ironic that
while Godless artists write of lust and nihilism and despair effectively because they have the style and the technique, the Ateneanwriter can barely manage a faint croak in the wilderness.
That is why THE QUARTERLY hopes to begin in the Ateneo a
literary renaissance, an awakening of latent talents. THE QUARTERLY aims to encourage and develop a genuine creative literature
on the campus, and to foster among the students a deeper appreciation for serious writing and for contemporary literature.
Meanwhile, THE QUARTERLY relies on the efforts of an overworked few (who write because they must), and waits for a more
favorable response from the students for whom the magazine is published. If the present trend is to continue, we might as well resign
ourselves to Jose Garcia Villa’s local avant-gardes and the mad symphonies of the literary wasteland.
THE ASSUMPTION AND ART
TOVEMBER IST OF LAST YEAR is a day possessing the notes of
Ntimeliness and timelessness. For a world bent on destroying itself,
it is a timely warning. It is timeless, for Truth has spoken. On that
day, the Pope, speaking with the voice of Christ, defined for the
centuries the dogma of the bodily Assumption of Our Lady into Heaven.
For the various schools of thought, whose preoccupation is (or should
be) truth, this proclamation is significant. For the literary world, in
particular, whose preoccupation is the beautiful expression of truth,
its significance needs no emphasis.
One thing a modern writer abhors is a dogma. He cannot stomach it, as a child cannot medicine. But if swallow it he must, then
he must, even though it has to be crammed down his throat. For he
is a most bewildered creature nowadays, very sick with confusion. He
has lost sight of what man is, and consequently, the purpose of his
existence. And in telling other people of what he thinks man is,
he has only helped in rushing the world through two great wars,
on to the brink of another one. For wars are merely external manifestations of the chaos of ideas within man.
It is sad to say that this chaos of thought, this aimlessness, found


  


its synthesis in American tribunals, where a brilliant man named Oliver Wendell Holmes, by claiming that morality can be conditioned
by circumstances like time and dollars and Reno, denied at least implicitly, the natural law, and thereby threw the Constitution of the
great Republic of the West, which was written on the premise that
there exist absolutes, into the wastebasket. The statement, morality
is relative, is only another way of saying that it is as good as anything, and as bad.
Kick out morality, and the only principle left in the dualistic
concept of man is the material, the body. The beautiful concept of
the human soul, and of God (why not?) wither into products of man’s
daydreaming. But man, by reason of his very nature, must express
himself fully. So he has to seek for a substitute for the soul. Freud
comes into the scene with Sex, and the Zolas and the Erskine Caldwells
and the D. H. Lawrences shout in triumph: Ars Grtatia Artis! Since
then literature has been crashing to the ground like the walls of Jericho. The timid sensitive ones, unable to stand the noise, have instinctively built a shell around themselves, chanting inane symbolisms
and symbolic inanities in a language all their own. In Soviet Russia
now, as far as we know, whose people are naturally artistic, there is
no art, no music, no literature. Gone are the Tolstoys and Dostoevskys.
For native genius has been choked to death by Power, Stalin’s substitute for the soul.
The Assumption is not only a declaration that there is no adequate substitute for the human soul, and can never be any. It is also
an invincible argument for the sacredness of the human body. The
purpose of the body is far nobler than making foul the air of Korean
battlefields. Or staining the snow of cold Siberian hills. Indeed, modern writers, with a few exceptions, praise it, raise it to the skies,
but their apotheosized body is not the glorified body of the Assumption. For the glorification of the body without the soul doesn’t make
sense. The body, brother to the earth, cannot lift itself by its own
bootstraps. It requires the soul of the glorified body of the Assumption.
Modern literature therefore suffers from a lack. It suffers from
a privation of proportion. Beauty, which resides in proportion, has
been banished from its bosom. It lacks symmetry, wholeness, wholesomeness. Reading modern writers is an exciting experience, but it
fails to give that satisfaction which man, as human, consciously or
unconsciously demands. It leaves a bad taste in the mouth, makes
you feel as if you were leading a dog’s life, except that you
wear clothes. It engenders and augments doubt, despair, a deadening,
a gradual death, the death of the living, the living dead, Eliot’s hollow men of the wasteland, Merton’s modern men living in asheans.
The tragedy of a thousand world wars is not so tragic as the death
of the human soul, or at least the darkening, the dimming of the
concept of the human soul. We are experiencing a Dark Age of literature.
What we need now is a new Renaissance, a departure, a deparAUGUST, 1951
5


ture which is a returning. Human nature has been done violence.
It demands reparation, a swinging back, an equilibrium. We have
this assurance in the Assumption, which is a call to order, to a proper
ranking of human values. With soul occupying primacy (without spicitual values there are no values at all), everything—sex, money, ambition, peace, et cetera—will fall into place as in a jigsaw puzzle.
When the writer shall have puzzled himself out, only then can he
write sanely, and beautifully. Only then can literature attain full
flowering.


MAN AND THE MACHINE
WITH HAIR-TEARING DESPAIR, pundits like Clifton Fadiman and
"" Jacques Barzun have deplored the indifference of modern man
for the Arts. One school of thought has diagnosed this enmity as the
result of an environment fast becoming standardized. Half a century
of automobiles, time-saving gadgets, radio and television and slot
machines, has dulled anything that resembles serious thought. In an
age of frantic mass production where quantity has replaced quality,
the pedestrian begins to feel less of an individual than a parcel in a
oldly systematic society. In short (this school of thought goes on).
the Machine is to blame for making modern man nothing more than
a hapless cog in a complex set-up. It has stifled the creative mind.
Imagine a world of automatons which only such prophets as Aldous
Hluxley and Orson Welles could have conjured! Without the Arts, how
weary, stale, flat, and entirely unprofitable can life be?
But after all it is man that runs the Machine, not the other way
around, and man that is largely to blame for his cultural decadence.
We are too busy. We are too busy to think what the devil we are
after. Because of it, we take too many things for granted, seldom
questioning their worth. We are too busy (1) making money, (2)
making more money, (3) pursuing material comforts. We drift along
with the crowd, following their fads and worldly-wise ethics. In our
blind concern for the cakes and ales of life, we only end up in disgust, with battered nerves, insomnia, and peptic ulcers to prove it.
The life of the spirit is neglected, starving in a world of machines, the spirit which alone can give us peace of mind and a fresh,
constructive and healthy outlook on life. Glutted with fat wads of
bank notes, businessmen on the Escolta, in their rat-race for the top,
trample upon one another’s toes, flout human decency, and break their
own spines, causing a great deal of misery. Our spiritual starvation,
in fact, is creating a greater mess than the Atom Boib: broken homes,
disillusion, and suicide.
Take the problem of how we spend oun leisure. For it is in the
way we spend our spare moments that we show signs of cultural decay, when we act prosaically like the Machine. Our idea of a good
time is limited to such humdrum sensory pleasures as a gaudy technicolor musical, bowling alleys, and parties. Very few have developed a keen appetite for reading “Chestebelloc" and Bernard Shaw, Sin

6


  


clair Lewis and Willa Cather, Waugh and Chekoy and T. S. Eliot.
For the hoi polloi, literature has been reduced to cheap historical
romances bulging with blood and thunden and sex digests, pulp
magazines, and comics. Nobody cares about reading a book by Faulkner or Robert Penn Warren when there is a movie based on the book.
There is something obviously wrong in our education when cheap
calendar art finds more admirers than an exquisite Madonna by Raphael or a landscape by Corot or Gaugin. Notice how rhythm, the
baser aspect of mnusic, has drowned out melody. When jukeboxes
blare forth brassy Tin Pan Alley tunes and a loud-shirted generation
appreciates nothing but Spike Jones records, it becomes a wonder
where Beethoven’s Fifth, Shubert’s Unfinished Symphony, and
Bizet’s Carmen have all gone to. The Rizal Memorial Coliseum,
where a noted conductor is presenting Tchaikowsky, does not match
half the turn-out of say, an NCAA game. This is true even in our
choice of movies; the right ones, like Brief Encounter, the Catholicprize movie Monsieur Vincent, and Charlie Chaplin’s bitter satire on
love and friendship, City Lights, have been overlooked.
A robust interest in and appreciation of the arts provide the
well-tempered mind (aequus animus) which a liberal education should
aim at. For it is in the arts that time-worn concepts like beauty,
truth, goodness are embodied in the concrete, in their fullness and
richness. In literature, painting, and music, inan delves for something vitally important beyond the prisons of the flesh—a spirituality
that generates a brotherhood among men, putting material goods
where they should be shelved, keeping our mind alert for the things
which really count.


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, '52
LEONIDAS V. BENESA, '52
EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


AUGUST, 1951


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


A Story


The Beautiful People
..wind in dry grass.
—T. S. Eliot: THE HOLLOW MEN


I.
AS THE TAXICAB CLIMBED the
gradually rising earth, he could see
the rows of suburban houses, elegant and neat in their fresh coats
of paint, the walled-in gardens, the
glass panes reflecting the fierce
golden glare of the sunset. Leaning
back on the seat, Ruben thought of
the decent people who lived in these
houses, lounging in the secrecy of
their lawns as they listened to soft
music blending with the scent of
rosebuds and pines and growing
grass. Sunk in luxuriant beds, they
drifted out into strange worlds of
russet dreams and faraway islands
and boulevards paved by palms lushgreen in the indolent heat. Early
evening began to spread like warm
wine over the earth, and the asphalt
road before him was drenched in
cobalt blue. Above the pines shone
the star, incomparable and desolate
in the grayness, while the sun glowered in a gulf of red coals. Faint
lights peeped out of the houses on
the hills.
He knew he had made a mistake
in coming: a growing emptiness ate
inside of him, a strange mixed feeling of homelessness and defeat. He
was afraid that meeting Nina after several years might awaken fresh
wounds. And yet he was tense with
the expectancy of seeing her again,
if only because she had been part
of time that was, when the wide



world glowed with adolescent glory
and youth was a mystic promise of
fulfillment. Like everything he had
known then, she too would not be
the same. Now she was on the other side of the fence, entrenched in
the gilded couch her parents prepared for her, after they had sold
their hacienda in Negros and came
to the big city. She would be pillowed in ease with glass slippers,
lost in the giddy whirl of week-end
soirees and lavendered rooms and
handmaids who brought her costly
wardrobe and exotic perfumes in frail
slim bottles. Silently he had hated
her parents for thus destroying her,
and in the throbbing darkness of
his shabby room he began to hate
her also, because there was not one
confounded thing he could do.
After she left, there had been
other girls: Charito, tall, slender as
a young reed, and Nenita with the
shining April face, and Leila who
came from Zamboanga and had soft
cascading hair. But they were trivial, and did not understand the secret hunger in his blood as she did,
when, under the warm bleeding petals of the firetrees, they both talked of Keats and Rupert Brooke in
soft secretive voices, of how someday he would roam the vast living
earth. When night came, he would
lie awake, unshamedly crying out
his loss, listening to the violent voices of the rain and the dismal cry
of a train rumbling out into the wet
  


night. But he soon forgot her like
the others. He was not thinking
of her when he came to the big city
to become a writer and lived in
his aunt’s boardinghouse. After his
father’s death and the farm mortgaged, he roamed the streets for
work, floundering helplessly in
an ugly and
heartless city.
E
But Nina had
a home, and he
none. After this
meeting he
thought, it would
be good-bye, one -
final door against
P
the past. Also he
kept reassuring
himself: she 

would be changed, inevitably to 2
be forgotten, like
all the rest.
The cab crawled slowly to a
halt before a
white open gate.
As the car pur
y
red away, Ruben
stood uncertainly

beholding a bulky

manorial house
—

planted firmly on 

a small mound
of green. Like some behemoth white
elephant, it dwarfed the other rich
houses along the boulevard and aspired defiantly to draw the silver
stars into the glass windows.
As he approached the house, almost with the furtive steps of a
trespasser, his temples pounded
wildly. Through the glass windows
he saw Nina sitting on the sofa in
the growing dark, the white curve
of her throat touched by the warm
glow of the sun, as she listened to
the dying melody of a song. He


realized he was first to arrive,
standing tensely in his chesnut suit
before the large egg-shell-white
door. He pressed the button, and a
silver-clear bell rang musically within like a lost maiden voice.
“I can’t tell how glad I am that
you came, Ben,
and her voice
was alive and
softly quivering.
He caught her
milkwhite, outstretched hands
2
in his, sunburnt
an d unsteady,
and somehow he
managed to say,
"Im glad you
were born this
da y, Nina, although he was
nervous and cold
inside and his
voice was dry.
She had her dark
hair short and
windblown, and a
watery pink
frock that reach
to a little above
the ankles clasped her young
body in graceful
gbMana5 tolas. He noticed
how excited she
was, and changed: no longer the shy,
skinny girl with eyes that reminded
him of a terrified pigeon’s, but fullblown woman confident of her own
charm.
They walked across the great living room, where the dying flames
of the sun were refracted like so
many leaping lights from the glass
windows and the quivering chandeliers. Nina turned on the electric
liglits and the room bloomed into
white morning. Then he slipped a
small wrapped packet into her hand,


AUGUST, 1951


9


and Nina smiled gratefully, and together they sat down on the sofa,
both of them a little breathless, not
knowing what to say or ask.
"I was afraid you might not
come, she said, her intense eyes
levelled at his. “You look better
now — after last night."
“I looked horrid last night," and
he grinned drily. That was when
he met her at the Escolta in her
car, waiting for her parents to come
out of the moviehouse. He looked
peaked then, and homeless, a growth
of stubble on his chin, as he sought
the friendly warmth of the coffee
shops with a volume of Proust under his arm.
“How is everything?” she said,
trying to be personal and conventionally pleasant and excited about
this meeting.
“Oh, everything is running fine,"
he answered thoughtlessly. It was a
lie, and Nina probably guessed it
and recoiled inwardly at her tactlessness. This was how it should
be now, Ruben thought, this bitter
disenchantment that was a part of
growth and change, this feeling of
emptiness that engulfed him, swept
him in the dark and ruthless river
of Time. For a while they talked
of Dumaguete in the summer, the
firetrees bursting into flowersong,
the park before the mosscovered
stone church built by the Spanish
friars, and the convent where she
trod the worn flagstone path to the
tidy classrooms of the nuns. But
even now as they talked of a flood
of memories, Ruben could feel her
remoteness as she would grow tense,
groping for words to fill the gaps
of silence. He could feel her awareness that there was a tall wall between them.
A manservant brought in a tray


of iced tea. Then half-jokingly and
laughing she said, "Here’s for the
good old days," as if she meant
that this was good-bye to schoolgirlish memories, for now the eagerness in her voice fled from her. He
saw her finger the cold-sweating
glass nervously; she looked tired.
Soon the headlights of a car lit
the gravelled driveway and swept
before the white front door. The
silver laughter of girls from the
limousine made Nina rise to meet
them at the threshold. He rose mechanically as Nina introduced the
gift-laden girls by their outlandish
nicknames: Rosie, Menchu, Cora,
Marie, who looked alike in their
mannish hair-do, who were lively as
sparrows on May mornings. Their
escorts were impeccably dressed
young men, lean, pale, and strangely pathetic, who wore flashy polkadot ties.
More cars arrived and the guests
began to pour in, until soon the
house resounded with the silken rustle of skirts and the uneasy shuffle of masculine feet. At once the
phonograph throbbed out sickly
sweet syncopated music, and the
dancers began to glide through the
ritual rhythm. Ruben had not known
such vivid sensory impressions before: the throbbing music and laughter, the graceful sweep of a golden
arm, servants moving like speechless
cranes, the tinkle of hollow glasses
and the drone of voices like the rustle of dead leaves. At the center
of it all was Nina, glowing with
joy, at home among her own people,
the beautiful people lost in the
Nirvana of parties and kleig lights.
“Bert, how about playing the piano for us—"
"Nina, did someone ever tell you
how lovely"Of course you’re invited to Lo

10


  


lita’s party next Saturday!"
The collegemen flocked around her
during the entire evening, and he
thought of Penelope and her countless suitors. He avoided her whenever she looked concernedly about for
him, and he sought the porch where
the men gathered to smoke and
talked of various escapades. He
watched several people on the moondrenched terrace, sniffing the swooning rosebushes, and the lights from
the other houses, pale and sickly,
and the garish lights of Manila,
faint and faraway. Then he would
look at the bright living room: the
party was now going at a feverish
pace and the voices were now mad
crackling of dead leaves, and the
music beat a nervous, energetic rhythm and debutantes flitted in and
out of rooms and he suddenly found
himself drifting along the tide of
warm excitement. Inside he was
bleeding, and when Nina urged that
he should dance with her, he was
blinded with an undefinable anger,
as Nina shook life a leaf, breathing
heavily, both of them unspeaking
as though they had become strangers. The anger rose into a wild
pounding pulsebeat: he was falling
into something he had not foreseen
before: the growing, brutal knowledge that he was still in love with
her....
II.
The party was over. After the
guests had gone — all except for
Ruben — the vast living room seemed lost in its desolate grandeur, the
elegant draperies, the chintz-cushioned furniture, the grand shining
piano beside the french window.
Somehow caught in the loneliness
was Nina, still fresh and breathlessly lovely in her pale-pink frock.
Though she was tired from being
celebrant of her own birthday par

ty, the flush of young excitement
lingered on her face. The evening
had been her own triumph, and she
had basked fully in the splendor
of being young, vibrant, and alive
like wakening earth warmed by tender sun. (She would be unfadingly beautiful, well-groomed in this
golden cage of hers; unlike most
womanhood shrivelling with age in
a few years.)
She sank resignedly on the sofa
and threw her head back half-arrogantly.
“Congratulations, Nina, for such
a splendid performance tonight, he
said half-mockingly. "Although
you could have stretched the party
a little longer, not ended it so soon.
“I was getting bored by it all.”
It seemed such a perfectly nonchalant remark, as though everything
money could command could be
waived aside by some reckless whim
of hers.
“Just when the party was getting
exciting really, and you had to break
it up.
“I was bored, Ben, and there
was a desperateness in her voice
now, as though she meant it, as
though she was pleading.
“Come now Nina, that isn’t being
yourself. You’re changed, terribly
changed, since four years ago and
you know it.” He made an effort
to keep his voice edged with bitterness since this was closing the
final door, putting the lights out
and saying good-bye to the engulfing
darkness. “You are among the best
people, the beautiful people; live,
laugh, for time is short."
"“Stop it,” she said. “Stop it, stop
it, stop it!” Ruben could not realize' at once what she had said, and
he saw her bury her face in her
hands, crumpled into tight balls of


AUGUST, 1951


11


fists. She was trembling.
Confusedly he blurted out, "I’m
sorry," but it was like talking to
a heedless marble statue. He stood
there without speaking, too stunned
to realize what it was all about.
"I’m so alone and lost, Ben—"
“But you have your parents to
think of.”
She looked at him almost with defiance and mockery, her eyes bloodshot with sudden grief, and she
snapped. “Yes, where do you
think they are? In Baguio for the
business convention. My father’s
making more money.” She rose and
turned her back toward him, facing
the open french window overlooking the sprinkled lawn gleaming in
the silent moonlight world. "I had
a quarrel with my stepmother — I
should say we have had quarrels.
“Over what?
“Many things, she said. “She
comes from an aristocratic family
in Ermita. She is making a mess
of running Father’s life. She’s shallow, selfish, jealous of me.
"Don't say that.
“I’m sick inside of me," and her
voice in the dark caught new meaning for him, a desperate, hungry
wind swirled among the dry leaves.
"I’m trapped here in this mess. You
think I can go on living like this,
Ben? I wish to God I had a brother or a sister to whom I could confide my grief. But I’m all alone....
and I keep listening to the wind
billowing the curtain, the sudden cry
of a train, and dark secret night,
and almost sometimes, I felt I knew
death, the kind brother.... My life’s
a rot.” And then she said: “There’s
no one to talk to... only you, perhaps, who could understand... but
I’m afraid it’s you that’s changed."
He wanted to say something, but
12


her hands began to move over the
keyboard, rippling in pensive agony
and longing in the throbbing dark
through the second movement -of
Rachmaninoff’s second concerto.
The music was restless, the way she
played it, languorous and desolate
in the moonlight; it caught him powerless, trembling because of this
new realization that Nina was homeless like him, even among these
beautiful people, that she was unchanged and unlost to him after the
long wait. The music stopped abruptly. "I’m running away, Ben.
“I’m sorry I doubted about you,
Nina. Now I realize how mistaken
I was...”
Outside the wind beat violently
against the trees, presaging rain,
swirling the dry leaves into a flurry, crackling into the room.
"Isn’t it wonderful! The whole
world outside! Well, what are you
waiting for?” Her excited hand
clutched his and together they hastened into the moonwet porch, out
into the terraces, the wind streaming her hair, beating violently against her face which became suddenly alive. She seemed to glorify
this strange, vast, moving symphony
of the earth as though it filled her
wild hunger, her secret nameless urgent search which she could not
find among her own people. The
moon turned to bloodred, as the
billowy clouds swept over it, and
Ruben caught her eyes looking upward, and her face was transfigured
into a loveliness that was deathless,
breathlessly listening like the quiet
earth waiting for the cool steady
thrusts of dark rain. And now the
world was in darkness as they stood
out there in the wind and the thunderburst as her face dug deep into
his shoulder and she was weeping
violently.
  


GABINO MENDOZA, '53


The Ayranny
of Time


"LIFE IS S0 PECULIAR, a popular song goes. If it only were! If
only Life were peculiar and different and unmonotonous, what a blessing it would be. The race of men,
that strange breed of them called
"writers" in particular, have always
been the victims of Life’s regularity.
Take the tyranny of Time: a writer can make a story take place only
at night or in the day. From the
Pentateuch to Hemingway’s latest
gripping, not to say griping "adventuromance", man has had to
talk of the “cheerful light of the
morning sun" or “the menacing glare
of noon" or of “the mellow evening
bell" when “day is done and darkness falls from the wings of night”
or of “the tick-tock silence" of the
haunting hour of midnight. Neither saints nor bards sublime have
escaped the chains of night and day.
Homer had to write of the "rosy
fingers of the dawn searching
through the mist" and John the
Evangelist, of the night in Judasheart. And so, bound by the chains
of night and day, man writes on
of history that repeats itself. He
lives a life, unpeculiar, un-different,
monotonous, bound by the chains of
night and day. He wakes up at
dawn and sleeps at night. He eats
breakfast in the morning, lunch at
noon, and supper at night. He lives
in houses that look as alike as the
rooms of an American hotel. He
is, especially the North American, a
gentile who uses vain repetitions.
On second thought, I think the


Filipino is even more of a gentile
than the assembly-line-infatuated
American. If you doubt this, you
have only to look at our nipa huts
to realize that from the Babuyan
Islands to Sulu, "a nipa hut is a
nipa hut is a nipa hut."
But to my mind, the most striking manifestation of the Filipino’s
gentile-complex is the stairway of
his suburban home. Walk through
Pasay, through Santa Mesa Extension, through San Juan, and you will
see what I mean. Every Filipino,
it seems, be he thrifty Ilocano, or
prudent Tagalog, or spend-thrift
Visayan, has an innate urge to
splurge on a pretentious stairway
when he builds a suburban home. I
frankly suspect that every Filipino
baby, even while he is still in his
mother’s womb, already has in his
tiny mind a big dream, in his heart


AUGUST, 1951


13


a tightly-clinging desire for a future filled with a “Cecil B. de Milleish" stairway. Will he build a
palace? Then let there be a magnificent stairway with rosy nymphs
and green dragons gamboling on its
sides. Will he build a chalet? A
modest bungalow perhaps? Let the
stairs be grandly theatrical, a
worthy rival to Cyrano’s scenic nose.
How often have I knelt in prayer
for some great leader, who would
save at least the Philippines, if not
the world, from the tyranny of
the regular and the monotonous!
But all in vain, till....
¡Five flaming sunsets ago, as I
trudged in the grayness of the
gloaming, I was shocked out of my
despair by a sight so peculiar that
the tyrant, Time, "grew pale and
specter-thin" and almost died. There
by the side of the dust road was
a stairless house! With an exclamation that we’d best put down as
‘goodness gracious", I looked again.
There it was, and no mirage, a
stairless house. And as I stared,
it peered back to me, a little shyly I thought. But perhaps it was
because I stared at it too fixedly
“What an exquisite little thing, I
whispered to myself. Then, as thick
realization seeped heavily into my
head, I reverently proclaimed to the
frog in the canal and the lizard on
the telephone post near-by, "What
a powerful little thing.” There before me was a house that broke all
the rules of unimaginative and monotonous Life. There was our deliverance from the chains of night
and day.
Just then, a little girl with a doll
in her arms jumped from the stairless house and tripped gaily to her
grotesque-staired home nearby. All
hope of true deliverance crackled
and went up in smoke. It was only


a rich little girl’s big doll house.
My steps dragged as I trudged home.
And it was night.
But with the resurrected day, just
a little below the horizon shone a
gleam of hope. In bed, while sun
beams and sleep wrestled about me,
I built houses in the air — all of
them blissfully stairless.
"First,” I planned, "a nipa hut
but unlike any ever seen before-round
and painted a gaudy red, with stainless steel posts, marble floors and
glazed glass windows. Its crown, a
purple weather-cow.” Then I built
a stairless chalet. Next came a bungalow, stairless too. Finally, a castle with a rude bamboo ladder at the
door. Anyone who wanted to go in
had to climb the rickety ladder. And
anyone who wanted to leave would
perforce have to use mountaineering
boots and pick-ax and rope.
But when my mind stepped back
to take a satisfied look, it recoiled in
amazement. Just as in a movie where
the projector has run riot and disconnected pictures flash crazily before your eyes, in my mind there
ran trunkless elephants, shell-less
turtles, speechless Ateneans. My
houses in the air lacked something,
yes, I know, the stairs — but they
lacked something more. Something
that made them Filipino houses. Then
I realized that they looked like a
father welcoming his prodigal son
home — with his arms at his sides.
I liked it little. In an orgy of
generosity, strangely reminiscent of
the Calabrian host, I gave all my
inhospitable houses to the spectres
that live in dreams, and woke up.
singing in my heart a wild and barbaric song of triumph. The rosy
fingers of the dawn searched through
the vanishing mist. And it was
day.


14


  


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, '52


A Story


The Srotners


I.
THE ELECTRIC GLARE burned
redly through his sleeptired eyelids
so that he turned on his side toward the wall and drifted again in
shadows of warm cool darkness. His
brother Aquiles called to him to
wake up, the voice blurred and unfamiliar in the twilight between
sleep and waking: “Maro, the birds
.. (Birds? Sleep and secret darkness). The voice harshly abrupt,
a rough hand shaking him: "Wake
up, Maro." Now with a dull gradual knowledge of the time and the
morning and the day, he lay on his
back shading his eyes because they
hurt in the raw, intolerable brightness. Irrelevantly, he thought of the
girl Elen (the whitepetal face, the
delicate slenderness) before he rose
numbly and staggered to the bathroom and splashed thin sharp water
on his face.
When he returned to the room
his brother had stripped to the waist,
flexing the muscles of his arms
thrust arrogantly before the long
mirror of the aparador His brother
Aquiles was nineteen, handsome,
lean with an athletic strength: always he had felt there was in his
brother a dark stoic confidence that
once flared into bitter revolt before
his father, lending now to his movements a quiet ruthlessness. The morning began to assert itself, and the
dimming electric light shone palely
in the room, outlining his brother’s
body with a vague sick pallor.
“You ought to do this everyday,"
his brother said, fingering the tens

ed muscles of an upraised arm. His
brother spoke with a curt, almost
angry accent.
“Yes, manong,” he said. At once
he checked a spasm of resentment
and felt his lips twitch with an
attempt to smile.
His brother strode to the window,
tall and defiant in the ambiguous
light and without turning said,
“There were many birds last time,
Maro."
There had been so many birds
then, wild gray pigeons in the duhat
and mango trees, mayas and orioles
in the camachile lining the bullcart
trail to his father’s farm, and herons in the low wet grass growing
on the flat riverbanks and along the
shallow mudfish creeks. His brother Aquiles had shot fifteen pagaw
and they had walked home in swinging pride through the town with the
birds slung from their gunstocks:
he had come from the city for a
week’s vacation, and it was November then and harvest season in the
fields and the birds descended tamely to the ground for the scattered
grains. The day came to him again
in a kaleidoscope of shifting images,
and now he dressed hurriedly with
a growing excitemant, recalling the
fragrance of loamy November earth
and the crushed grass in the greenyellow valley and the silent exploding socond when the gunsights rested on the feathered target motionless and doomed in a tracery of
leaves. He had told Elen in the
city about the hunt, and she had
listened to him with an carnest


AUGUST, 1951


15


childlike simplicity.
He said, "Manong, you shot fifteen last November.”
His brother did not answer but
turned to him his tragic intense
gaze. He wavered before the sullen
stare, feeling an instant incomprehensible guilt, and looked away abstractedly at the guns newly oiled
upon the table. They were steelblued .22’s, long of barrel and implicit with death. Then he heard
the sounds of morning, as though
the door that imprisoned them had
opened suddenly: a calesa rattled by
on the straet and a woman’s voice,
shrill, phlegmatic, rasped aginst the
morning air.
II.
The sky glowed orangely with the
unrisen sun when after breakfast and
his mother’s plea that they come
home early they stepped out into
the morning with their guns and
walked with longfooted strides down
the street of acacia and across the
plaza where the requiem leaves of
May reposed on the yallowed grass,
past the churchyard and the ancient
graves and the woodnipa houses
with old men coughing hollowly at
the windows and women sweeping
the dust of the frontyards, over the
bridge to the railroad station where
the town ended and the fields began. They followed the tracks on
the high steep embankment, away
from town. The sun rose and glittered on the singing rails.
His brother Aquiles trudged on
determinedly in silence, stepping easily over the gravelled railbed. He
kept pace with his brother’s strong
rapid gait, and he began to sweat
in the young morning, carrying the
gun rested on his shoulder and the
buri bag where his mother had placed their lunch. Beyond the barren
16


summer fields sloping away from the
railway embankment the mountains
towered blue and unreachable over
the brushclad hills. It had not rained for many sunrises, although darkedged clouds ranged on the horizon
at noon, portentous with thunder, only to dissolve into pastel threads
at evening.
They left the railroad where it
curved into a tunnel of bamboo
brakes, and entered a path skirting
a hill and plodded through the dry
shade of a coconut grove where the
valley showed through the trunks of
the trees. Thick powder dust draped the trail that led to his father’s
farm, and the insignificant sparrows in the camachile fled at their
approach, piping weak cries over
the dead brown stretch of fields.
III.
Noon blazed from the furnace sky
and he was tirad and hungry and
thick sticky sweat clung to his face
and neck when suddenly he saw
the heron. His brother Aquiles had
shot but two pigeons, and they had
finally come to the river after having vainly scoured the trees bordering the empty fields for more
game, waiting in breathless despair
for the mating calls in the hot drab
silence; and he pointed out the heron to his brother with the exultant tingle of discovery. It was the
biggest, whitest heron he had ever
seen, unlike the frail awkward birds
that rested on the backs of carabaos. The heron stood tall and
graceful and magnificent against a
confusion of bamboo twigs, hunting for food in the short damp grass,
the solitary moving object in the
hypnosis of river and sun and so
unaware of their presence as they
crouched with loaded guns behind a
clump of weeds that the inane
  


thought that perhaps it was enchanted flicked amusedly at his mind,
and he raised the rifle, seeing himself feeling the tender fleshy breast
through the bloodsplattered feathers.
“Maro!"
The hoarse fierce whisper jarred him, and he lowered the rifle.
The heron stood white and magnificent in the noonsun.
“I better do it,
his brother said.
He could hear
his brother's
quick breath, and
A
the tragic sullen
sta re unnerved
him. His brother 
gripped him
tightly on the
L
arm until the
fingernails burrowed painfully
MD
into the skin. He
swallowed to ease

the solid chocking heaviness in
his throat,
wrenching his
arm free.

He looked at 



the hereon, his




heart beating
with fear and
anger, stifling a wild sereaming
desire to shout. His brother’s rifle
cracked and he saw the spout of water where the bullet had missed, saw
the heron jerk as from a blow, the
wide white wings flapping beating
the grass as it rose, airborne, crying frightenedly, to disappear over
the tress on the riverbank.
His brother stood now and stared at
the spot where the heron had been,
his face expressionless and pale. For
a long while his brother stood there,
the gun in his hands. The summer


silence stirred in the trees. The riverwaters streamed forever. The anger and the fear flowed into a
warm shy rush of sympathy for
his brother standing staring at the
spot in the grass where the heron
had been and he said, “It is all
right, manong, it is all right.”
IV.
He lay on the hard leafcarpeted
ground with his brother beside him
in the warm
s ha de an d
through the scant
acacia foliage he
could see the sky.
There were clouds
a upon it now,
VDUI
formless streamers against the
blue. He was
tired and drowsy
and over his
unresisting mind
w a s h ed the
shapes and tones
of things. He reTtamembered November and the
birds again, the
triumphant tem

—
po of the hunt in
—


the harvestvalley,
EA

and he knew with
a terrible and fatalistic certainty that everything
would not be the same again. He
thought of the hereon and its white
enchanted tallness, his brother’s pale
blank face, the futile crash of riflefire.
He was remembering the girl Elen
laughing in starlight when his brother said, “Maro, there is something
wrong with the gun.
“Yes, manong," he said.
“I do not know why I should have
missed. There is something wrong
with the gun,” his brother said.


AUGUST. 1951


17


He peered at the sky through the
lacework of branches: there were
more clouds now, ragged and swift
and billowing. A crow alighted on
a branch, and for a moment it remained on its fragile perch before
it flew away.
“Manong, there were many birds
the last time we came.
“Yes,” his brother said.
“That seems a long time ago,” he
said.
"Do you still want to go hunting?”
“That is up to you, manong,” he
said.
“Let us not any more.
A quietness grew and spread and
covered them. He thought of the
girl Elen in the city, Elen singing
laughing in starlight. A slow hot
wind walked over the leaves on the
dry cracked ground.
“Maro," his brother said, "what
are you thinking of?"
“Elen," he said. "A girl in the
city.
"Do you love her, Maro?'
“Yes, manong, he said. His
brother had never spoken to him of
love and he wondered at his words,
sad and querulous when he had always affected a brusque, impatient
manner. He thought of Elen and
loneliness in the night and November birdsong and he closed his eyes
against the day while the slow wind
brooded over the barren fields.
V.
A carom of thunder awakened him
to find the afternoon like dusk and
the sky violent with boiling cliffs of
rainclouds. His brother rose and
gazed too at the sky.
"Manong, it is going to rain," he
said.


“We will be in town before the
rain," his brother said.
Soon they were running up the
trail across the fields, his brother
forgetting the two birds he had shot
in their heartpounding hurry, and
the sudden virulent wind flung the
dead leaves in dusty swirls lashing
their faces, and he gritted his teeth
as he ran, the blood hammering in
his temples, the tiredness in his
limbs now like pulsing flowing fire.
Tongues of lightning spat from the
coiling thunderheads and the shattering roar strangled his brother’s
voice urging him faster, faster,
waving his gun, they could still
reach the town before it rained, and
he raced his brother down the railtracks panting through the hot moist
breath of the pursuing rain.
They had reached the town and
were halfrunning across the bridge
when the rain cascaded down in
sheets of fury, slashing his face and
stinging, blinding his eyes. He
sprinted for shelter and at last safe
under a store’s tinroof, he saw his
brother standing unmoving in the
street in the rain, and he called out
to him, "Manong! Manong!" but
his brother did not seem to hear
him but stood there as in a trance
in the rain.
VI.
It was night and darkness in the
room and his brother Aquiles tossed feverish and moaning in his bed
and the rain fell on the roof in
neverending engulfing monotony. "I
do not understand," his brother had
said, holding him transfixed with his
intense tragic stare; “the heron and
the rain and now I am sick.” His
brother had tried to laugh then, but
winced as though from some inward
wound.
His body was tired and the mus

18


  


cles of his legs ached throbbingly
but his mind was alert and unresting whirling in the flood of darkness with the memory of the day
from beginning to end: the electric
glare hurtful in his eyes and the
dry brown fields, the white heron in
the river and his brother asking him
if he loved the girl Elen, and the
sobbing desperate flight across the
fields and then his brother standing
unmoving lost and forlorn in the
rain.


Why? he cried in silence in the
dark, wanting the answer to a question which he could only feel and
not utter because it was wordless
and vast and undefined as the universe, and he waited for a ray of
voice and light, and listened in fear
and awe to the first rain of May
falling like ocean threnody on the
roof, the rain falling on the world
of night, upon all the living and
the dead.





RICARDO NEPOMUCENO, JR., '53
Invocation
My Lord, before You anuff the trembling light
That now weakly smoulders within my breast,
Let me roam, a hungry wind, some tender night
Through this dim land, through hill and mountain crest,
Ravish once more the roses' attar swcet,
Feel the soft ebbing sunset's opal flame,
Feast on the glorious copper summer wheat,
Thrill, from cold streams, to the music of Your Name.
Then, may this land, in whose sod my young heart
Has taken root, mourn the passing of my bicr;
And as my corpse returns to its fruitful womb,
With the mute earth to mingle part by part:
Come Mary (softly now), a shining teur
Shed on the rainless grass above my tomb.


AUGUST, 1951


19


GUILLERMO V SOLIVEN, '5


110005
Sunset


I HAVE A REGULAR HABIT of
attending the band concerts given
at the Luneta every Sunday afternoon. One particular summer afternoon I found the lawn around the
grandstand near the Rizal monument
unusually congested with people. It
seemed as though all Manila had
turned out in its colorful Sunday’s
best for this one concert. And
drawn like bees to honey by this sudden exodus of Manila’s "music lovers," garishly painted pop-corn stands
and ice-cream carts had rudely invaded the grounds.
The band had not yet arrived but
a symphony already filled the air
a discordant symphony of honks,
sneezes, grunts, whistles, screeches,
wailing voices and blatant cries of
“Balut!" and "Pop-corn!" I found
a soft grassy plot under a friendly
acacia tree and sat down, half in
light and half in shade.
As I sat there brooding, a sunbeam slowly crept into my eye, and
I lifted my face to the western sky.
The clamor had died down behind
me and in its place came the music,
soft, sweet, and far away. It was
then that a strange sensation coursed
through me — a feeling of sadness
and of exultation — a feeling that
I was looking deep into the very
heart and beauty of creation, beyond
the Veil itself into Eternity.
The sun had long passed its zenith
but it still had the dazzle and the
power of early afternoon. I could
not look at it with a steady eye and
I turned so it would be shaded
from my sight.


O
A poet once said that knowledge
is like a lamp that lights a traveller on his way; but now it struck
me that knowledge is even more
than that. Knowledge is like the
afternoon sun, dazzling and radiant,
and its beams scatter power and life
itself. And it can belong to anyone
daring enough and willing enough
and ambitious enough to pay the
price of possessing it. But many
people would turn away from knowledge rather than go through the
trouble and pain of reaching for it
just as they would turn away from
the brilliant afternoon sun and keep
their eyes in the cool shade. And
I asked myself how many times I
had done the same thing; how many
times I had wavered in my duty to
study when I felt it would be easier
to be watching a movie-screen than
to be thumbing through a book; how
many times I had chosen the easy for
the hard and in doing so, had missed
some of the really worthwhile things
in my student life. I thought of the
few miserly minutes I had so often
grudged Shakespeare and Cicero for


20


  


the easy but empty hours I had slept
away on a comfortable couch; and
of the many occasions when the
"Laws of Motion" and the "Analytic Principles of Philosophy" had
been abandoned for the jam-session
and the basketball game. I knew
very well that I had sometimes lost
sight of lasting values in the perennial distraction of the world around
me; I had let moments creep into
minutes, minutes drag into hours,
and hours rush into days and weeks
without having accomplished much
of real worth to show for the time
that had passed, for the opportunities
that had come and gone. I pondered
over these vacant chapters of the
past and turned my eyes into the
afternoon sun again. The splendor
of the scene that met my sight was
breath-taking.
The afternoon sun was setting;
setting with a glory all its own. As
I looked on, sunbeams swiftly sprang
out like shafts from Apollo’s bow,
breaking the heavens into bars of
yellow and silver: touching the azure
sky and burning it into rose; trimming the clouds that were piled up
against the light like mighty pavilions with a fringe of fairy gold.
And as the dazzling glare of midafternoon mellowed into a pleasant
golden glow through the air rushed
a freshening breeze. Sunbeams
slanted down to where I sat and
danced upon the grass around me,
glinting from every moist blade and
from every stone, shining even from
among the mudholes and in the
ditches near the road as purely as
in the sky. And I could not help
but wonder at this. God must have
placed a link between virtue and the
sunbeam. For just as the sunbeam
that comes to rest on a path of slime
transforms it into a thing of beauty
that shines gloriously back at the
sky, so too does virtue touch the cor

ruption and coldness of the world,
bringing to it beauty and warmth
and Godliness. The trusting smile of
a little child can soften the hardest
heart to praise the loveliness of innocence; the generosity of one employer can teach more eloquently
than any sermon the brotherhood of
man to a hundred workers; the happy home life of Christian families
can perhaps give the world what it
has been seeking through long troubled years — the key to true peace.
As the sun drew himself closer to
the horizon like a tired monarch
sinking to sleep, he doffed his golden
helmet and blushed a bright vermilion. And all nature seemed to
blush with him. The pink-gold
clouds now donned deep purple; yellow sunbeams slowly softened into
rose, and flaming lustres began to
play among the waves in the bay.
The haze of twilight now stole over
the Luneta and dewy shadows crept
slyly across the grass. The day
was sinking fast; and in the gathering darkness these words I once
read came back to mind: “Just like
our shadows, our wishes lengthen
as our sun declines." Napolcon, at
the sunset of his great carcer, standing on the bleak wind-swept rocks
of St. Helena must have looked out
over the sea for many an hour toward the distant continent, reliving
the battles of his past — Wagram,
Jena, Austerlitz, Vienna, Moscow,
Waterloo. And with what bitter
regret must he have remembered
Waterloo and wished that he could
be fighting on that fateful field
again, avoiding the errors that he
knew would bring defeat and leading his legions to glorious victory.
But his campaigns were over: his
great moment was gone; his chance
was forever lost. And so as his day
drew to its end he must have sat
there alone, his heart heavy with


na
AUGUSI, 1951


21


longing and rue. There were many
others like him and there will be
many others who at life’s sunset will
look back and wish they could retrace their steps into the past and
start life anew — to stand at life’s
threshold again, young and ambitious
and eager but this time knowing
what course would lead them to success and joy; wishing perhaps for
another chance to say all the kind
words they had left unsaid; to stretch
out the helping hand that they had
held back; to unlock the heart that
pride and greed had sealed and rusted.
The sun flamed even redder than
before, turning the whole western sky
into a vast fireside. The day was
now melting into dark night. The
sun was dying.... Shall the end
be like this?... Shall life die with
the sun? Everyone must ask himself these questions some day and


the answer will depend on whether
he has lived in the path that God
has sat for him. If he has done so,
he can smile and say — with, no
backward glances and no regrets
"Let my sun set, for when it sets
I will be one with heaven and the
stars. My sun sets to rise again.
The fiery sun at last rushed down
to his flaming bed, dyeing the waves
of the bay with blood. And as the
burning rim sank beneath a sea of
fire, up shot a parting ray like one
last benediction on the world... a
golden ray... a ray that wrote a
promise in the sky — a promise of
a new and brighter day.
The concert had ended. I stood
up and found that I stood alone.
Lights from the ships in the bay
glimmered before me and above me
silently coursed the eternal stars.





ROMULO LARA, '53
Handmaid Of Heaven
With graceful steps and sure
She walks her ways;
Her rose-hands lift their tasks
Budding with praise.
She keeps her thoughts about her
Like flocks of sheep,
Memories too full for mirth,
For tears too deep.
Folding her cares at evening
(Is that He on the hill?)
She waits, a watchful candle,
On window sill.


22


  


ANTONIO P. G. MANUUD, '52


A Story


The peus of Murcia


IT IS EASY TO FORGET unpleasant things in Murcia where the sugar
cane grows tall. That is why people
there no longer remember Tio Pacio
who was taken away to Iwahig by
some uniformed man, or Tia Isang
who ran off to Bacolod with her
sister’s golden carrings, or even Cardo who shot the mayor in the back
during the last elections. Still, there
happened one thing there that people to this day talk about. Whenever
the chapel bells call through the
waking mist in the fields heavy with
the morning dew, the farm hands
pause awhile and the womenfolk bless
themselves hurriedly where they
stand. Even loudly crying children
stifle their wailings to almost inaudible whimpers and little Islao
stops his singing and sits up quietly
on the broad back of his carabac
Damulag until the bells are again
silent.
"Listen," say the mothers of Murcia to their wide-eyed babies, "it
is Fernando calling from the dead
to his Tatay Icong.” And the babies listen, and sure enough, the tall
cane fields echo the hollow ery:
"Tay I-CONG! 'Tay I-CONG! 'Tay
I-CONG!"
Fernando was a mere slip of a
boy. Barely ten, he had to stand on
tip-toe while lighting the huge candelabra of the town chapel’s main
altar. But nevertheless, Padre Jose would not have any other sacristan — for the priest had, in seven
years, learned to love his sleepy little attendant. At Mass, the padre
would not mind Fernando’s yawning


though he often found it necessary
to cough loudly one, two, or three
times to jar the boy from his sleepiness and to remind him that it was
time for transferring the book from
the Epistle side to the Gospel side of
the altar.
"Fernando," the priest would say
at breakfast, "whatever will we do
with you? When you grow up, you
could never be a sexton like your
Tatay Icong.... The mosquitoes in
the belfry would carry you away!”
And the priest would hold his sides
laughing at his own joke while Fernando would blush and say, Abaw,
Father!"
Fernando’s Tatay Icong had lost
three things some weeks before Fernando’s birth: a wife, an only son,
three months old, and also, half of
his own mind. In Murcia, few wanted
to remember that horrible sugar
central fire, but Icong could not
even remember it clearly except for
a few disorganized impressions. Now,
he was living mostly on charity and
with help from Padre Jose, he was
slowly, laboriously gathering together the pieces of a shattered past.
With his orphaned nephew, Fernando, he could even look forward,
though hazily, into the future.
"Andoy,” he would say — for that
was how he had fondly nicknamed
the boy, "Andoy, my son, I will send
you one day to Manila and you will
go to the university there. Promise
me you will be a doctor or a lawyer
and that you will wear a moustache
someday, and spectacles, and smoke
a pipe like Don Porfirio, the fiscal.
And then, my son, you and I, we


AUGUST, 1951


23


will be together always... always...
you and I and your mother....
Icong would always break off into
sobs after such musings — he could
never think of Andoy as a nephew.
Andoy was his son! Andoy, resurrected from the dead! Icong was
sure, was certain that the flames
had been powerless, had not killed
his boy!
And Andoy would say, very sincerely, for the old man was indeed
a father to him, “Yes, 'Tay Icong,
I shall go to Manila some day and
we shall be happy, you and I.”
The two spent day after day in
a small loft in the chapel’s belfry,
for to them, the chapel belfry was
home, all the cobwebs and the dark
notwithstanding. While Andoy served
Mass in the mornings, his Tatay
Icong unofficially served as sexton,
tugging vigorously at the bell ropes
from the window of his belfry-home.
Watching his tired old face twitch
with every peal, one could easily,
very easily guess that down in this
man’s heart somewhere, there was
a deeply throbbing pain, stabbing
rhythmically and strongly, even as
the swinging and the clanging of the
bells.
“I must ring the bells loudly,” he
would say to himself, "loudly, there
is a fire in the sugar cane fields.
The flames may reach the central.
Ring!” he would command the bells.
"Ring! Ay, come on, ring! Ring!”
And the bells would drown his shouts
until Tatay Icong, half-dead with
hoarseness and exhaustion would
limply release the bell ropes and
sink on his hard bamboo bed sobbing
disconsolately and digging his fingers deep into the adobe walls. It
was then that Andoy would come up
to the loft, finished with his chores
in the sanctuary, and he would put a
tiny brown arm around Tatay Icong’s


neck and Tatay Icong would say
slowly, as if seeking reassurance,
“You are here, my son? You did
not die? You are really here?”.
And Andoy would flood him with
nods and "yesses” till the old man’s
tears were turned to laughter and
the two, one after the other, would
crawl down the belfry ladder to join
Padre Jose at breakfast.
For sevan long years, that had
been the pattern of two lives.... for
seven long dark and cobwebby years.
And then, one day, Tatay Icong
stumbled into a farmer harrowing
his patch of newly-plowed sugar cane
land.
“Hello," he called out to the farmer. “Who are you?”
Quite taken aback, the farmer
nevertheless answered, "I come from
Bais. This land was leased to me
recently.
“Oh, that’s wonderful," said Tatay Icong, "...eh, who are you?”
“My name is Kulas, you know,
Nicolas Carpio. I’m new here.
What’s your name?'
“Icong. Federico Ladao. I live
in the capilla.
The farmer looked intently at Tatay Icong. "Why, that’s the name
of the tenant who held this piece of
land before me. They told me he
was— The farmer arrested his
specch, though indeliberately. “They
he repeated
told me he was -
slowly. “Excuse me, I have to return to my work.”
Tatay Icong could not understand
why the man had run away. "Wait!”
he shouted. "Wait!” But it was
useless, the man had already covered
a great distance.
“Me? Federico Ladao?" laughed
Tatay Icong. "Who is Federico Ladao?” And he went skipping off


24


  


on his bare feet toward the chapel.
At the gate, Andoy met him.
“'Tay Icong,” Andoy said, "Padre
Jose left for Bais late this afternoon
while you were away. He told me
he would be back by tomorrow morning in time for his Mass. Please
don’t leave me alone tonight. You
won't, ha, "Tay Icong?
"For Bais, said 'Tay Icong,
"Why?”
“Somebody who lives there wants
to build a sugar central next to our
church and Padre Jose does not
like it. He said there could be a
big fire and the people in church
might be trapped like the woman and
the baby in a sugar central fire
ten years ago.
“Woman? Fire? Baby?” queried
Tatay Icong.
“Yes. The man who was with Padre
Jose when he left mentioned her
name. And the boy’s, too. I remember because he had the same
name I have. Fernando. And the
woman was Tia Sayong. I remember very well."
Tatay Icong froze. After ages of
silence, it seemed, he muttered, "Sayong," and falling silent once more
he gazed about him, at Andoy, at


the saints on the main altar, unmoving and mysterious in the carly
evening darkness. "Sayong,” he
said once more, almost reverently
this time, and he walked past Andoy, staring fixedly into space,
groping his way up the belfry ladder and feeling for his bed where
he slumped and breathed heavily for
a few seemingly torture-filled minutes
until his motionless eyelids grew
heavy with sleep.
Next morning, he was up very
early, even before the blackness of
the night had yielded to the wateryblue ink hues of the dawning. He
shook Andoy into wakefulness and
said that he was leaving the chapel
for a while. “Ring the bell when it
is time for Mass; I shall hurry
back.
Andoy could not understand why
Tatay Icong would want to leave so
carly. But then, one was not supposed to understand Tatay Icong, and
obediently, the child went down to
the sacristy anl spread ont the
vestments on the table.
Tatay Icong left soon after. The
day before, he had found some of
the missing pieces in his shattered
past — Sayong, that magic name...
she had died in the flames of that
torrible December morning. Sayong, his wife, and Andoy, their little son. Now he was making straight
for the site of the old sugar central... perhaps, there, he might find
some more of the pieces. But wait,
was not the east before, and not behind him? What was that light?
What was that wild ringing? The
bells, the bells were ringing. But
it was not yet time for Mass. The
bells! Crying out frantically! Wildly ringing! Turning on his heels,
Tatay Icong thought of a wild Decemrber morning and sped away in
the direction of the church. Half-way
across a clearing, a hysterical wom

AUGUST, 1951


25


an grabbed him by the arm.
“The boy! The boy, she ranted,
“the altar boy... lighting candles...
was alone with me in church...
lighting candles... drapes of the altar... the boy!” Her ghoulish
shrieking and sobbing brought out
many of the town folk. Andoy was
in danger! Andoy! Wild-eyed, Tatay Icong flew to the chapel. But
it was too late. The bells were still
ringing, but already, the belfry was
a flaming torch.
Padre Jose, his face alternately
shiny and grimy in the light of the
dancing flames held Tatay Icong
back.
"No, Icong! No!" he shouted.
“There’s nothing anyone can do,
there’s nothing you can do.
The flames leaped high. The bells
rang more wildly!
"Listen, Father," said Icong, struggling like a tamaraw to free himself
from Padre Jose’s iron hold. "Listen.


the bells! He’s calling me. My son.
Andoy. He’s calling me. I hear him,
I say, Father — I hear him!"
“Nonsense!" yelled Padre Jose.
“Oh, yes! Not only him, Father.
Father," Icong panted, "I hear her,
too. They are calling, Father, calling me... there, don’t you hear?
Listen, 'I-cong! I-cong! I-cong!'”
For a moment, Padre Jose listened
intently, relaxing at the same time
his hold on Icong. With an animal
leap, Icong freed himself and screamed, "I’m coming. Sayong! I’m coming. Wait, Andoy, wait for me!”
And in a wild frenzy, the flames
and Icong embraced each other.
“I-cong! I-cong!” the bells rang
weakly... fading away, fading away.
“I-CONG!" And there was a
dumb and empty silence that morning in Murcia where it is so easy to
forget unpleasant things and where
the sugar cane grows tall.


-
O
JAIME E. DY-LIACCO, '52


Windsong
Your name is a windsong, Lorenc,
Silvery strings of golden guitars
A strain of trembling organ chimes
That serenade beneath the stars.
You are song of virgin streams,
Sighing wind among the trees,
Trilling tune of mating birds,
The longing cry of moon-spilled seas.
Your song is in my heart, Lorene,
A blend of haunting old refrains;
O let my song to you-ward wing
We'll ride the winds on honeyed strains.


26


  


JOSE DE VENECIA, JR., '55


Night in September


FAR AWAY BELLS were pealing
merrily, as if to welcome the fast
approaching night. The white-andblue clouds in the sky began giving
way to somber colors. Soon darkness
enveloped the whole land and the
stale warmth of the afternoon air
disappeared with the first sign of
the cool evening breeze blowing
through my slightly open window.
Perhaps, it was the September wind
rippling the window curtains that
prompted me to take a walk that
night.
Outside, the monotonous murmur of
passing people hung in the evening
air. As I strolled aimlessly along,
the chuckling throng swirled continuously about me. Soon I reached
a dismal-looking cafeteria on the
outskirts of the city. The long
walk produced in me a fecling of
dryness, so I entered the cafe. From
where I stood, I could see groups
of men drinking heavily, with whiskey
bottles clattering the tables. Curling
eddies of smoke drifted in the damp
atmosphere of the room.
I took a table and ordered a bottle
of beer. While pouring the drink
into my glass, I spotted a shabbylooking fellow peering intently at the delicacies on display
under the showglass. His eyes held
a pitiful look, almost petulant, almost hurt like the eyes of a child
who had been refused something, and
was on the verge of tears. His clothes
were tattered. Perhaps, it was his
eyes that moved me deeply. I beckoned him to come in. He entered
reluctantly and took a seat beside


me, his eyes full of gratitude. I offered him a drink, which he readily
accepted. “Cigarette?” I asked.
He took one and lighted it with
slightly trembling hands. His thanks
came in a guttural tone that was
scarcely audible. For a moment, we
sat in silence. I had a better view
of his face, and I saw that he had
bushy eyebrows and rough uncombed
hair. Suddenly, our silence was interrupted by the blare of a melancholy tune coming from a jukebox.
A stray lock of hair fell down
across his forehead, and he pushed
it back with a gesture that long
years had rendered habitual. He
paused for a while and gulped the
remaining beer in his glass. In
frothy monotones, he babbled of a
clean, glorious, and honorable past;
of better days he had known; of
love and beauty in faraway places;
of tenderness and home. Then he
stood up and shouted, "What made
me so blind, that I wasn’t able to
realize these things. They could still
be mine if only—"
Presently, he gave a sigh, and with
a deliberate effort, he stood up, murmured his thanks, turned away, melancholy, and terribly despondent.
I begged him to stop but he strode
toward the door, which slowly and
silently closed behind him. I stood
and tried to follow him, but the night
had swallowed him in its darkness.
Far away, I could still hear the
strains of music, as the night breeze
swept the fallen leaves down the silent street.


AUGUST. 1951


27


2 Poems for the Grayland


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, '52
O Death Of The Beautiful Flower
Drum-music marching on black barbed-wire,
The red electricity of the night-cities,
And yellow laughuter in rented rooms:
O death of the beautiful flower,
The beautiful flower of the river.
Lady, we sit forlornly beneath slender trees,
We are exiles in a grayland
Now that the beautiful flowers are dead.
The tiger stalks among the beautiful dead flowers:
He listens to the drum-music of black barbed-wire,
He walks the clectric streets of the night-cities,
His eyes are shining like green moons
In the twilight of the rented rooms.
Lady, but then you must not grieve nor weep
For us exiles forlorn beneath the slender trees:
In the catacombs of the everlasting hills
The long-robed sacred sorcerers sing moonbright matina,
Chant for the white rain, the cool rain,
For the beautiful dead flower,
The beautiful flower of the river.


28


  


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


Man, From Your Darkness
Weep, Magdalene, weep, before this barren tomb,
The Christ you seck has left us and His eyes
Were picreed with loneliness of man's despair.
Although you see an empty sarcophagus,
There is no glory in resurrection now,
Nor saving bath in those five wounds
That marked His death's-head;
For in the vile ashes of our ruinous summer
Lies buried the Christ we would not have;
Gone from our cities swirling with forests of naked towers,
Raised by men hurling blasphemics to the skies,
Crics of hollow voices drowned in crimson cups;
While the soul, the haunted, (hunted) roams the descrtstreets.
There is no glory in resurrection now,
When hungry vultures devour cach other,
For penny crowns and fleshpots, and rejoice
In their blood-lusts.
Go, seck for Him in this twilight kingdom.
In the devious mazes of the twilight men who go on
Slaying Him with spears of hate,
Laughing, laughing, at His murder!


AUGUST, 1951


29


ELADIO P. ALDECOA, '52


Bovhood


HAVE YOU EVER STOPPED and
thought of your boyhood, of the time
when you were so full of boundless
curiosity and youthful enthusiasm? I
think everyone of us has thought of
this and I am quite sure that our
thoughts have run along the same
lines. All youngsters are the same;
there seems to be a guiding spirit
which steers life into a world beckoning and beaming with challenge,
a world with no burdens and no
cares.
It was a make-belicve world, that
world. It was a world of fairies and
witches, of kings and queens, of
knights and dragons. Imagination
was its food. It was the magic tool
which gave us everything and made
us everyone. In ankle-deep water,
at the seashore or in the bathtub,
it made us Magellan, set on a voyage of discovery over strange and
perilous occans; it made us Jean
Lafitte, fierce and intrepid, bombarding every ship in sight, and looting giant galleons of their sparkling treasures; it made us mighty
sea captains, clearing the sea of pirates, giving the crew sharp commands, and watching warily for
signs of resistance or mutiny among
them. In the playgrounds, imagination made us giants of brawn and
muscle, fast and versatile, threats
to Olympic Greats.
We were matchless optimists then.
We could defeat anyone our weight.
Nothing was too hard for us to try.
We sought and climbed the highest
trees, and swung from their weakest branches. And whenever Moth30


er or big sister shouted with alarm,
we would give her an innocent
stare and wonder why they should
get panicky over so simple a matter. We made simple things the
greatest things. A discarded milk
can or a few bamboo reeds unfolded
a world of possibilities for us, and
with them we could shut out the
world and all its cares. We were
never still. We ran and raced against anyone for the simplest reason, or for no reason at all. We
loved to fight, to show our skill
in anything, from swimming the
length of the swimming hole or diving from the highest branch, to
fighting anyone with beetles. We
were the greatest show-offs alive.
We were full of life and indomitble spirit. We lived in a fast and
thrilling time, urgent and filled with
new discoveries which never satisfied our curiosity. And as we moved
slowly through boyhood, we learned
to love life and everything in it.
We had bitter memories too. The
suppression of our desires, the loss
of our prided possession, the death
of our dog — all these touched us
with sorrow that initiated us into a
world of realities. We made mistakes — great mistakes — but none
was great enough to stifle our irrepressible spirits.
Years pass. Manhood steals upon
us like a dial hand, and before
we know it, we find ourselves in a
snapping, snarling world, grabbing
and fighting for everything, but
fighting not as we did in boyhood,
for the joy in it; fighting, rather,


  


in a strange and new way, for some
flimsy excuse we force ourselves to
believe. At times we stop, and look
at ourselves, then at others, unconsciously grabbing and fighting like
us; and we laugh at the silliness of
it all. Then we look around for
something really worth fighting for,
and we find how close it has always
been with us, and how far we have
kept away from it. We renew our
course, conscious of new responsibility. And yet, somehow, we feel


a longing for a world where people
do not snap and snarl at each other.
for that world we knew once, for
the lost world of our boyhood. Men
have gone to extremes to relive
these memories. Ponce de Leon was
not the first who searched for the
fountain of youth — nor was he the
last. No one ever did find it again,
for like all good things, it comes
only once and we have to take full
advantage of it then.


ANTONIO P. G. MANUUD, 52


Mattinata


Now listen softly to the singing sod
And feel the awesome majesty of God!
What song is this that speaks of breathing life.
Of muted palpitations, secret-rife?
What magic music rises with the mist
Diaphanous at dawn? And lightly kissed
By gentle sunlight, sighs of angel song
Swect-echoed by golden melody that lingers, long
To be remembered: swirling blades of corn.
Hushed chirping of a birdling in the morn,
Faint erystal twinklings of a falling dew,
Shattering its fragile music against a nenPrimrose? O listen to this hymnal clod,
To this koleidoscopic voice of God!


AUGUST. 1951


MELITON V. SALAZAR, '52


on Fido
-hooey


THERE ARE ONLY TWO kinds of
dogs that I like: the dogs you find
in the City Pound and the dogs you
find in sandwiches. You can have
all the other types, breeds, species
and varieties, but for heaven’s sake,
keep them out of Singalong. I always say that a dog may not bite
the hand that feeds him, but what
about the ankles?
There are two fundamental faults
in the physiological make-up of a
dog that I dislike, detest, abhor and
abominate. He barks and has teeth.
There are again two fundamental
defects in his psychology: he is suspicious and fond of heroics. Did
you ever watch a dog advance to
make sure you are not the one who
stepped on his tail last week, while
he was enjoying a sunbath? He is
almost human in his portrayal of an
R.O.T.C. sergeant. There is a cloud
of suspicion in his eyes, in the hunch
of his shoulder, in the forward
droop of his ears, and if he could
speak he would doubtless be muttering: "Watch out, buddy. I don’t like
your eyebrows and that’s one strike
against you. If I find anything
wrong with you, I’ll...
And when he has sniffed your
trousers and your shoes over very
carefully and filed your scent in the
voluminous library he has between
his ears so that one dark night he
can smell you from far off and come
tearing down on you like a Tartar,
do you notice how he walks back
to his position on the doormat? Like
the sergeant again, putting his unused fountain-pen back into his


pocket and muttering: "Ha, it’s a
good thing for you that everything
is spic and span. If it weren't...
1 looked up the history of the
canis familiaris and discovered that
its origin is "lost in the mists of
antiquity.” This only proves either
of two things: that the dog has
been produced as a sort of personal malediction on mankind by some
disgruntled stonc-age witch or that
the researcher who made this imaginative statement had had a hard
day and preferred to use exquisite
generalities instead of hard facts.
Then I found out that dogs are
swift runners, a fact which I had
already learned through sad experience, for I have never yet outrun
a determined Fido.
Some scientists hold that dogs
have really evolved from wolves, but
if you consider the facts clearly, you
are apt to dismiss this statement as
another improvisation. As a petite
young lady described her big grey
wolfhound: “He hounds wolves.”
Because he has lived in a lair, a
dog has a homing instinct and a
wonderful sense of direction. That
is why a strange dog often decides
to “home" on your front door, vowing in deep gutturals to make canapes out of anyone rash enough to
get out of or into your house. This
also explains that deplorable trait in
a dog to make a bee-line for your
socks the moment he spots you. His
exuberant spirit leads him into the
most disgraceful dog-battles, and
very often he will drag you into a


32


  


row with your neighbors. I know
of two women who still do not speak
to each other five years after a dogfight. Their pets are the best of
friends.
There are many kinds of dogs but
that makes little difference. They
are still essentially dogs. The bulldog has the most terrific personality, but then, that is explainable.
He has to make up for his looks.
The bloodhound always looks like the
day after a basketball game. You
can guess what kind of a game it
was. His brow is furrowed deeply,
like this year's “Guidon editors
thinking of the Columbia Award,
and his eyes have a world of grief in
them, like the sophomores brooding
after a chemistry exam. An English
Setter is so named because you have
to yell “Set 'er down!" at least ten
times before he will drop what is
left of the duck you have shot.
Sometimes you only have to yell five
times, but then you will have to
make up for the other five yells
with your rifle butt.
In Singalong, however, people do
not believe in quality when it comes


to dogs. They believe in quantity.
Dog owners give away puppies but
that does not help any. They export a different-colored puppy in return. They sometimes get so numerous that these puppies travel in
packs. Personally, I prefer the other
kind of Puppies in the other kind
of packs.
Dogs are secretive. They will hide
the smelliest bone with the utmost
of care, no doubt working under the
delusion that you have run out of
chewing gum. If you have these
low modernistic tables, the smarter
dogs will hide bones where you would
least expect it — in your Latin homework. Incidentally, there is a story now going the rounds that Dan'l
Boone’s name was, originally, Dan’l
Bone. After watching dogs for a
lifetime, however, Dan’l decided to
add an extra "o to his name, "When
ah goes on thuh sunset trek,” Dan'l
said, "ah aims fer an undertaker
to bury me, not no dawg.
Dogs have few uses, and they
uswally muff the most fundamental. The chow for example, used
to be the chief ingredient in a good,


AUGUST, 1951


hot dish of chowder or chowmein.
But soon humans lost their taste for
its meat. In China, especially, reaction against the chow was so virulent that a city was named in
order to insult it eternally: "Phooey,
Chow!" or, in short, Foochow. A
rare example of a dog that does
perform its work is the St. Bernard.
A clear insight into human behavior
has made the abbes of the Alps decide that the most probable last
wish of a man freezing to death
would be whiskey. So, the moment
a St. Bernard spots a human in distress he runs to the unfortunate’s
side, lets him drink deep from a
cask attached to the collar, and then
efficiently packs the victim in snow
to make the end as quick and painless as possible. The Chihuahua is
another rare example. Circus clowns
and listeners to after-dinner speeches in Mexico use it to help them
laugh. They put the Chihuahua in
their coat pockets where its nervous
movements tickle them. But the
Chihuahua has a drawback. It is
a carrier of hay-fever. Thus, a man


usually sneezes before he laughs.
That is where the name comes from:
"Achee! Haha!” Why the "ha"
has an extra "u” in it I have not
been able to figure out. Perhaps
the Mexicans laugh that way.
In France, mad poodles are not
rare in the summer, but in Singalong, mud puddles are the commonest things in August. That is something else again. The BPW has been
as successful in ridding Singalong of
puddles as the City Pound in ridding Singalong of local poodles.
There are still oodles and oodles of
both.
The last thing about dogs is that
they turn around before lying down.
This is because their ancestors used
to sleep under tall grass which had
to be pushed aside to form a bed.
This only proves how perfectly idiotic a dog can be. Can you imagine
men pushing their aparadors against
the door at night because their ancestors sealed their caves with boulders before going to bed?





LEONIDAS V BENESA, '52
Devolution
I long for the good old days, I do,
When men faced issues
Without the “buts” or "ifs"—
It won't be long now when we moderns
Instead of handkerchiefs
Use Kleence tissues.


34


  


JAIME E. DY-LIACCO, '52


A Story


Slna Date


YOU ARE THE FIRST FARE who
ever offers to sit in the moonlight
with me and watch the bay. Oh no,
no, it is all right, perfectly all right.
Ill be very glad to sit with you even
the whole night if you wish.
Having trouble with the sweetheart? Don’t let it get you down.
Women do the craziest things. Why,
I remember one fare I had — Kikoy
was the name. Poor guy. Let me
tell you about him.
As you know rich and beautiful
women practically grow like weeds
in Ermita and Malate. So when my
cab is empty, I like to circle around
in that part of the city. Of course
I do so only for business reasons
and nothing more as my wife suspects. This kind of people prefer
taxis to buses, and that’s good business.
By the way, whatever I say about
this matter, please keep it secret,
huh? I don’t want my wife to know
I’ve been thinking again of what
she calls my "pet" subject. She gets


hysterical everytime. She thinks I
run around with the women who ride
in my taxi. She loves me very much.
Well, one afternoon I was cruising
along Mabini Street near Malate
Church. I was feeling quite happy.
My false front teeth were snugly
set, and the coffee I just took was
still warm in my stomach. I was
about to light a cigarette when I
heard the whistle. That was when
I saw them — two men, one very
tall and the other very short. Somewhat like Mutt and Jeff. Only, one
was named Matt and the other was
called Kikoy. I found that out later.
I back up and reach out to open
the back seat. As soon as they get
in, they start talking in English.
That is natural. They look like provincianos and they want to impress
me. You see, they think I might
mistake them for what they are and
take them for a round-about ride.
“Take us to Santa Mesa,” the tall
man says. He has a very deep,
booming voice like the bass horn my


AUGUST, 1951


35


father plays in the barrio band back
home in the province. My father was
teaching me how to blow that bass
horn when I was a boy. He wanted
me to replace him in the band when
he dies. Something about family
tradition being handed down all the
way from my great grandfather.
That’s all right for my brother, may.
be. But not for me. I got ambition. Ever since I read in Grade One
how Pepe and Pilar came to Manila
for their summer vacation, I always
dreamed of living in the big city
and driving around in a flashy convertible. Now I live in Manila and
drive around in a flashy new caronly, the car has a steel roof and
it is not mine. It belongs to the
Lagapatok Taxi Company.
Naturally I am overjoyed about
going to Santa Mesa since that is at
the opposite end of town. Also, there
is sure to be heavy traffic at Quiapo and Espana, I hope. Aaaaa — I
had to take them through Espana
and not through the shorter route
passing Nagtahan because, well, there
was something wrong with the bridge
or some other such thing along the
Nagtahan route, I just forget now
what it was. Anyhow, I was forced
to take them through the longer
route.
The car is running along at 30;
and the meter is ticking merrily. I
never intended to eavesdrop on my
customers. That is impolite. But
what can I do? I am not deaf and
I cannot help hearing them. They
are only a meter away behind me.
The tall man laughs and says,
“Kikoy, your sweetie-pie must have
a strong right arm. Your eye looks
like a battered apple.
No wonder this fellow Kikoy is
wearing smoked glasses.
“I told you already I got this from
a human gorilla 6 feet 3 high, and


you keep yakking about some sweetiepie doing it. What do you think
I am, a sissy? And this is all your
fault too!"
“My fault! Why, I don’t even
know what’s the matter with your
eye, whether that’s a sty or what.”
“It’s not a sty! Matt, why did
you not tell me she was 5 feet 6?
You said she was cute and little.
"Who?
“Traviata.”
“Well, she always seemed to me
to be cute and little.
“Maybe she is to you!" Kikoy
almost shouts and Matt laughs a
little. “But I’m not a totem pole
like you. What’s more, you told her
that I stood six feet tall and had
green eyes, brown curly hair and
broad shoulders!"
I glance up at the little mirror
above me. Kikoy has curly hair all
right, but that is about all. In
fact his hair is as black as Tarzan’s
hair. Tarzan is my little boy’s black
dog.
Matt roars out laughing. He sounds
like my father poomphing "La Palo“Well,” Matt says, "she’s
ma.
rich and beautiful, and that’s what
you’re looking for. You don’t expect
Hedy Lamarrs to come below 5 feet
2, do you?'
Poor little brown fellow. He’s
got ambition too, just like me when
I was young. Why, once I even
thought of marrying the daughter
of Don Carlos who lives in our town.
Only, one little trouble. He did not
like me. Another. She did not like
me either.
"Maybe so," Kikoy moans a bit.
“But I won’t have this now if it
wasn’t for your rotten idea of a
joke.” He points to his bad left eyc.
“Look,” Matt rumbles on his bass


36


  


horn. "Let’s get this straight. You
said a while back that an apeman
gave you that blackeye or whatever
it is. What’s he got to do with me?”
“It’s because of that blind date
with Traviata which you fixed up
for me." Kikoy moans again and
fingers the area around his bad eye
gingerly. I see all this in the little mirror up above.
"Will you stop moaning and tell
me what happened? I’m beginning
to feel like a guilty step-mother,
what with you moaning like that.
“Don't tell anybody.”
“No. Word of honor. Naturally.
“It was this way. I got to the
Sweet Coffee Shop right on time
that Saturday afternoon, some three
minutes before 4 o’clock. She was
already there. She held a big red
rose, just as you told me she would
to make identification easy. She
was at a corner table. She’s really
beautiful, Matt. I almost ran.
Pardon me, I said, 'are you Traviata? Without waiting for her to
answer, I introduced myself right
away. She cocked her head and
looked at me queerly for a moment."
“Maybe your eyes aren’t green
enough, Matt snickers.
I wonder how Kikoy can stand
this mutt of a Matt without getting
all hot and socking him. Maybe
that is because he is much bigger
than Kikoy. But if I had my way,
I would use the flat woodan laundry
beater which my wife Cordapia uses
on me sometimes — I mean -- oh
never mind.
Kikoy goes on, "We ate some sandwiches and ice cream. I was beginning to feel at ease. As a matter of
fact, sitting across her at the table
and looking into her cool eyes, I
felt like singing to the whole world."


Poor little boob. He is like me
when I was young. I first met my
Cordapia, and I felt like a robin in
spring. Now after ten years of
married life, I don’t sing anymore.
I croak.
By this time, we are at Quiapo
already, and hallelujah! — there was
a red light! I shift to neutral and
relax contentedly. Kikoy is saying:
"After paying the bill and talking
a while, we stood up to leave. I was
very much embarrassed. All the
people were looking at us. Maybe
on bare feet, she’ll stand about 5
feat 6. But she wore extra high
heels that afternoon, because you told
her that I was a six-footer. Stop
snickering! You make a fine friend!
Luckily, I was wearing my elevator
shoes. I managad to elevate up to
her shoulders.
The light turns green and I push
the starter. The car slides forward
as I shift to first. Matt is laughing
above the rattling of the gears. I
want to laugh too. But that is impolite. So I just snesze.
Kikoy goes right on with his story.
“She was very understanding about the whole thing. She even let
me hold her hand inside the theater."
“What was the show about?” Matt
asks.
“I don’t know. Her left hand felt
like electricity," Kikoy sighs. "Anyway, after the show I felt a whole
lot better. My old embarrassment
was gone. I was even beginning to
feel proud that I should be seen
stepping out with such a — a queen,
a star in human form. We were
then standing at the edge of the
sidewalk, waiting for a taxi, when it
happened —
The little fellow suddenly stops
speaking English and bursts into
Bicol! Bicol! They are Bicolanos,


AUGUST, 1951


37


like myself! Much as I would like
to, I do not tell them the glad news.
It is impolite to interrupt. Besides,
maybe he purposely speaks in Bicol
because he does not want me to understand what he is going to say.
Or maybe, the story is now too exciting for the English language. Anyway, he might shut up if he knows
I understand Bicol. Then where
will I be? All night long I will toss
and toss on my buri mat, trying to
figure out what happened. My Cordapia will hit me again over the
head with her wooden slipper. She
does this everytime I am restless,
in order to help me sleep and rest for
the next day’s work. Really, she is
a very thoughtful wife, and she hits
me because she loves me. Even
though I love my little Cordapia too
and I appreciate her solicitude, still
I think it is more polite and gentlemanly not to interrupt my passengers’ conversation. So I just keep my
mouth shut and don’t tell them I am
one of their own people.
Kikoy is now getting excited. His
pitch goes up two keys. His words
scramble after one another. He says
that they are waiting for a taxi when
a big lug about six-feet tall begins
insulting him. No, it was six-feetthree. This gorilla says aloud for
everyone to hear that the lady better take “baby boy" home now, since
it is time for him te go to bed. Also,
not to forget to warm the milk in
the feeding bottle before giving it
to him. Then this big boob steps up
to the lady, bows from the waist,
and asks, "Lady, what grade in the
primary school is your boy in?'
This oversized goon can insult Kikoy all he wants. But when he begins annoying the little fellow’s
dream queen, his heartache, his Cinderella, his shooting star or whatever she was, then that is crossing


the 38th parallel.
So Kikoy tells the six-footer to
shut up or else. The six-footer—
no, he is a six-footer-three — does
not seem to be very much impressed
by Kikoy’s gallantry. In fact, he calls
Kikoy a worm. Well, Kikoy won’t
stand for any more of such nonsense,
especially since his shooting star is
listening. So Kikoy strikes back by
calling the six-footer-three a dumb
son of his mother, a male pig, a carabao, a—and the big apeman
swings!
Kikoy sidesteps to the left. With
his left leg extended in front of the
six-footer-three, he tries to catch
the blow — just the way his ROTC
Commandant showed him how in
combat judo class one Sunday morning in school. Kikoy catches the
blow all right; only it is the bones
around his left eye that do the catching!
When he wakes up, he is in bed
back in his landlady’s house. His
left eye is swollen and it is aching
terribly. He discovers too that he
has been robbed of two pesos. Thut
is very strange because he had more
than that in his pocket, but the rest
of the money is still there. The elderly couple with whom he is living
says that he is already there when
they come home from “Valentino's"
last screening.
In the morning, he calls up his
twinkling star three times on the telephone. But everytime, she is not
at home. He is puzzled of course.
It is good, though, that this incident did not happen in his hometown;
or else all the people are already
laughing at him over their morning
coffee.
Kikoy then stops talking. Matt
keeps quiet too. Maybe they are
figuring out what happened to Kikoy


38


  


after he got knocked out, how he
ever got home.
After a while, I let them down
at a green house with a red iron
fence. The tall guy pays me P3.00.
Grinning happily, I tell him thank
you in my best Bicol: "Dios mabalos
po.” They just stand there, looking
at me dumbly. As I drive away, I
hear Matt blowing his frightening
bass horn again.
Several days later, I was rolling
down Dakota, just cruising along
with the car empty. Half a block
away, against the afternoon sun, I
saw two women flagging me. I peered at them. Hallelujaaaahhh! It is
two beautiful shooting stars! Ohhhhh,
if only I am not a taxi driver, if
only my taxi is a convertible, if only I am six-feet tall!
They get into the back seat, and
their voices tinkle musically. "Sweet
Coffee Shop, please.
I hear them talking behind me.
One says to the other. "You know,
Carmencita, that Flying-Mare Fling
which we were studying in your correspondence course — what’s the
name of that course again?
The other lady says very sweet"Protect Yourself From Human
ly,
Wolves By Scientific Judo.
“Oh yes. My goodness, I’m always
forgetting things. Well, I had a
chance to try it out last Saturday,
and it works perfectly. There was
a six-footer who...
“Excuse me, Mum,” I interrupt in
my most polite Enlish. “Are you
sure it is not a six-footer-three?
“Huh? Oh, Sweet Coffee Shop,
please. Quezon Boulevard."
“Yes, Mum, I reply sheepishly.
"As I was saying, Carmencita,
this six-footer picked a fight with
my date that evening, and he knock

ed him out cold."
“Your date knocked a six-footer
out cold? My, he must be a man!"
“No, I mean this big six-footer
knocked my date out cold."
“Oh!" a disappointed sigh from
the lady called Carmencita.
“Hmmm, the idea! Imagine, with
the poor thing unconscious, I’d have
to pay the taxi fare home. I was
so mad I flung that bully right into
an electric post."
"And you used the Flying-Mare
Fling for that?” the girl Carmencita asks.
“Yes! Really surprising! Such
ease! Why, he just went sailing over
my shoulder!"
“What about your date?”
“Well, he was still unconscious.
And I didn’t dare leave him
there lying cold like that on
the streets for all the policemen and
reporters to find. You know how
they ask a lot of silly questions, like
how old are you and a lot of other
nonsense. I certainly don’t want to
have my name in any vulgar Police
News column. Why, people might
think that I was a tomboy or some
such other low character. So I
carried the poor thing home up to
his bedroom. It looked like it would
be his bedroom. It was lucky his
address was in the little black book
which fell out of his shirt pocket.
He had some money there also. I
took two pesos to pay the taxi."
“What did your date look like?”
Carmencita asks.
“He was supposed to be six-feet
tall, with green eyes, brown curly
hair, and broad shoulders, but...
oh laok, there's Jimmy! Jimmy,
yoohoo! nice guy, cute, oh, you know
him too?... Well, as I was saying,
this blind date was supposed to look


AUGUST, 1951


39


like Errol Flynn, but...
You’re laughing, pal. I’m telling
you, women do the craziest things.
A fellow oughtn’t to get himself all
worked up over one. Not worth it.
Take me, for example. I always
take it easy. If only my Cordapia
goes easy too.
Huh? Oh no, I’m in no hurry.
Glad to keep you company. I’m enjoying the moonlight. Of course


not! Why should I make up that
story just to make you feel good?
I heard it with my own ears in my
own taxi. Besides I like you, pal,
so I’m honest with you. Why, you’re
the only fare who ever offers to
sit in the moonlight and watch the
bay with me, with the meter running
all the time. Cigarette? Here, PIl
light it for you. Get closer to the
match. Wh-why, you’re — you’re
Kikoy!





LEONIDAS V. BENESA, '52
On How My Songs Unsing Me
(To J. GARCIA VILLA, Poet)
I like the song that Ben J. sang,
His sad song to Celia—
On second thought Td rather sing
My glad song to Lilia;
But this dainty little lass, alas!
Would much rather listen to
A mad song of Villa.


To L. V. B.
(Who Thinks He Can Write Poetry)
For shame, for shame, you better quit,
Sand, mysfriend, is what your hopes are bailt on,
In water, friend, your name is writ,
For in spite of all your piety and wit,
You mute inglorious Keats (or Milton?)
Poeta nascitur, non fit!


40


  


52
EDUARDO D. LACHICA


Kapitan Dida
(A movie script)


“CHARACTERS"
DON DIEGO, encomiendero of Sta.
Barbara and a blackguard of the
first water.
COLLAS, his right-hand man.
LUCIA, a sweet young thing.
MONTEZ, Lucias father and deposed alcalde of Sta. Barbara.
KAPITAN BIDA, fearless two-fisted
champion of the people’s rights,
the identity of whom is revealed
only in the last scene.
Peasants, Civil Guards, Choruses,
Hautboys; withal, a cast of
thousands.
SCENE: Sta. Barbara and environs
smack in the middle of the riceproducing region of Central Luzon.
TIME: the Philippine Revolution.
“CENE ONE — A market-place. A
group of peasants are lined up before the bayonets of the guardia
civil who, deaf to the heart-rending
pleas of the peasants, take their
grain, animals and personal effects
away and place them in classified
heaps on the ground.
COLLAS: (Supervising these atrocities) Drop those sacks in this corner and easy with those jugs of
tuba.. they are.. er.. needed at
the medical dispensary. Trousers,
shirts, there... toothbrushes in that
pile. (To the peasants who watch
glumly) Say, you fellows don’t
mind, do you?
ISt PEASANT: (Cheerfully) That’s
all right. There’s more where they


came from. Here, you forgot my
garters. (Collas gratefully receives
it and deposits it in its proper
pile.)
Ist SOLDIER: Diablo, what’s this
I find? Gold! (At the mere mention of the word, the blood of
the conquistador surges anew and
all Spaniards present drop whatever booty they have been holding.)
SOLDIERS: (Chorusing) Did you
say gold?
COLLAS: (Frowning at his men)
This is hardly the time for singing; however, something gleams
in this ugly pleasant’s mouth that
isn’t fireflies. By the beard of
Montezuma, hand me a pick,
somebody.
(With avaricious growls, the
Spaniards bear down on the poor
peasant with torches and pithhelmets.)
2nd PEASANT: (Baring a set of
already defiled teeth) If Kapitan. Bida were here, you would
rue the day you were born.
COLLAS: Kapitan Bida? Who is


AUGUST, 1951


41


this scoundrel?
Ist PEASANT: Fearless, two-fisted champion of the people’s rights,
and speaking of the devil, here
he comes now.
(True to the peasant’s word, the
masked hero arrives on the scene
on a model '98 bicycle, waving
two menacing horse-pistols.)
BIDA: Hola! I see the garrison is
up to its old atrocities again.
Grab sky, pardners.
COLLAS: (Patronizingly, while
secretly reaching for his derringer in his back pocket) We were
only jesting, Bida, ha, ha. Nothing like a little horse-play with
the masses now and then... Take
that, you scum!
BIDA: (Fondling the derringer)
Hm! A bit weak at the catch but
thanks anyway, Collas, and next
time point your gun where you
intend to shoot. Beat 'em up, boys.
(With cries of delight, the peasants
fall on the helpless Spaniards and
in a matter of minutes the whole
troop is laid on the grass, dreaming of the beauties of Granada.)
Ist PEASANT: We cannot go on
like this for long. Soon Don Diego will hear of this and the whole
brunt of his forces will be after
us. And what can our bolos and
sling-shots do against his Mausers and Gatling guns? Eventually, we shall lose.
BIDA: You speak the truth, comrade. I must ride and warn the
people against this impending
doom. Await my return and Remember the Maine!
ALL: Remember the Maine! (Fade
out.)
SCENE 2. The Montez home.
Montez ambles excitedly to his
daughter’s side.


MONTEZ! Lucia! I have news! Kapitan Bida has been stirring up
the countryside to take arms against the Spanish hordes. (Fervently) This is the awakening,
the long-awaited struggle in
which every loyal Filipino must
be ready to lay down his life for
his country. Tell Bida when he
comes that my goat-cart is at his
services....
LUCIA: (Dreamily) He has been
here already.
MONTEZ: Really? And was there
any message for me?
LUCIA: Yes. He said that if you
turn over the silver you got for
issuing illegal licenses, the movement will be eternally grateful.
Isn’t he rather good-looking,
Father?
MONTEZ: Well... yes. He is a
popular lecturer at the women’s
club. But after all, he may have
other reasons for the mask he is
wearing.
LUCIA: His eyes tell so much about him... and his voice is oddly familiar.
MONTEZ: Pish, my child. Do not
talk that way when the whole
town knows that you are engaged to young Lopez who left
three years ago to complete his
Litt.B. at the Ateneo. You should
consider yourself a lucky girl to
marry a man whose father owns
900 hectares of the richest rice
lands south of Malalim River. Besides, he is a man of culture and
refinement. Here, let me read
to you the marks the Father Dean
sent me. (Tears open sealed envelope containing the marks and
a rather lengthy letter to the
guardian) He is in his senior
year with subjects in psychology,
sociology, religion... (as he reads
on, his face purples) At least,


42


  


he is a good provider. Now go
to sleep, child. You have to sing
at the town fiesta tomorrow, you
know.
SCENE 2. The den of Don Diego.
DIEGO: (advancing towards his
lieutenant with clenched fists)
You... bungler!
COLLAS: Easy now senor. I had
enough beating for the day.
DIEGO: (Still fuming) How did
you ever become an officer?
COLLAS: (Blushing) Well, it’s like
this. With the 6th Regimento on
the fields of San Antonio, I personally disabled siz Cubans!
DIEGO: (Awed) And... and you
were promoted on the spot.
COLLAS: Of course! And we won,
too, 3 goals to 1, after rallying
in the second half.
DIEGO: (Suddenly becoming
thoughtful) But this hostile attitude of the pcople is a perplexing
problem. Why, they are even
demanding an 80-20 share system! I wonder what they intend
to do with all that 20? We must
apply the iron fist, Collas. Let
me see, what atrocities haven't
we tried yet? I have it, tomorrow is the ficsta of Sta. Barbara and naturally there will be
drinking and merriment. But by
order of the garrison commander,
there shall be no drinking of tuba
for one week.
COLLAS: (Pales and clutches the
curtains for support) S-Senor! We
are a Christian nation....
DIEGO: (Glancing ruefully at his
henchman) Perhaps you are
right. We musn’t do anything
drastic that will precipitate a revolution throughout the country.
But I have a spitting hunch, anyway, that Kapitan Bida will be


there, at least to steal a look at
the beauteous Montez girl with
whom Intelligence reports he is
enamoured.
COLLAS: And when he shows up.
we catch him. Magnifico, senor!"
DIEGO: (Pleased at the astuteness
of his cohort) You will be captain
of the guards someday. Post
ten men at the plaza tomorrow.
(Fade out with ominous music)
SCENE 4. The town plaza of Sta.
Barbara, gaily decorated and filled with a gay, fun-seeking crowd.
COLLAS: (In barong tagalog)
Everything in readiness? (Ten
odd-looking peasants nod grimly
and disappear into the crowd
from which later the lyrics of a
native drinking song is heard
with a slightly Spanish accent.
A silver voice is heard above the
rest. It is Lucia Montez, rendering a splendid coloratura of
“You Are The Lovely Rose of
Summer" (with S. Payawal and
his ork. now available in all record shops). When she finishes,
the crowd gives her a big hand
and she is examining this curious
present when Don Diego grabs
her from behind a curtain.)
DIEGO: I may look like a bull, my
sweet, but you are a lovely matador shooting sabers into my
heart....
BIDA: (Jumping out of bush) Unhand her, rat!
DIEGO: (Chuckling) So you showed up, after all.
BIDA: Yes! And I intend to fix
your filthy hide once and for all.
DIEGO: Are you kidding? (Whistles three notes from “You Are
The Lovely Rose of Summer" and
the guardia civil shed their disguises and step grimly forward.)


AUGUST, 1951


43


BIDA: Treachery' (He fights with
the strength of 10 devils but is
no match for the 11 devils who
beset him.)
SCENE 5. Long, fade-in shot. Camera follows a bare-chested Spaniard with an ugly sword-scar on
his check as he trundles an iron
carriage through the gloomy cells
of Don Diego’s dungeon-keep. The
scene, after wending through a
labyrinth of corridors filled with
the cries of the dying, emerges
in a room wherein Don Diego
gloats over his prisoner stretched
on an iron rack.
BIDA: Ill die he vre I betray my
people.
DIEGO: Stubborn, eh! But here
comes my persuader. (Spaniard
rolls carriage to the side of Diego, who lifts from it something
light and fluffy). Now will you
or will you not? (Suddenly, demoniacal laughter is heard even
in the deepest recesses of the
dungeon and other prisoners
cringe in fear at the new satanical device of torture their inquisitors have conceived. Camera
flashes back to the torture room
and it turns out that Bida is
doing the laughing and justly so
because the evil Dicgo is tickling his armpits with a chicken
feather.)
BIDA: (Gasping) Please, stop it.
I7l tell all.
DIEGO: Where is all the booty you
stole from me which I stole from
the people. Tell me.
BIDA: At my bodega awaiting
shipment to Acapulco.
DIEGO: And I suppose that’s where
Lucia has flown, hah? Gaoler, you
can dispose of his body in the
Malalim. (Diego leaves.)
SCENE 6. Outdoor shot.


LUCIA: (In alarm as Diego places
her atop a carabao) Where are
you taking me, Diego?
DIEGO: To Manila where my private galleon waits. And from
thence to Acapulco where there
are black markets galore. Yah!
Move, you beast!
LUCIA: Help, Kapitan Bida. Save
me!
DIEGO: Hah! Your Bida cannot
save you now. He is at this moment floating down the Malalim
with a hole in his head. (But
far from floating down the Malalim, Bida is not far behind them,
pursuing on a fleet carabao).
DIEGO: Curses! How did you ever
escape?
BIDA: Your Collas has a weakness for gold, senor. And I still
had my class ring with me. Justice will ultimately triumph.
(Carabao to carabao they splash
across rice paddies, but Diego's
mount, emburdened by stolen gold,
is soon overtaken, and Bida lunges
at the Spaniard and bears him
to the ground. They leap to
their feet, blades drawn.)
BIDA: I have waited long for this
moment, Diego. And when they
drag your corpse away, it shall
be a lesson to future tyrants that
crime does not pay!
DIEGO: Enough of your foul mouth.
(They lunge at each other, and
the deadly duel takes them
through the market-place, up the
archbishop’s residence and down
the fire-escape. Soon Diego is
cornered in a cave and as the
town-folk gather apprehensively
at its mouth, the sound of the
fighting suddenly stops. Kapitan
Bida finally staggers out, pale
and bleeding.)
LUCIA: (Falling into the hero's


44


  


arms) Bida, you are safe!
MONTEZ: And Don Diego...?
BIDA: He burst a blood vessel.
MONTEZ: Thank heavens, now Sta.
Barbara may see peace once and
for all if only....
COLLAS: (Wearing his arm in a
sling and a contrite look on his
face) Senor town mayor, I speak
for my men. Truly, we are sorry
for the trouble we caused you
and we wish to retire. Only permit us now to start a beverage
factory.
MONTEZ: (Amicably) Of course,
senores. Now all of us, Spaniards and Filipinos, shall live together in the blessings of our common heritage. And Collas—
COLLAS: Yes, senor?
MONTEZ: 	Prepare your soccer
team for this Sunday afternoon.
You see, our United Bakia Makers have sort of organized...
COLLAS: Oh, si, si! (He grins
rather maliciously as he departs,
but rest assured, he is really reformed.)
BIDA: (Kissing Lucia’s hand) Lu

cia, I also have a confession to
make. I truly and sincerely...
that is... Lucia....
LUCIA: (Regretfully) Alas, you are
the second man I have to refuse
this day and it pains my heart
because I think I feel that way
too. But, you see, I’m engaged to
young Bingo Lopez, who left me
three years ago to....
BIDA: (Removing his mask) But
sweetheart, you do not understand. I am young Lopez.
LUCIA: Is it really you, darling
Bingo?
BIDA, or, more recently, Bingo:
Yes. When I flunked my psychology I took to hard drink and
was ashamed to come back. But
when I heard of the oppression in
Sta. Barbara I had to come back,
being a member of the Social
Order Club. Forgive me, dearest. Perhaps, next semester....
(He can say no more, for Lucia
throws her arms around him and
kisses him as the people around
them cheer and rejoice.)


AUGUST, 1951


45


WHAT STOLE THE SHOW for
Ateneo at the NCAA opening was
Clarence, the mountain eagle. He
created quite a furore when he was
carried into the court atop a blueand-white basketball goal. And the
imprudent bird even flapped his
wings and hooked his beak at the
faces of the other players when he
passed by them! A few female
rooters, after gushing forth their
wonderment, asked us why Clarence
wasn’t blue at all. They had us
there, for Clarence, far from being
of the summer sky’s hue, was brown
like the Batangas hills he was taken from. He compensates for this
fault, nevertheless, by being a
sprightly and sometimes ferocious
bird. His captors say that he used
to swoop down on innocent monkeys
and gobble them up with a few deft
strokes of his beak. This information should be enough to warn
his custodians to keep him securely
chained whenever he is exposed to
the stadium again. Before he came
to the Ateneo a keeper had to
keep a hawk eye on the bird all
the time and when, one morning,
this person was not found at his
usual watch, the owners were frantic. There was much to-do including a few exploratory pesks into
Clarence’s mouth. They were shaking the bird by his feet when the


EDUARDO D. LACHICA, '52
keeper strolled in from his morning
coffee. We presume Clarence was
absolved of his supposed crime and
ceased to be a problem to everybody except the cheerleaders.
How the cheerleaders managed to
teach Clarence the good manners
ritual at an NCAA opening is another tale. As Reli Calderon told
us, the education of Clarence took
months but the cheerleaders’ toils
were rewarded when finally the
eagle learned to sit still and look
as majestic as his counterparts on
the windshields of Ateneo cars. On
the day of the opening, Clarence
was bundled into a Buick and driven
in secrecy to the Rizal stadium. His
debut was supposed to be a surprise,
but even before the parade had begun, the stadium was already abuzz with the Ateneo’s innovation.
When Clarence finally was brought
out before the crowd, his “education" vanished. With the applause and
the strains of "Hail, Ateneo, Hail,"
ringing in his ears, he reared from
his perch and flapped his wings and
threatened to make for the nearest
La Sallite.
In pomp that is the envy of all
the other Batangas eagles, Clarence
took his bow before the cheering
thousands. His debut reminded us
of his predecessor, the lovable
Yam-Yam who walked beside Si

46


  


mon La O and Bobby Jones in the
same stadium and on the same occasion. That year, historic 1941,
the Ateneo won the basketball championship and later the football championship, and Yam-Yam became the
most feted and coddled eagle in existence. Will Clarence be as great
as Yam-Yam?
* * *
Note from the Sanctuary Society:
Ernie Sevilla tells us that his brother had quite an experience on his
way to serve Mass at the Assumption chapel next door. To save
time, the elder Sevilla donned his
soutane in the sacristy of the Ateneo chapel and walked to his morning appointment with this saintly
get-up on. One morning as he was
walking down Dakota, he was met
by a “colegiala. She glanced at
him, smiled, and respectfully greeted: “Good morning, Father.” He
was taken aback by this unexpected greeting, but he thought fast to
save the young lady from embarrassment. Nodding portentously he
replied: "Good morning, child," and
walked on with dignity.
A diligent Jesuit teaching English in a high school senior class
received the shortest composition on
record. He conceived of a way to
get his pupils to write inspired
prose. As he knew that every Atenean loved basketball, he told his
pupils to write a piece each on a
basketball game between the Jayvees and another school, and sat
back to await the result. When the
compositions came the next morning,
one of them said simply: "Rain, no
game.
Puns have infested postwar Ateneo and are here to stay for bet

ter or for worse. In fact, this form
of witticism (?) is crawling like
lice all over the place. Like the
common cold, it is contagious and
such a nuisance. Like nuclear fission, cracking a pun begets puns
which beget other puns ad infinitum
like Macbeth’s bloody murders, until no one knows how the devil
it all started. But we do not condemn the pun, not altogether roundly. Why, you say, Chesterton and
Shakespeare commit puns. That is
not the point we are driving at.
Rather, we are after the abuse of
puns as committed by such puny
malefactors as Antonio Pastor Gella Manuud and Antonio Kabigting
Joaquin, who are making a fiendish
cult out of punning, upsetting everybody’s healthy sense of humor.
Even professors, alas, are succumbing to this infernal oddity, thus
putting their pupils in embarrassing situations all the time. The
students themselves do not help
much in ridding us of this plague
when they snicker politely at their
professors’ dead puns. In the kiosks
and college cafeteria, for instance, a
lot of intellectual discussions are
ruined by self-willed imbeciles or
kibitzers who envy the intellectual
palaver going on. A sordid instance:
Mr. Soliven: The pianissimos are
superb! Breathless poetry!
Mr. Lara: Ah indeed, Bach is
such a master. His toccatas especially.
Mr. Villa: Who’s talking of staccatos?
Lara: Bach’s toccatos are never
staccato-like. Perchance you listen
to fugues?
Sol: Fugues? I have a few recorded fugues of Bach at home....
La. Well!


AUGUST, 1951


47


Villa: Fugues! Reminds me of funitives! Who’s one, Bach?
Sol: Oh, pipe down! You don’t
even know who Johann Sebastian
Bach is.
Villa: Let’s not go back to Bach.
And exactly at this point the discussion has fizzled out and somebody
begins to talk of — from the sublime to the ridiculous — the ACIL
dance and Charito with the light
brown hair, etc.
This fiendish vice of punning is
rapidly becoming an institution associated, beyond the walls, with all
blue-blooded sons of Loyola. Consider seriously what one blue-skirt.
ed damsel (from St. Scholastica)
told me: “They (Atencans) can
quote snatches of Shakespeare from
memory, write Thurber-like satires.
declaim beautifully like Cicero, but
they tell lousy puns.” You heard
it: "lousy puns" Tsk, tsk! So,
in case you are one of those who
crack puns to your partners on ballroom floors, think differently when
she laughs patronizingly. Nine out
of ten times, she thinks the witticisms you have just told her arc
incongruous, reflecting a shallow imagination and intellect and
personality; in short, they stink. In
case you are really such a bad conversationalist, you can break the ice
by saying, “The weather’s so hot
these days, no wonder the college
will be transferred to Loyola Heights
this coming December.” And she
will probably answer: “Really? I
heard you have a new gyin, too.
And you grasp the opportunity (she
has such intense auburn eyes): “I
have a few tickets for Sunday’s
game, so how would you like....
She will have a better impression.
So keep away from puns, bad
puns, otherwise people who are in
their right mind will shun you just


as they shun people with halitosis.
And don’t patronize puns: thus you
contribute largely to a campus-wide
campaign to stamp out the pun plague, a noteworthy campaign sponsored by self-styled pundits (no
puns intended: pundits are highbrows, intellectuals). If you hear
some poor fish crack puns, react
with a perfect dead-pan instead of
making all sorts of grimaces. If
you feel like committing one yourself, don’t. Think something better, like "Pensacola — the Pause
that Petrifies." But if you think
you are capable of a terribly good
pun, use it fastidiously as you
would salt, with finesse and at the
right moments. Anything to relieve
the tedium of life is better than
nothing. (At this juncture I am
trying to avoid the temptation to
end this nonsense thus: “So let’s
gather all putrid puns into a dustpan — which is putting it rather
pundamentally.")
* * 3
Let us consider the rich fruits of
classical education as manifest in
the following polished translations
by A.B. students:
vicissem—we kiss em
O tempora, O mores!—Time out.
I can’t bear it any more!
beati possidentes. —Beatrice has all
her teeth
gratis dictum—hoarse
fideliter—violinist
opus finis coronat—I have finished lighting my cigar
deus ex machina—a day from work
in loco—not in his right mind
By the way, according to Mel Salazar, the sophomores no longer call
bluffing “bolas.” Now they are
known as "a soph’s fables. (But
we have an improvement on that


48


  


one: "a soph’s fibbles. Oh, fibblesticks!)
Several slips of the tongue cropped up last month: Imagine our
consternation at Litterateur Greg
Brillantes’ remark before other
Quarterly editors: “I like that cute
neighbor of yours, but how old is
her twin sister?”.... Or note bulky
Pio de Castro’s unintentionally funny comment that elderly men who
married teen-age girls were simply
“infantuated".... Meanwhile, (overheard, of course!) Aurelio Calderon of megaphone fame started tryouts for the freshmen play, Julius
Caesar, by exhorting a greenhorn
thespian somewhat to this effect:


“Okay, make it snappy, and recite
a soliloquy from Hamlet.” In one
of the editors’ frequent literary teas
(or cokes?), Eddie Lachica mentioned something about disposing of rejected manuscripts for the Quartorly: "How about printing them in
a mimeo supplement to the Christmas number and calling it, Pallbearers' Golden Thrashery?
Contributions to this column about
Atenco life will be heartily welcomed. Unspcakably rich rewards
await stndent contributors, including, perhaps, an invitation to THE
QUARTERLY's aurval luncheon
and dance—Ed.


A Lover’s Notebook


THE TEARS OF THE BLIND LIONS
By THOMAS MERTON
New Dircctions, 1950


BEFORE HIS CONVERSION, Thomas Merton was another confused intellectual grovelling in the muck. His
painful journey from the civilized
iungle to final rebirth in a remote
Trappist monastery is recounted in
his phenomenal Seven Storey Mountain, an autobiography charged with


poignant despair and eventual triumph. After his chaotic university
days, he published some first-rate
noems which pierced the stifling air
like a'voice from the wilderness, indignant and prophetic. In Figures
for an Apocalypse and Man in a
Divided Sca, he hurled fire and brim

40


AUGUST. 1951


stone at an age steeped in the concupiscence of Sodom. Merton
chose exile "in the far end of solitude" to living among "a heap of
broken images" which littered Eliot’s
bleak and arid cactus land.
This latest slender sheaf of poems
(pages from a contemplative’s notebook) borrows its title from a quotation by Leon Bloy: “When those
who love God try to talk about Him,
their words are blind lions looking
for springs in the desert.” Merton
now speaks with the breathless joy
of one sailing on silent seas of God;
his language has the freshness and
singing clarity of April rain, the
humility of a clod rejoicing in the
glorious morning of spiritual renascence:
“Cooled in the flame of God’s dark
fire
Washed in His gladness like a vesture of new flame
We burn like engles in His invincible awareness...
Although Merton writes with less
passion than in his previous poems,
his thoughts show channeling through
deeper rivers of wisdom. His psalms
“flower with a huge architecture”
filled with a mysticism that defies
strict logic, like his brilliant evocation on the Trinity.
But in his cloistered world, Merton
is still concerned about his fellow
men wallowing in the backwaters of
sin and corruption. With white anger, he echoes Eliot’s ironic remark
that the world ends not with a bang
but a whimper:
“Our souls are trying to crawl out
of our pores.
Our lives are seeping through each
part of us like vinegar.
A sad sour death is eatlng the
roots of our hair.
Yet in our slums there is hope for
redemption because while
50


" .the first fat drops (of fire)
Spatter upon the tin tops of our
church like silver dollars
And thoughts come bathing back
to mind with a new life.
Prayer will become our new discovery...
After reading Tears of the Blind
Lions, comparison between Merton
and T. S. Eliot is difficult to elude.
Merton is as modern and significant a poet as the author of The
Wasteland, and all their works are
loaded with symbols. In fact, some
symbols in Eliot’s earlier poetry are
reiterated in Merton’s latest volume:
"dog" a connotation of secularism;
"rock" and "water" for redemption;
death images like bones and unfertile earth and thunder mentioned by
Eliot are also present in Merton’s
poems. Eliot’s poetry is smooth as
a polished gem; Merton’s, however,
is rough as uncut diamond. While
Eliot’s attitude is seemingly passive
when he describes with nauseating
disgust the contemporary wasteland,
Merton’s is vehement against cities
where wordlings “Build each hour
another god/And fry a fatter idol
out of mud."
Even those reared up in mid-Victorian literature will find it hard to
dismiss Merton as a verse-dabbler
belonging to the Cult of the Unintelligible. Like Eliot, he has something urgent to say, not just random gibberish. His poetry can never
be bracketed in the class of such
symbolists as Rimbaud and Ezra
Pound and John Gould Fletcher, who
all strive for striking sensory images
for their own sweet sake, therefore
emasculating their works as vital
poetry. What Merton does is employ new images to cloak old truths
-pouring old wine into new bottles.
Unlike most impressionists, Merton’s
poems have proportionality of expression and content. His expression is like the bold, dynamic strokes
of Van Gough painting a landscape.
  


If we are to achieve spiritual renaissance as a substitute for the
chaos, we should talk of God in vigorous, deeply personal terms, like
Bloy’s hungry lions. There has been
so much overblown piety and anemic timidity among Catholic poets
that their poetry rarely strikes a
note of significance. So far, very
few poets write with the fervor of
one possessed by religious conviction, with the exception of the nineteenth-century Jesuit Gerard Manley Hopkins; Francis Thompson in
his tour de force, Hound of Heaven;
Eliot, of course; and possibly, a new


Catholic poet, Robert Lowell, who
won the 1947 Pulitzer Prize.
Merton’s poetry is a moving manifesto of the spirit, rising from the
tragic sterility of a secular world,
a revolutionary protest against the
apocryphal forces of the machine
age. In the last poem of the book,
Merton utters the final hope for the
lost:
“Great Christ, my fingers touch
Thy wheat
And hold thee hidden in the compass of Thy paper sun.
There is no war will not obey this
cup of Blood.
This wine in which I sink Thy
words, in the anonymous dawn!
EMMANUEL TORRES, 53


Portrait of the Elizabethan Artist
SHAKESPEARE OF LONDON


PT
By MARCHETTE CHUTE
E. P. Dutton, 1950
MUCH HAS BEEN WRITTEN of is an enlightening chronicle that


England’s greatest genius, and yet
there are few intimate glimpses of
the artist as he really was beyond
the spurious stories that have cloaked him in a mist. Among the new
books about Shakespeare, Marchette
Chute’s impressive Shakespeare of
London clears away a great deal of
the mystery. It is a realistic attempt to portray the man as seen by
his contemporaries, not as the garnished figure compounded of myth
and fact. The plays do not receive
the usual treatment of standard criticism, but are discussed strictly
from the standpoint of the Elizabethan stage. For such an impartial
account, Miss Chute has stuck uncompromisingly to documents of the
time, weeding out rooted myths and
conjectures of her own. The result


sheds fresh insights on Shakespeare.
Just how well it succeeds at a
real-life biography is shown in its
recreation of Shakespeare’s early
background. The book manages to
bring alive the bustling town of
Stratford; its well-regulated society; John Shakespeare’s rise to the
landed gentry; the puritanic climate
which washed away "a good deal of
innocent color from the lives of the
pcople" of Catholic England. Young
William’s education in a free grammar school, though threadbare, kindled in him a voracious appetite for
reading. From the night he first
saw a play staged by an acrobatic
troupe, the boy’s heart was quickly
wedded to the make-believe world.
It is tragic, therefore, that while in
his teens he married Anne Hath

AUGUST, 1951


51


away, eight years his senior, whose
strait-laced Puritan elements rebelled against William’s broad artistic
ambitions. After four years of starcrossed wedlock, Shakespeare deserted Anne to be an actor.
At this point Biographer Chute
shifts the spotlight to London, a prosperous gaudy melting pot in the
1580’s. James Burbage had just finished building the first permanent
theatre in the slums and was luring
Londoners from their bull-baiting
pastimes. Before playhouses could
swell in number, Burbage’s brain
child had met the slings and arrows
of outraged Puritan churchmen who
branded it a temple of sin. But it
had the royal sanction of an incurable admirer, Queen Elizabeth, whose
wholchearted patronage made playgoing the national rage. The drama
sprouted from melodramas crammed
with blood and thunder to maturer
products by university men like
Cristopher Marlowe. Not until
Shakespeare dawned on the literary
horizon did it fully ripen in the
warmth of his creative fire.
Elizabethan poetasters turned
green with envy to watch this rustic
fledgling tread a veritable primrose
path to fame and fortune. Two of
his early poetic efforts were published with remarkable success.
When he joined the Chamberlain’s
Company headed by Burbage’s sons,
he was already a highly paid professional actor. This gave a decided edge over rival writers when
Shakespcare turned to playwriting:
he saw every rehearsal, drew close
emotional ties with his audience, in
a way "graw up” with their reactions.


Shakespeare’s private life was
even more spectacular. At a time
when conceited literary figures easily lost their heads and unleashed
insults at one another, Shakespeare
was no temperamental genius. Always cool-headed, he kept out of
trouble, unlike Marlowe who was
stabbed in a tavern brawl. Nor did
he dissipate his talents in wine and
women like the scholarly Ben Jonson.
Shakespeare of London is stimulating and informing in equal parts.
Miss Chute has a sharp narrative
eye for catching the glitter of a hectic era, its theatrical life at its exciting heyday, with an ear cocked
for barroom gossip, court intrigues,
and backstage literary tiffs. When
the limclight is not on Shakespeare,
the vivid, Iengthy descriptions of
London make the book look sometimes like a biography of London.
until the real subject is brought back
to the foreground. Because of these
digressions, the image of the man
is blurred now and then. But when
the author talks of the real Shakespeare, she does so effectively. Even
more impressive than threshing over
historical details, the book bears
none of the dull stamp of academic
prose, occasionally sparkles with humor. An objective discussion of
Shakespeare’s comedies and tragedies brings some of the most engrossing sections and heretofore undisclosed facts about the sources, the
elements that went into them before
productions, the "working problems’
they evoked. This leaves plenty of
room to appreciate Shakespeare,
with newer discoveries always in
store, like drawing fresh water
from a well which never runs dry.
-EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


52


  


The ATENEO


REQUIEM FOR THE UNLITERARY
FEEL THE THROB
THE LOST BIRTHDAY


Emmanuel Torres


Meliton Salazar


Guillermo Soliven


OCTOBER


AD MAJOREM DEL GLORIAM


the ateneo
quarteriy
COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES
ATENEO DE MANILA


EDITOR-IN-CHIEF .. . . . . . .. Gregorlo C. Brillantes, Litt. B. '52
SENIOR EDITORS . .. . . .... Leonidas Benesa, A.B. '52


Eduardo Lachica, Litt. B. '52
Emmanuel S. Torres, A.B. '53
STAFF CONTRIBUTORS .. Jalme Dy-Liacco, Litt. B. '52
Ricardo Henson, Litt. B. '52
Antonio G. Manuud, A.B. '52
Robert D. Wilson, A.B. '52
Gabino Mendoza, A.B. '53
Ricardo Nepomuceno, A.B. '53
Pablo Silva, A.B. '53
Guillermo, V. Soliven, A.B. '53
Vivencio Peralta, Litt. B. '54
Meliton Salazar, A.B. '54
CIRCULATION . . . . . . . . . . ... Manuel M. Garcia, Litt. B. '52, Mgr.
Eladio Aldecoa, A.B. '52
Nemesio Dacanay, A.B. '52
Oscar Pacquing, Litt. B. '52


CONTENTS
OCTOBER, 1951
VOLUME 3, NUMBER 2


PROSE


FEEL THE THROB ......
THE LOST BIRTHDAY .....
THE DOGGONE REPUBLIC
CORN SEEDS .............
IN ANOTHER SUMMER ...
THE REMEMBRANCE .....


Meliton Salazar
Guillermo Soliven 13
Jaime Dy-Liacco
19
Vivencio Peralta
22
Gregorio Brillantes 29
Jose Castillo
40


POETRY


BIRDS ON THE GRASS..
VANITAS ........... . . . . . ..
SONG FOR OCTOBER .....
THE LOST NOTE .........
I FACE MY WORLD ALONE
RECESSIONAL .............
IRONY ............. . . . . . . ..


18
Leonidas Benesa
Ambrosio Makalintal 21
Leonidas Benesa
21
25
Gervasio Diaz
25
Reuben Pengson
Leonidas Benesa
28
35
Leonidas Benesa


FEATURES


DRAMA: MURDER IN THE CATHEDRAL
—T. S. Eliot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Torres 26
BOOKS: LAST CHAPTER — Ernie Pyle .... Jose Bengzon, Jr. 36
THE BROTHERS KARAMAZOV
37
—Fyodor Dostoevsky . .... . . ....... Romulo Lara


   is published four times annually by the College
of Arts and Sciences, Ateneo de Manila. Its editorial offices are at the Atenco de Manila, Padre Faura Strect, Manila, Pnilippines; its publishing office
at M. Colcol & Co., 378 Rizal Avenue, Manila. This publication was entered
in the Post Office of Manila as second class mailing matter on September 10,
1949.


promontory


Beyond, the Seas of God...


MOONLIGHT, ROSES, AND RED BLOOD


IT IS LITERARY BLASPHEMY, protest the campus Art-for-Art-sakers, to
write of "rough, unpleasant things.” Art, they claim, is an escape from
the realities of the world. To write of life as it is being lived is to add
to its sordidness, its ugliness. One must write only of the soft and the
tender; one must dream forever. And so from the start of classes in June
to graduation-time in March, most school publications print the same sickly
The acme of poetic perfection is the
swvet prose and poetry.
lambent sonnet about the sunset gold that is Oh so heart-warming to behold. Juan should never be portrayed as a bruised and baffled creature
searching for bread and wine in a Tondo alley, or in the wildernesses of
Pampanga; Juan must sing a balitaw on the batalan, gazing up at the yellow buan in the sampaguita-scented night, communing with the memory
of Rosa, whom he shall marry after the harvest in November. The writer
is a misanthrope in the proverbial Ivory Tower, far away from the madding crowd, and there he dreams of murmurous pines and hemlocks, and
in the moonlight streaming in through his narrow window, composes insipid
abstractions for their own sweet sake.
The result is stereotyped, undistinguished writing, anemic, devoid of
significance, and therefore powerless and trivial and transient.
True creative literature cannot remain purely aesthetic and escapist.
It is not enough for writing to be lyrical in its expression of saccharine
sentiments, and thus to entertain the reader with romantic delusions, to
induce in him the luxurious lethargy of a warmly pleasant glow that will
render him insensate to the harsh tempo of the world about him. Literature has long since discarded the petticoat traditionalism of the late-Victorians and the sham paradise of the French Decadents, to become a powerful medium for the dynamic presentation of spiritual and sociological
themes. While the aesthetic element in literature cannot be denied the
artist, it is undeniably urgent for him to recognize the role of literature
as an intense searchlight, so to speak, guiding man in his search for higher
values. In this perspective, we see where lie the greatness and power of
the works of Steinbeck, Faulkner, Grahame Greene, Richard Wright, Marquand, and Merton, who wrote of the lost and the dispossessed and produced
triumphant commentaries on life. The present-day writer’s total indifferentism to the mainstream of life is utterly absurd in an age of nebulous


OCTOBER, 1951


3


artist, is threatened not only by political serfdom, but also by moral and
intellectual slavery. For the artist is an interpreter of life. He is a teacher of men in his own subtle and inimitable way.
So the campus writer (who may be tomorrow’s professional writer in
apprenticeship) must live and work in dimensions of flesh and blood. He
must not be content with moonlight and roses, melodious verse, purposeless
imagery. Words, beyond their soft vowels and rhythmic consonants, are
a potent tool in the Christian task of changing and elevating the condition
of man: realizing this, he must write of the world, of the people who live
in it, and glorify the good and condemn the evil with the sure, virile strokes
of an earnest reformer. A million subjects await the dilineation of his
gifted pen: the inspiring truths of the human spirit, courage in the face
of defeat, emptiness before fulfillment, the oppressed and the oppressors,
men groping for the Truth and the Light, men sweating and laughing and
weeping and dying and living eternally. Such is the stuff of life, which
is literature’s inherent preoccupation, and only by writing of life gourageously and well can the writer be faithful to the priesthood of his art, transforming with the mysterious chemistry of his inward vision, the events
transpiring around him into messages of truth and hope and strength.
—G.C.B.


CREATIVE WRITING: AN APOSTOLATE
RECENTLY, A LOCAL UNIVERSITY held a gathering of budding writers, the future literati of the nation. Many problems of writing were discussed. Communication, for instance. One quality is to be admired in
them, namely, their zeal. But this feature stood out like a sore thumb: they
never so much as breathed a whisper on that controversial subject, morality (or responsibility) in writing.
They are not to be blamed for their indifference. At least not as
much as we should be blamed for our species of indifference. And this
in spite of the philosophy and theology given us here at the Ateneo.
Ateneo writers have a habit of budding with promise during college.
Witness the Columbia Scholastic Press Awards. After college, they promptly wither in the bud, their promise drying up like dew before the hot sun.
They graduate, marry a convent-bred girl, settle down in a cottage somewhere in the suburbs, try to go to Mass more than once a week, drink
beer in the evenings, grow fat in the middle, have children, and that’s that.
Why don't I write anymore? Oh that’s old stuff. Meanwhile their contemporaries from other schools are ruling the field of letters.
Editorials which used to appear in this magazine are filled with highsounding words as the "Hail Mary team" "Fight!” “We must be Christbearers!", and these against a cacophony of crashing civilizations foretold
by lamenting prophets. We have had our share of lamenters. We have
lamented the degradation of Filipino literature as an ugly outflowering of
the general chaos of men’s minds. But lamenting is not enough. Action
is wanting. De facto, we haven’t done anything about it. Because we
lack zeal, which our colleagues from other schools have.


4


  


The twenty-eighth of this month is the feastday of Christ the King.
As usual, Ateneans will be in the forefront in the men’s procession. Will
we never have Ateneans in the forefront in the field of short stories and
poetry as well? Our Lord once said something about "going forth.” When
will we have men who will go forth, like apostles, who have enough guts
to weather the severities of a literary career? For, after all, writing is an
apostolate. This fact shines more clearly in the light of St. Paul’s Mystical Body. Let us not be hypocrites. We must not forget Our Lord’s
story of the servant and the hidden talents.
—L.V.B.


ANTIDOTE FOR PANIC
A RECENT GUIDON EDITORIAL aims rather plainly at us and our
supposed ignoble worship of “the gods of 20th Century literature," and,
in effect, accuses us, in a fit of righteous indignation, of championing "a
false idea masked prettily in the learned smock of literature," of desecrating
the treasures of medieval culture, of being ominous harbingers of disbelief
and despair. The charge is ridiculous and irrelevant: it is based on false
assumptions. When we examine the issues, there is hardly cause for alarm,
much less for panic or frenzied denunciations.
The editorialist, it is sadly evident, misconstrued our emphasis on modern style and technique to mean an insidious advocacy of the doctrine
of Existentialism. (Horror of Horrors!) To study and adopt the technigue
and style of modern authors does not necessarily mean to succumb to their
false philosophies: prose models of Hemingway are included in anthologies
and classroom texts for the vigor, the freshness, the power of his technigue and style. Again, we have been branded desecrators of "medieval
relics.” Is to discard the obsolete style of "medieval" romances in favor of
contemporary stylistic trends a denial of the wisdom and solidity of medieval
ideals? Must the Atenean, who has the true and shining message to tell, write
in an antiquated style, unpublished, unread, while Godless but competent artists rule the field of letters?
Our own poetic repartee appears elsewhere in this issue. As the price
for permission to insert this retort at the last moment, we were instructed
to include also the two following immortal bits of verse, which may be interperted (we take it) as a faculty comment on the “controversy."
The first bit of verse is Hughes Mearns’ celebrated piece, "Antigonish,”
which portrays (we like to think) the GUIDON editorialist in pursuit of
his adversary.
"As I was going up the stair
I met a man who wasn’t there!
He wasn’t there again to-day!
I wish, I wish he’d stay away!”
The second bit of verse is by Ogden Nash and, we are informed, is
for our own edification as well as that of the enemy.
“It is better in the long run to possess an abscess or a tumor
Than to possess a sense of humor.
People who have senses of humor have a very good time,


OCTOBER, 1951


5


But they never accomplish anything of note, either despicable or
sublime,
Because how can anybody accomplish anything immortal
When they realize they look pretty funny doing it and have to stop
to chortle?
Everybody admits that Michelangelo’s little things in the Sistine
Chapel are so immortal they have everybody reeling.
But I’ll bet he could never have dashed them off if he had realized
how undignified he looked lying up there with his stomach
on the ceiling.
Yes, fatal handicaps in life are fortunately few,
But the most fatal of all is the faculty of seeing the other person’s
point of view,
And if your devoted mother suggests that you will some day be
rich and famous, why perish the suggestion;
That is, perish it if you are afflicted with the suspicion that there
are two sides to every question.
Good gracious, how could anybody corner wheat
If they were sissy enough to reflect that they were causing a lot
of other people to be unable to afford to eat?
Look at mayors and congressmen and presidents, always excepting
college presidents, such as Harvard’s Conant;
Do you think they could get elected if they admitted even to themselves that there was anything to be said for their opponent?
No, no, genius won’t get you as far as common everyday facility
Unless it is accompanied by a conviction of infallibility,
And people who have a sense of humor are extremely gullible,
But not enough so, alas, to believe that they are infullible.”
-G.C.B.


REQUIEM FOR THE UNLITERARY
(Or The Decline of Art, Campus "Medievalists,” Et Cetera)


How truly strange that in our day and age
Within these walls we cannot write a page
Of lines like blind lions that weep and tear and rage
At this sham paradise of cars and butterflies,
Of dainty fingertips, of moneyed mice
And men with fawning faces who can never
Think of poverty and pain or a clever
Line that matters much after they’re dead
(Poor imitators of Shelley who die unread),
Nor find the magic mountain, feel God’s lightning rod,
Far from hotels, golf lawns, Rivieras built on mud.
O Shakespeare, how I weep as they dissect you


6


  


They who feed on cliches, who read the menu,
Presume they know a lot of myth and fable,
Analyze your plots with vegetable renditions,
Tear you, with such surgical incisions!
Now we are trapped inside a room of bones
And watch the dancers play the gramophones
And do a vacuous ritual on the floor,
Hear the dead leaves crackle from the door.
Here is Dodo, the campus writer,
In a sophomoric trance
Over a ticket to a dance.
"Shall I go tonight
Or must I write?”
You, hypocrite litterateur, full of scholia!
Rhetorician exemplar, wiser than sawdust,
Wallowing like Jonas in the belly of a whale,
Shall all your latent talents turn to rust?
2
But it seems, Dodo, you are snobbish:
Because you cannot appreciate the ism
In Monsieur Seurat’s pointilism,
You condemn his painting wholly foolish.
Child of the Machine, sick from an overdose
Of statistics, clear-cut journalistic prose,
You cannot read a line of Mr. Eliot
Without damning him an intellectual idiot.
Diagnosis proves you are just lazy
To search the meaning hidden with subtlety
Behind each pregnant symbol and simile,
By branding Robert Lowell’s poetry crazy.
You, reader of headlines, of academic breeding,
Should not curse Merton at a single reading.
You must not insist on the kind of clarity
Found in photos, cliches, a schoolboy’s ditty.
I’m glad you sneer at writers lost in a void
With Sartre, Nietzche, Sigmund Freud.
But you, for all your bright philosophies,
Can only utter anemic apostrophes
On moonlight, magnolias, languid ladies,
Conceived in your snobbish Ivory Tower,
Themes proper in times of comparative peace,
Such as when Sir Launcelot was in flower.
3
One June afternoon while walking down the Escolta
I watched the sunset explode in a geyser of colors,
Changing to dark-graped wine over the Pasig
(This is the Seine where Villen laughed and sang),


OCTOBER, 1951


And I thought of Cynara lost beyond the vineyards,
Of Wagner mastering stars in blue Saharas of space,
Of Dante standing at the yawning pit of Hell.
In my blood soared the wild shout of Schiller
Set to the choric tempest of Becthoven.
Then I cried turning to my colleague beside me:
“Look at the burning seas of ravaged Troy!”
He shrugs and keeps on munching peppermint
And goes to see a movie sneak preview.
“The world is too much with us!
How long have I wandered in the city of the blind
Rats.


4
Write, write of the Here and Now,
Forget your knights, cream puff and soda water,
Or is it that you are simply squeamish
To write of death in a lonely gutter,
Of the unloved and hungry, of war and its slime,
Of God’s lost children in a Quiapo market,
Of a city crumbling with its weight of human crime?
Literature is a living organism,
As against the bloodless academism
Injected in your hackneyed fiction
Powerless with its rosy diction,
Deprived of intelligent realism.
You only take the word "modern"
To stand for cheap pornography and sex,
Abnormal psycho and hopeless human wrecks,
And consequently never learn
The best of such contemporary masters
As Steinbeck, Hemingway, and G. B. Shaw,
Stephen Spender, Marquand, and Evelyn Waugh,
Instead of antiquated poetasters.
But you persist in your archaism,
Chanting of castles and golden casements,
When you could smite the pharisaism
Of Godless hollow men
Caught in an asphalt fen.
Gbituary
O here lies he who thought the sound of sorrow
Quenched hope today, and meant DESPAIR tomorrow:
O here lies Dodo—
Extinct Victorian bird,
Who never wrote a word,
That cut or jarred or bled,
Or drew tears for the dead.
—E.S.T.


S


  


MELITON V. SALAZAK, '54


tee, the throd


VERY FEW PEOPLE feel the
throb nowadays, so that the old men
have begun to say it has left us
for good and gone off somewhere,
to China or Japan or Siam perhaps.
Occasionally, you hear of the throb
popping up in such out-of-the-way
places as the Imjin River in Korea
or Mt. Dorst in Pampanga, but these
occasions are really few and farbetween, so that you sometimes begin to wonder whether the old men
are right, after all, and the throb
has really gone away for good.
If there are people who can tell
you about the throb they are the
old men, specially those who were
at Tirad Pass with Del Pilar for
those who tore up their cedulas with
Bonifacio in Balintawak. In those
times the throb was really going
around the country, and wherever it
went there trouble was sure to start.
The old men were young then, with
young fire in their veins and young
songs in their hearts. That is why
they were so susceptible to the
throb, because the throb has always
been young and full of life, and it
has lived best in young countries,
like America in 1776 or Indonesia
in 1949 or our own Philippines in
1896. You cannot find the throb
in countries where the people have
grown old in the heart and tired
in the soul. There it simply will
not grow and if you go there with
the throb all fired up inside vou,
pretty soon you will feel it curl
up and wither and die, and you
will be as old and as tired as the
citizens of that country. The throb
can only live where the songs are


OCTOBER, 1951


9


proud and full of youth and strangth,
not where they are flat and made
up of despair and weaknesses. That
is why, perhaps, you can feel the
absence of it most actually after
great wars, when the people are
morally and spiritually and physically discouraged, when vigor has
been replaced by exhaustion, when
joy has been replaced by grief, hope
by despair, band-music by lamentations. That is why the throb found
such a fertile field in the young
men of the Revolution, the old men
of today.
Of course, during the great war,
anybody could see that the throb had
made a spectacular comeback. Thousands who had never even heard of
it woke up one morning to find it
burning in their hearts like a stinging memory, or a surging love, or
a deadly hate. They felt it sing
within them and wondered. Very
few knew what it really was, where
it had come from, and what it did,
though almost every one knew by
heart the stirring words of the National Anthem that described it so
vividly:
“Ever within thy skies and through
thy clouds,
And o’er thy fields and sea,
Do we behold the radiance, feel
the throb,
Of glorious liberty."
The men who heard it during the
great war were young and old; they
heard it at night, when there was
no light save that of the stars above
them, and no sound save the distant drone of an enemy bomber,
lost in the dark and the hostile cold
of the skies. It was a song; some
said it was the wind, for it is only
in the Philippines that the wind can
10


sing so distinctly in the summer
evenings; others said no, it was the
sound of the surf far away. But
the song grew louder in them, and
when they slept the song was in
their dreams, insistent and no longer subdued, and when they woke
and worked it was in their hearts,
and in their voices, and in the way
their eyes flashed and their jaws
set. When they prayed it was in
their prayers, when they cried it
was in their tears. Some could no
longer stand its fire in their hearts,
and they took up guns and walked
into the trenches from which there
could be no escaping. When the
enemy came, he died on the barbed
wire and in the ditches, thousands
of him. His planes fell in plumes
of flame that were as red as the
red sun on their wings. His ships
sank like wounded whales, in great,
gasping explosions. But he had
more men and we had no more
barbed wire. He had more men than
we had ditches, more planes than
we had guns, more ships than we
had seamen.
Despite the great upsurge of the
throb during the war, when everybody expected it to die as it did in
Hongkong and Singapore and Indonesia, it seems now to have left us
already. Some say that it has gone
instead to the men who lie like beasts
in the mountains, with guns in their
hands and greed in their hearts. But
the throb does not work that way,
and the men who mistake it for lust
and envy and hatred have never
felt it themselves, and do not know
what it feels like, or why it could
never be in the mountains with the
murderers and the kidnappers who
roam there.
Knowing very well that the throb
could fade completely, and never
  


come back, and leave this country
in a very sorry mess indeed, the
old men of the Revolution have begun looking everywhere and scouting around to see if sparks of it
remain that could be fanned into
a fire somehow. One of them discovered that if you read Rizal’s Mi
Ultimo Adios very slowly, taking
every word as you drink cold
water on a hot day, in small, delicious sips, you will get a bit of the
throb into that poem. Sometimes it is
in tiny shivers that dribble down
your spins, and sometimes it is in a
feeling of fulness in the heart.
But try as they might, none of
the old Revolutionarios has yet discovered when the throb came to the
Philippines or where. Certainly it
did not come with the Spaniards, because when Magellan went to Mactan he found the throb very much
in evidence, and as usual it had stirred up a pack of trouble. The indios
were waiting on the beach with
their ridiculous bamboo spears and
their stone-age bows and arrows, and
even when the shells began falling
on them like fire from the skies and
a strange, thundering sound bellied
toward them from the floating castles on the sea, they felt the throb
like fire in their veins and heard it
like the crash of the surf on a lonely night, and they refused to run,
and stayed instead and beat the
Spaniards roundly.
From that time, off and on, when
the Spaniards got too uppity and
demanded too many tributes, or grabbed too much land and imprisoned
too many indios, the throb of liberty would rear up like a dragon
from a calm sea, and stir up a regular hornets' nest. There was Lakandula in 1574 who teamed up with


iards a few anxious moments, because the people of Tondo were being abused. There was Maniago,
Tamblot, Bankaw Ladia, Malong,
Palaris, Dagohoy, Hermano Pule.
Exery one of them woke up with
the throb buzzing strangely within
them, and in a day, a month, a
year, they were heading revolts that
traveled up and down the country
like wildfire. Some of them died
in the leech-infested forests, or in
the soggy swamps, or on the blazing sand of the beaches or the chilling tides of the sea. But they
died without regret, with the song
of liberty loud and strong in their
lips and a deep pride in their hearts.
If the revolts failed, it was because
of ill timing, and because they were
spontaneous and unplanned and localized, born of a sudden fury and
an instant’s hurt.
But soon the throb spread itself
pretty uniformly, and people all
over the islands began to say the
same things and think the same
thoughts and plan the same plans.
There arose much talk of a Filipino nation with a Filipino government, foolish talk about liberty and
emancipation and equality and the
rights of a human being, and of
course the throb was behind it all.
And before you could say "What?”
the Spaniards were a very worried
people, especially the Spaniards in
the Philippines, and anyone could
see that they had a very good reason to feel worried. In fact, they
got so worried that they executed
even priests of the Church. Of
course it didn’t help any, for the
blood of heroes is the seed of patriots, and when the garrote finished its work on the bloody morning of February 17, 1872, the Philippine Revolution, as such, was born.


OCTOBER, 1951


11


There is no more glorious era than
the Revolution. Ask the old men,
and if they are not too old and their
eyes are not too dim and glassy, or
if the heart has not yet been taken out of them by the great war
and the absence of the throb, they
will tell you the story with a note
of the old thunder in their voices
and a glint of the old flame in their
eyes. Some of the more intelligent
Filipinos, fired by the urge, brought
the fight to Spain itself, although
it was not an armed battle they
were waging but a war of truth against falsehood, of justice and
fairness against injustice and unfairness. It was very like fighting
on the fields of battle, and sometimes the victories were more significant. The risk was the same.
Some lived through it; others, like
the man who died in the morning of
December 30th, 1896, in the Luneta,
did not.
Soon, the men who were young in
years and those who were young in
hope were in the fields and the hills
and the swamps. The throb was
everywhere in those days: you could
feel it in the sounds you heard, find
it in the people you met, breathe
it in the air and smell it in the
smoke of powder or the scent of
fresh blood. It was not a pleasant
era, but no war is pleasant, not
even a necessary war. By 1898, the
entire archipelago was aflame. It
was the throb’s greatest year and


the men who have survived to this
day can tell you about it much better, because they were there, and
because the throb was in their hearts
and in their blood, and probably-still
is.
That is why the old men are worried today, because after being so
much in evidence only fifty years
ago, we can see very little, if any, of
it today. Perhaps it is because this
is a slack period, a period of stretching and rebuilding. But still,
whereas the fire of it used to jump
at you from every street-corner, and
the sound of it from every voice,
today you have to wait very patiently and listen very carefully.
Who knows? Perhaps one dark
night you will hear the far-off
rumble of the sea, when you know
there is no seashore for miles and
miles; perhaps you will hear a song
you have never heard before, or
have you. Perhaps you will feel
a strong fire, perhaps you will suddenly feel a fierce pity for your
people, who are starving and troubled and sad. When that comes,
hurry to the revolutionarios, for you
have the throb in you, and it is a
malady that must be communicated
and allowed to grow and eat at
your vitals and your heart. Who
knows? In a few years, we may
have the throb sweeping across the
country again. Please, Lord, may
it be so.


AUA


12


  


GUILLERMO V SOLIVEN, '53


tne iost oirtnday


A Story


BENNY SHUPFLED SLOWLY
down the walk, head bowed, kicking dust ahead of him with the tip
of his shoe. He had never felt so
miserable in all his life. And he was
indignant too, like a smouldering
piece of coal. And lonely.
Today he was seven years old,
all of seven years old. He had often
thought how wonderful it would be
to be seven, to have a big celebration with a cake frosted over with
whipped-cream and all his friends
around him laughing. There would
be a big table in the middle of the
parlor and colored bowls filled with
candy-hearts and afterwards there
would be games. What great fun
it would be to play hide-and-seek
among the mountainous upholstered
sofas and the plush drapes that hung


low over the wide glass windows.
Now, Benny was seven. He had
been seven for several hours and
miserable almost that long. This
morning the maid shook him from
sleep as usual at the hour when
the room was bathed in a cool bluish
dawn-glow which reminded him so
much of the water in Manila Bay
that he wanted to keep on lying
back on his pillow and make believe
he was drifting out to sea. On other
days he would have closed his eyes
again, and the maid would have to
pull him out of bed, and march him
arm-in-hand to the bathroom where
she would stand by like some evil
witch, arms akimbo, eyes sternly
following his every move to see that
he washed behind his ears.
But this morning was very spe

OCTOBER, 1951


13


cial. As he opened his eyes and
blinked at the witch, he remembered it was his birthday. And he
smiled. For an instant her face
was a scowling blank. Then it
softened and the lines on it vanished and she seemed to be trying
to smile back. But by the time
she had hustled him down from bed
and away, she had again donned
the mask of the witch. However,
Benny caused no trouble this time,
and ears were washed and teeth
brushed with not a word of reproach
from her.
Benny was immaculately neat in
a newly starched white shirt and
pressed khaki shorts when he tiptoed to his parents’ room to see if
they were awake, and to receive their
formal recognition of his brand-new
dignity. His face was warm and
flushed with seven-year-old pride as
he approached the massive door and
rapped it with his knuckles as he
had seen grown-ups do on doors that
had no knockers. He straightened
his collar, patted down the hair on
the top of his head, and smoothed
the slightly crinkled edges of his
shirt.
The door swung slowly open and
from behind it a face looked out at
him. It was one of the maids. She
came out, holding a broom in one
hand, but she did not look like a
witch as the other one did.
“Where’s mamma and papa?” he
asked eagerly.
“They went out. No one is here,"
she answered.
“Where did they go?” he asked
anxiously, and his heart jumped to
his throat.
“I don’t know where," answered
the maid. “Maybe Senor went to
office and Senora to her club meet

At first Benny just stood there,
his breath stuck. It was then that
he began to feel miserable, as the
full meaning of her words struck
him. His mother and father were
not here to greet him. They had
forgotten; and perhaps they had
left without even thinking of him.
He looked up at the maid in confusion, the way an animal caught in
a trap which cannot find its way
out looks. And he stammered, as
if protest could help:
“But it’s my birthday!”
She looked down at him sympathetically. "Pobrecito," she said,
shaking her head, and then added
consolingly: “But maybe this noon
they will be back.
Maybe! She couldn’t understand;
how could she? They were not her
mother and father, and the maid
was not seven years old. He suddenly felt sick; a queer sensation
tugged at his bosom, and he felt
as if he were about to be torn apart
by hands that pushed and probed
inside of him. He turned and rushed away through the hall and down
the stairs, his eyes blinded by hot
tears. He ran across the sala and
buried his face in the rich drapery
over the French windows, fiercely
clenching the cloth in his closed fists
and sobbing bitterly. A heaviness
like that of an iron hand fell on
his shoulder and as if from far away outside the veil of mist that
was his world came the voice of
the witch rasping out: “Come, eat
your breakfast. You will be late
for school."
The taste of salt had not yet
left his lips and the stinging in his
eyes had not all gone as he sat
alone in the big Cadillac’s back seat.
He held his books tightly against


14


  


that they would scatter and be lost
in the vast emptiness of the upholstery around him, leaving him all
alone. The emptiness of the seat
around him was frightening and it
only reminded him of the emptiness
inside of him. So, he closed his
eyes and kept them tightly shut until he heard the throbbing gush of
the engine fade out and the tires
crunch to a stop on the school pavement.
At recess, Benny shuffled down
the walk, kicking up dust in front
of him with the tip of his shoe. All
around the air pulsed excitedly with
the heartbeat of a school at play—
the lusty cries of make-believe Tarzans, the bangs of "Forty-fives” the
tramping and stomping of many running feet. Benny walked on, head
bowed but listening to the sunshiny
riot. It wasn’t fair. He should be
happy, not they; today was his
birthday and he felt a funny ache
inside. But why should others know?
Why, even his own mother and father didn’t know: or if they did,
didn’t want to remember. No, he
would stick it out alone. After
all, wasn’t he almost big enough
now to be a man? He was seven.
“Hi, Benny," a voice piped up
beside him. It was Enrique. Enrique was eight and Enrique was
his best friend.
“Hi,” he answere without much
enthusiasm.
“I went everywhere looking for
you. Come on, let’s play catch the
ball. See!” And his friend proudly
held up a new-smelling softball for
Benny to see. “My father gave me
this this morning.
Benny took the ball in his hands
and fondled it, running his fingers
over it, delighting in the feel of
its store-fresh texture. But then


as he was about to smile back and
say “O.K.!", he remembered, and
gave he ball back. He felt sore
at everything — home, his folks,
school, the world. "No! I don’t want
to play.
“But why?” his friend asked.
"Don’t you want to play with me?
And his face was puzzled and hurt,
the way a little boy looks who is
punished for something he did not
do.
"No!” Benny answered in a flush
of stubbornness. Almost at once he
wished he hadn’t said it.
"O.K., if that’s what you want..
.. Enrique shrugged and turned,
throwing the ball up and catching
it again with one hand as he walked away. No, it was not what Benny wanted, not really. But when
he tried to call Enrique back, his
voice was a huge lump in his throat.
Everything was going wrong, and
he had lost a friend.
He thought of his father: tall and
handsome and natty. His father
was an architect, quick with the
pen and the ruler and skillful at
sketching views of beautiful mansions and awesomely grand buildings that took your breath away
when you looked ot them. But he
was not the kind of a man Enrique’s father was. Enrique’s father
was not rich or handsome, and maybe could not even draw a picture
of his own house. He had no mansion or shiny Cadillac, but he did
little wonderful things for Enrique,
like coming to school to take him
home, or buying him a cone of icecream as they walked together on
the street, or giving him new balls
to play with.
And. Benny thought his mother
was the most beautiful woman he
had ever known. She was dark

OCTOBER, 1951


15


haired and fair and had that faraway look in her face that he had
seen on the princess of his story book
at home. But he just didn’t know
why she could not be like Enrique’s mother, who was not beautiful and faraway at all, but had a
softness in her face and a warmth
in her voice that made people feel
good.
The electric bell was shrieking furiously the end of recess. From
all directions came the shuffle of
hurrying feet, converging on the
classroom doors, trying not to be
late. Benny, running in from the
far end of the playground where
he had wandered, saw that the lines
had already formed. He was among
the few stragglers left who were
puffing to arrive barely in time at
the doors. He caught sight of the
door to his room. The others were
already filing in. Gasping for
breath, he quickened his run and
threw his whole body into the final sprint, the wind blowing his
hair into his eyes. A blurred form
suddenly crossed in front of him,
there was a sudden smash, a tangle
of arms and legs, and Benny was
sprawling on the grass. His head
throbbed and his stomach felt numb,
as if it were no longer a part of
him. Nearby another boy was picking himself up from the lawn. The
bell was ringing its last shrill warning.
Benny stood up painfully, brushing back the hair from his eyes. Before him stood the other boy, a nine
or ten-year-old barbarian, and very
angry. He looked as big and husky
as Goliath. He was panting and his
breath fell hot on Benny’s face.
“Why don’t you look where you’re
going? See what you did. You
made me late!”


Benny was half-scared, the way
David was when he stepped out in
front of Goliath; but he was also
stubborn.
“No, I did not,” he answered.
“Yes, you did," repeated the other
boy.
“I did not!"
“Yes, you did! Wait till I tell the
principal.” This was too much. His
father and mother had forgotten his
birthday, he had lost his best friend,
and now he was being blamed for
something he knew was not his
fault. He felt the blood rushing to
his head, hot like drumming steam
on the lid of a kettle. He clenched his fists and swung his right to
the other boy’s mouth. With a yelp
of pain the older boy drew back,
his hand on the spot where the balled fist had landed. But when Benny swung his left, the other boy
was no longer there. Something
painfully hard smashed across Benny so he could not see. Furious,
he raised both hands swinging out
wildly where he thought his enemy
might be, lost his balance, stumbled,
and fell. Picking himself up he
saw through his good eye the principal approaching, big and terrible,
the way a locomotive is.
Benny walked out of the execution chamber, his fingers still stiff
from writing "I shall not fight in
school" a hundred times. His starched, white shirt was muddied and
rumpled, and he knew that under
his right eve was a tell-tale bluish
lump. What his mother and father would say when he reached home,
he could only guess. He had never
looked so messy before. Now, they
surely would be angry and he could
not tell them that today was his
birthday. But he simply didn’t care
anymore.


16


  


He shuffled out towards the driveway, his books hanging limply from
the strap in his hands. They seemed to be as heavy as a sack of
stones. He saw the Cadillac, crouching near the gate, big and gleaming and beautiful. He walked towards it, hating it.
The door swung open, and he saw
his mother and father. They stepped out of the car and stood there
looking at him. He stopped, looking back at them. They were so
handsome and beautiful. He glanced
down guiltily at his dirty shirt and
his books that were now dragging in
the dust, and then jerked his head
up again in wounded pride.
His father was not frowning. He
stood there looking him in the eye
smiling and stretching out his hand
"Happy birthday, son!”
Benny froze for a moment, then
he reached out and grasped his
father’s hand and there was his
mother, kneeling in the dust beside
him, running her fingers through
his hair and kissing the blue lump
under his right eye. Then they
pulled him up between them into
the car.
The boy sat there, his mother on
his left and his father on his right.
His chest no longer ached. The
heaviness of him was gone and he
felt light, a swimming-in-the-air
feeling.
"Papa and I went to church for
you this morning, dear," said his
mother, smiling.
"For me?” and his eyes blinked
hard with delight.
“Yes. But when we came home,
you were gone, said his father.
“They sent me to school.”
"“Yes, they told us.
"And I fought.”
“So thats how you got your blue


eye!” His father was laughing now.
“Yes, but I hit him too. On the
mouth, said Benny proudly.
“And who won?” they asked. Why,
they weren’t angry at all, just interested and sympathetic and treated him like he was seven and they
were his father and mother.
“Goliath won.
“Who?” asked his father and mother.
“Goliath. But that was because
he was bigger.”
And his father laughed again, and
his mother smiled and touched his
ear with her lips. They were not
cold at all, but warm and soft. It
was wonderful the way his father
looked when he laughed, so handsome
and full of life. And his mother
was even more beautiful when she
smiled and kissed him and whispered, "My poor, poor little man."
“And now, little man," said his
father when he had stopped laughing, “how would you like to have
a party? You’re seven today, you
know.
"A party! My birthday party?”
He looked up at his father with
eagerness.
“Your birthday party. This afternoon, at home. What do you say?”
asked his father.
“Can Enrique come?
"Anyone. All your friends, answered his father. “Mama made a
big cake for you with seven candles. Just wait till you see it!
"A cake!" he echoed his father’s
words softly. No, they were not
different at all from Enrique’s father and mother, or from other
fathers and mothers. He turned to
his mother gratefully: “I love you,
mama.”
"And I love you, my little boy.
You don’t know just how much I


OCTOBER, 1951


17


do.” And she put her warming arms
around him and pressed her face to
his hair. “Your father loves you
too, very much. But I know, sometimes we don’t seem to love you.
But we always do, dear, and we always will. Don’t forget that, ever."
“I won’t forget, mama, Benny
whispered back. There was a glorious warmth inside him, and he
felt big and one with the world.


And his father put his arm over
him and around his mother and
Benny reached out and threw his
arms around both his father and
mother and the three of them embraced, all crying and laughing together, delighting in that gift that
is greater and more beautiful and
more to be treasured than money
and mansions and bodily grace, that
gift out of which life gets its joy
and birthdays their meaning.


AUA


LEONIDAS BENESA, '52
BIRDS ON THE GRASS
Look at the birds
Spread on the grass, chirping.
Today, a lone Figure walks disconsolate
In the streets of the barren cities.
They have cast Him out.
Out of their doors they have cast Him,
Among His own people, a stranger.
O God, my God, vengeance!
O for twelve thousand legions of angels
To swat this ingrate generation
With thunder and lightning
From the green face of the earth!
But no, He only looks on,
He the Omnipotent now helpless,
For His keenest weapon, love, is broken
And rusting in the gutter:
While men and women dance the death-dance
To the music, of guns and the CRASH
Of the Commandments.
I do not care,
We must not care,
Must not despair, my brothers,
As long as birds are on the grass,
Chirping.


18


  


JAIME E. DY-LIACCO, '52


the doggone republic


THE DAY the Bark-Ration Bill
was made law in the Kenmel of
Congress marked the beginning of
the Doggone Republic’s austerity
program. The nation was on the
verge of war. It was necessary
that its citizens tighten their collars
and go easy on the barks.
Growled Senator Bull E. Terrier
of the Armed Services Committee:
“The bark is the Dog’s most potent
weapon in psychological warfare.
Knowing when and how to bark at
the right strategic moment is of supreme importance. With the right
tactical volume of bark power, strategic barking can utterly demoralize the enemy.


"However, wanton use of the bark
can also lead to our defeat. 'First,
it destroys the element of surprise
in sneak attacks. Secondly, it discloses our hidden positions of defense to the enemy. Thirdly, it can
give away to the trained ears of
spies entire battle plans for biting
offense and defense. Hence, the
need for controlled and rationed
barking during these times of national crisis. From now on until the
crisis passes, no Doggone citizen may
bark unless in connection with military tactical situations or extreme
emergency cases in which barking is
the only means of saving your doggone life. For all other occasions,
growls will be the method of communication. We will have no whines
about the matter. We are in danger of a terrible all-out war. Your


ove


acting


best interests of its Doggone citileys Cats.


From the Pen-tagon, where the
Dog generals and admirals were
working night and day at feverish
speed on measures of defense, General Short T. Dachshund of the Military Intelligence Service issued
this statement: “Reports from our
secret agent, K9, have verified our
suspicions that we no longer possess
a monopoly on flea powder stockpiles. The Cats are manufacturing flea powder at maximum speed,
and in one year more, their production will have equalled ours. That
means that our terrible Flea Bombs
will not prove as effective as we
planned them to be. The Cats’ possession of flea powder stockpiles
means the neutralization of the once
terrible threat which our Flea


ressive


OCTOBER, 1951


19


war intentions of the Union of Alleys Cats.
“It has been further learned by
our secret agents that the Cats have
been working on a Flea Bomb of
their own. Their first successful
working model was detonated two
weeks ago, itchy repercussions of
which were felt even by the almost
hairless Bulldogs. If there is to
be any reasonable hope for our survival as a free Doggone nation (and
here, the voice of General Short T.
Dachshund quaked with patriotic
emotion), we must put a stop to
feline aggression once and for all
now, while we still have superiority
in armed strength. To wait for
them to strike first is national suicide. Another year will be too
late.
So in big and small kennels, the
Doggone Republic geared for war.
Training camps sprang up like wild
fleas all over the country. Greyhounds were transformed into fasthitting Commandos. Bulldogs composed the 13th Airborne. Great
Danes were mobilized into the 1st
Marine Corps whose motto was
"Doggone It!” Bloodhounds were
trained in special secret-service
camps. Collies flew up into the
stratosphere in giant strategic
bombers. St. Bernards exchanged
their priestly robes for the less
cumbersome uniform of the Chaplain
Corps. Meanwhile, the D.C.D.A.
(Doggone Civilian Defense Admini

stration), as a precautionary measure in case of a land invasion, ordered all teeth, even of the smallest puppy, constantly filed to razorblade sharpness.
The Dogs were determined to fight
to the last dog if need be. Three
hundred years ago, the Dog Pointers, founding sires of the present
republic, had come to the new land
with high ideals of freedom. With
the efficiency typical of pioneers,
they had cleared the land and
thoughtfully mined the mountains
with bones for the use of future
generations. They had pushed the
frontiers of their homes farther and
farther to the West, subduing the
ferocious Red Cats who were always on the warpath. Until finally,
the country had completely gone to
the Dogs and all the New Land was
won.
The present Dogs, proud descendants of sturdy ancestors, meant to
keep it that way. No imperialistic,
dictatorial, fish-mongering Aly Khat
was going to rule them. Even if
it meant being deprived of their most
beautiful heritage, the freedom to
bark when and how and at whom
they pleased, still they were willing to sacrifice that freedom in the
interests of a greater cause: the
cause for which their Pointing Fathers lived and died... the cause
of the Doggone Republic, the cause
of National Survival to see to it that
his country remain forever and ever
and ever — with the Dogs.


AUA


20


  


AMBROSIO MAKALITAL, JR., '53
VANITAS
The world smiles full
With the greatness of God and His grandeur:
The open-faced and candid curl of a rose
Unfolding to the sun,
The stormy splendor of the sea
Mirroring the sunset glows—
And yet, proud clay, though in fierce pride glorying,
Far smaller you are than dewdrops wasted in the sea,
Than sandgrains lost in the drifting windblown
Deserts of eternity.


LEONIDAS BENESA, '52
SONG FOR OCTOBER
There is something strange in the buzzing of the hummer,
Foraging for the few flowers spared by summer.
He must think me odd here underneath the trees
Coaxing the woods to yield coy similes.
For months in deserts now my soul has lain
Poemless: like dry grass pleading for the rain.
So, bee, if you have come to scoff, be off,
My songless voice is punishment enough.
What’s that? I think I heard someone titter.
It must have been the new-come sparrow’s twitter.
The fallen leaves than last week’s now are crisper.
What is this strange new gossip that they whisper?
What is this message windblown through the thistle?
There’s no mistaking it: that lyric whistle!
She’s here, poet, someone you knew is here!
October: your singing mate of yesteryear!


OCTOBER, 1951


VIVENCIO PERALTA, '54


A Story


corn seeds


EMILIO GLANCED at his wife
then turned back to his rice bowl
in silence. She did not seem to feel
like talking.
“Juana—" he gulped. Something
stuck in his throat, but he went on.
"Good rain, last night. Don't you
think so?"
“Uh, good rain. Yes."
"Went deep enough.
“Went deep enough, maybe.
She was still hurt and he knew
it. He did not talk to her again
until he stood up. Reaching for
the dipper, he said lightly, "I’m going to plant corn today."
"I’m sorry,” she replied, wiping
the table vigorously, "I have some
things to wash.
“Oh, that’s all right,” he declared, as if it did not matter at all
to him.
Fastening his bolo to his waist,
he went downstairs without another
word.
He guided his carabao through the
mountain trail unhurriedly. He tried
to divert his attention to other
things. The way the rain-drench
ed path yielded to his feet showed
him the ground was good for the
corn seeds. It was not too wet
nor to dry. The water went deep
enough but not too deep to spoil the
seeds that were to be planted. He
raised his eyes from the ground and
stared blankly ahead, vaguely noting the familiar twitch of the carabao’s tail.
He ought to feel glad. It was the
first rain in Naragsac. He ought
to say a prayer of thanks for it


made his fields ready for planting,
after having lain idle for so long
during the hot, dry months. But
Emilio felt no joy. Only confused
emptiness and miserableness tore at
his heart.
Some days ago, he did not feel
this way.... He was laughing at
his brother-in-law’s efforts to beat
him in the game of dama.
“1 win again, Baldo, he told his
brother-in-law.
“I give up,” said Baldo, morosely.
"Friend, what’s the matter? Your
mind is not on the game.
"Forgive me, bayaw. I can’t play
well, today. I-I....
“You have a problem?'
“Yes.” Baldo slapped his forehead
for emphasis. “Gorio’s brother has
arrived from the city.
Emilio could not understand how
this could be a problem. He knew
Gorio was his brother-in-law’s rival
for the hand of Purita, the darkeyed, long-limbed daughter of Lakay
Kario. But how could Goring’s
brother be the trouble?
"His brother studied in the city,”
Baldo explained, “therefore he knows
how to write. So Gorio tells him,
Write Purita a letter — for me,
brother.' And his brother writes
for him. Now Puring does not
even look at me anymore. She thinks
I don’t know how to write. She
thinks Gorio knows how to write.
She thinks, maybe, I’m a worthless,
no-good, ignorant beast!” He shook
his head bitterly. “You must help
me!” he cried.


22


  


important. “I know how to write
letters. That’s how I won your sister, remember?'
Baldo smiled. "I know you will
help me,” he said....
Emilio began the letter that night.
He did it laboriously, because the
pencil was poor, the paper was poor,
the light was poor, and because the
letter he was copying was also poor.
It was one of his former letters
to Juana, when he was still courting her. He did not know what
the words meant, but he was sure
it was about love. Tomas, an old
friend, wrote it for him....
Baldo did not come to get it the
next day because it was raining.
Emilio placed it in his pocket and
forgot all about it, until his wife
confronted him with it.
“What’s this?” she asked.
“Oh, that — that is a letter for
Baldo. He could not understand
why he should feel so guilty about
it.
It is impossible to explain how
Juana could decipher the writing,
but she was able to do it. ""Dearest
Puring’” she began. “This is for
Puring!” she accused.


“I know,” he explained. “Baldo...
She did not heed him. Instead,
she read on. “My love for you is
like the forever shining light of
the stars above that gleams so fitfully in this night of gloom and
hopeless sorrow Puring, my
love ...'” She bit her trembling lips
and with tears blinding her eyes she
threw the piece of paper at his face.
He caught her hand and before
he knew it, he had struck her furiously, sending her soundless to the
floor. Something snapped in his
mind; he stood aghast before her for
a moment and then he cried, “Juana!"
The woman shrank from him and
rising to her feet, she ran sobbing
into the room.
He was not able to talk to her
again until the next morning. He
wanted to explain everything, then,
but he was able to comment only
on last night’s rain....
So now it was deep enough for
corn planting. He wished he was
planting somebody’s head right now.
He felt his sweat cooling his whole
body. He breathed in the sweet,
earthy smell of the freshly turned


OCTOBER, 1951


23


clods, but he did not experience that
sudden surge of strength in his
limbs, unlike in the past. He wiped
the drops of sweat from his face
with his arms and when he looked
up he found himself face to face
with Baldo.
“What did you do to my sister?”
he asked. Emilio was dumb-struck.
He could see that his bayaw who
was the root of all his troubles
was very angry with him.
“What did you do to my sister?"
he repeated with growing hostility.
Emilio snorted. This was too
much. “Get out of my sight, or
by God, PIl...
“Who are you shouting at?” Baldo shouted back heatedly.
"Go away! Go away! Or so help
me, PIl...
“You'll what? I ought to teach
you for striking my sister."
“Who are you going to teach,
puppy?” Emilio was infuriated.
“Puppy? Who is a puppy?” Baldo stung by the insult, lost all sense
of reserve and unsheathed his bolo.
“No! Don't!” It was not Emilio.
It was Juana. "Wait, my brother!”
She came running towards the two
men. "Don’t fight each other,” she
pleaded.
“He called me a puppy,” Baldo
told her.
“He would not let me explain,
countered Emilio. “You did not
let me explain," turning to her.
“You don’t have to explain any

thing," said Juana. "I think I understand everything perfectly. I am
not going to stay with you any longer. I am going back to my mother
and — and you are free to go to—
to your Purita. She was crying
again.
“Purita?” Baldo looked at Emilio.
Hate flared anew in his eyes. "Why
you—! To think that I trusted you
the way I did."
“But— Emilio retorted.
“Would you believe, talking to
his sister,” that I even asked him
to — to write Puring for me!"
"What?” Juana was beginning to
understand. “You asked him to
write for you?
“Yes,” he confessed. "I did not
know he could do this to me," sighing dramatically.
“Oh, you—you—! Go away! Go
away! Don’t you ever show your
face to me again. Why did I ever
have you for a brother? Go away!
I hate you!"
Baldo walked away, wearing a
stupid look on his face.
“Forgive me,” said Juana shamefacedly to her husband. "I didn’t
give you any chance to explain.
"Forgive me, too,” Emilio said
humbly. “I shouldn’t have lost my
temper that time...
After a short silence, she said,
“I will help you plant the corn,
if you wish.”
"All right,” he agreed. "I make
the holes and you plant the seeds.


AWA


24


  


GERVASIO DIAZ, '53


THE LOST NOTE
On life’s soft strings I wove a song, and felt
Youth’s fiery spell surge through my soul, like waves
O’er reefs, and yet the music failed to melt
My heart, for notes turned cold and dull as staves.
And so on crippled wings, the heavens I
Explored, and over ocean’s wide, wild ways
I roamed in painful search for one note’s sigh
To fill my young life’s time with lambent rays,
Bright, blinding as the sun’s. When in the high
Gloss of a vernal star I gleaned the streams
Of golden strains that changed my song and my
Decadent life to soaring, winged dreams.
For life, with thorns to bleed, has bliss to bide,
And love is only God’s to give or hide.


REUBEN PENGSON, '55
I FACE MY WORLD ALONE
I face my world alone,
Bereft of friends.
Numb and dead, my life:
Deserted by Beauty,
Rejected by Fate,
Spurned by Love.
Lost in the swirling mist,
I face my world alone.
Depthless pits await me,
Shattered dreams to mend,
Wrecked pillars to raise,
Long roads of loneliness.
Discouraged, despondent, dejected,
Lowly man that I am,
Laughed at by peers,
Sneered at by fools,
Shunned by all, loved by none,.
Unfriended but unbrokenI face my world alone.


OCTOBER, 1951


25


Beyond Compromiso...
MURDER IN THE CATHEDRAL
By T S. ELIOT


IN THIS HIS BEST PLAY, Thomas Stearns Eliot, unquestionably
the greatest poet of the twentieth
century, recreates out of the fabric
of medieval past a distinguished
verse drama with a timely moral
implication for modern minds. For
its subject, Muder in the Cathedral
dramatizes the last days of Saint
Thomas a Becket, the uncompromising Archbishop of Canterbury during the turbulent rule of Henry II,
as he returns from his exile in
France to meet inevitable martyrdom.
Before the play begins, many crucial events have taken place in the
strife between the King and the
Church. Thomas a Becket, the
King’s pleasure-loving Chancellor, is made Archbishop of Canterbury at the King’s behest for the
purpose of usurping the "royal customs" of the Church in England.
But Thomas becomes a changed man
at his ecclesiastic appointment and
opposes every sordid move of Henry to control the Church as its
chief regent. When bloodshed seems
imminent, Thomas flees to France,
leaving the country to be swallowed by men of hatred, men blinded
by greed for material power.


From this point, Eliot evolves his
play. Here, judging from mere externals of plot, lies the discernable
flaw of Murder in the Cathedral:
the story of Thomas’s assissination
in itself is too passive to arouse
any strong dramatic conflict. But
Eliot’s concern is not so much in
physical conflict as in the inner
struggle within Thomas, in the inevitable encounter of the forces of
darkness and light, in the meaning
of Thomas’s death to his people
and to mankind. The essential struggle between Mammon and Truth
forms the substance of the play, a
glorious battle in which there is
no middle road, in which a compromise can only mean the triumph
of evil.
After an absence of seven long
years, Thomas returns to find his
flock like the dispersed tribes of
Israel — without a shepherd. They
are embittered by destitution and
disease, injustice and licence, living in terror. There seems to be
no light in the dank quagmire about them, doomed to go on "living ond partly living.
The pervasive despair of the faithful is
reflected in the Chorus, a group of
(shrewdly enough) old, helpless wo

26


  


men who have no bearing on the
action of the play:
Now I fear disturbance of the
quiet seasons:
Winter shall come bringing death
from the sea,
Ruinous spring shall beat at our
doors....
Disastrous summer burn up the
beds of our stream
And the poor shall wait for another decaying October.
There is no note of optimism in
the voices of the three priests either, for although Thomas comes with
“the assurance of right, and the
love of the people,” his obstinate
opposition will only fan the flames
of hate in the King and the barons. Thomas knows he has to
die for the Truth, but he cannot
help feeling depressed at the wasteland before him, inhabited by weak
souls who sorely need his guidance:
"For us, the poor, there is no action," the Chorus laments. "But only
to wait and to witness.
Meanwhile Thomas is exposed to
Four Tempters, of whom the first
three offer him temporal glory. But
the last Tempter is unexpected; he
convinces Thomas to court death in
order to achieve sainthood and a
glory above that of kings, that
by martyrdom he will be remembered with shrines and pilgrimages and
an "enduring crown" But this horrifies Thomas, and, in the most majestic passage of the play, he answers:
Now is my way clear now is the
meaning plain:
Temptation shall not come in this
kind again.
The last temptation is the greatest treason:
To do the right deed for the wrong
reason.


act, Thomas further elucidates on
what makes sainthood possible.
“Saints are not made by accident.
Still less is a Christian martyrdom
the effect of a man’s will to become a saint.... Ambition... to become ruler over other men... operates with deception, cajolery, and
violence... the action of impurity
upon impurity. A martyrdom is
never the design of man; for the
true martyr is he who has become
the instrument of God, who has lost
his will in the will of God, not lost
but found it, for he has found freedom in submission to God. The martyr no longer desires anything for
himself, not even the glory of martyrdom.
When the crisis comes, Thomas
courageously offers himself up as
the sacrificial lamb to be slain by
the four knights. By his blood Thomas conquers evil and secures the
triumph of the forces of light. The
ultimate victory is indeed glorious,
a victory as dazzling as the sun, for
his death enhances a profound meaning to the prindiples of goodness
where others are only too willing to
seek compromise. 1170 is not as
remote as it seems to us today
for in our midst continues the battle between Satan and Christ, even
more crucial as a result of the weakening of man’s moral fibre accrued
by world materialism. It is a battle which demands an outcome; and
for the legions of Truth to triumph,
the Christian living must be ready
to carry its banners and give up
their lives if necessary in the fight
of which Thomas’s death was but
a beginning. Then can we rejoice
with the Chorus toward the end:
We thank Thee for Thy mercies
of blood, for Thy redemption by
blood. For the blood of Thy
martyrs and saints


OCTOBER, 1951


27


Shall enrich the earth, shall create
the holy places,
For wherever a saint has duelt,
wherever a martyr has given his
blood for the blood of Christ,
There is holy ground, and the
sanctity shall not depart from it
Though armies trample over it....
It is poetry like this that renders
Murder in the Cathedral its superior qualities as a work of drama,
for here verse is not just a saccharine coating superadded to plot but
is the forceful medium through
which the play achieves its greatness. Every line throbs with noble
meaning and emotion, pregnant with
rich imagery and symbolism. There
are shifts, however, in the dramatic
medium of expression, as in the
Christmas morning sermon after the
first act, which is written in clear,
modern prose: this evinces distinct
contact with a modern audience. But


a violent shift occurs in the second act when the four knights unexpectedly step out of the historical
sequence to defend their crime foolishly by appealing directly to the
audience; this appraach strengthens
the contact besides providing dramatic irony. The play gains its
classic grandeur in Eliot’s use of
a chorus that utters the most sweeping lines of the play, intensifies the
conflict, interprets the immediacy of
Thomas’s death, and gives the play
its structural balance.
The spiritual optimism of T. S.
Eliot’s poetry and the aesthetic qualities of Murder in the Cathedral
lift it above the ruck of presentday plays. Its universal theme will
surely survive the test of time to
rank this Eliot masterpiece among
the great Christian dramas of all
time.
-EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


AWA


LEONIDAS BENESA, '52
RECESSIONAL
Shall I forget? Not so. At least not yet.
Your laughter, dear, was sparrows twittering.
I love bird-song. September songs now bring
Remembrances that rise and will not let
Me rest. But though my heart is caught in a net
Of song, my thoughts are ever on the wing.
When poets think, they feel. Feeling, they sing,
Singing remember, though gladly would forget.
Perhaps I could forget you if and when
Should fade, like the sun, this pale paling ember
Of young dreams. But the sun rises. Well, then
I would forget you, only to remember.
I have just seen the fading sun setting,
Have felt young dreams fading, past forgetting.


28


  


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, '52


A Story


in another summer
For the young,
the wanderer,
the fierce hunter.


At first, if you have not been
there, perhaps you will feel a little dizzy as the car in second gear
strains up the narrow road winding
along the mountainside. But after
a while, the dizziness passes away,
your head clears, and now you notice the difference in the cool, clean
highland air. Y ou lean out with one
arm on the car window, and look
down at the undulating stretch of
road you have passed, curving and
sinuous against the dark green of
the mountains. It is most beautiful, late in the afternoon. The sunlight lingers on the mountaintops,
while the deep canyons, the hollows
between the hills, are already misty with evening. The wind blows
cool and clean on your face, and you
smell the sweet subtle fragrance of
tha pines, the rain-moist earth, and
somchow in your heart you know
that in the city at last, beyond the
arid years and the empty rooms and
the inarticulate dreams, you will
find the beginning of a new glory.
THEY CAME in buses and automobiles that clogged the ascending zigzag road to the city in the mountains
(I am in the middle of nowhere,
he thought, mentally composing
sentences during the trip with melancholy amusement, unmindful of
his cousins’ gay chatter, I am flotsam borne on the violent tide): the


and the newly-rich, the carnival
crowd seeking release from the omnipresent, palpable heat that hung
over the plains with a dusty languor now that it was March and
April. The city welcomed her guests
with sunflowers and amplified music flooding the white sidewalks, with
lithographed postcards and fantastic prices, and they came on in everincreasing droves, crowding into the
hotels and the houses of obscure relatives, and once the hurried amenities were done with, the trunks
unpacked and the leisurely tiredness
from the trip replaced by a keen,
supercilious excitement, they strutted down the geometrical streets,
greeting one another with meaningless queries about when did you come
up and when are you going down,
proclaiming their dubious conquests
with loud banter and blatant sweaters and candid cameras: This was
taken in Wright Park, that’s me
behind the mestiza, and here’s Nenuca on horseback, and that’s me
again helping Inday on the rollerskates.... The strident horns of lownumbered cars and imported taxis
desecrated the mountain quiet (the
unceasing traffic of the main street
jarred him into the remembrance
of another city where the litanies
of blind beggars was an undertone
to the throbbing grating pounding
tempo of men and machines), the
juke-boxes groaned under the barrages of coins and blared everlast

OCTOBER, 1951


29


acbrilarles


ingly the forever-remember songs, as
young girls in mannish shirts and
pedal-pushers beat time to the music, laughing shrilly over Cola-Cola
so refreshingly delicious after pilgrimages to skating-rink and bowling-alley. Everywhere, color and
movement exploded against the blue
green landscape (Hey, Raul, his
cousin Dodo said, snap out of it and
have some fun), and in the pinescented air there was the promise
of shining adventure, which belonged
solely to the mountain city in the
summertime, something almost tangible in its urgent persuasion, moving and magical as song.
The feverish, almost frantic pace
of the first few days dulled the
sharp edges of his loneliness, his
bewildered brooding: he went with
his cousins on their rounds of the
city’s parks and scenic spots, sharing in their enthusiasm and delight,
laughing with them aware of a sudden gladness, smiling in the sun.
What a wonderful view, Tita said,
breathless and enchanted before the
majestic sweep of the mountains.
Yes, he said, it’s wonderful. Say,
let’s all go boating, Dodo said. I
can’t swim, Carling said. You’re all
wet, Noy said. Speaking of wit,
Carling said. You make me sick,
Mameng said. Well, then, let’s just
drive around, Dodo said.


But he soon tired of their smug
witticisms, and began to avoid their
company, offering feigned excuses
when asked to join in their excursions, finding a perverse satisfaction in his loneliness. I shouldn’t
have come, he thought. I don’t belong here. I know it. I ought to
be some place, anywhere, but not
this town. What’s come over me?
I don’t know All of a sudden, I’m
tired of the place. That’s it, I’m
tired, he thought. He had come
only after his uncle’s furious insistence, the redolent face with its eternal cigar eloquent with anxiety over
his nephew’s well-being: You need
the vacation, young man, and you'll
meet a lot of girls up there, mind
you. You go, Raul, his father had
said. His mother seconded the sentiment, solicitous, almost pleading.
Then he felt it absurd to refuse
to go, yet he had packed hesitantly
to the last moment, assailed by a
strange forboding, while the car beneath the vine-enclosed window kept
up its impatient summons: finally,
he had stamped resolutely down the
stairway into the noon-glare to the
waiting automobile, where his aunt,
fanning herself vigorously in the
rear-seat, met him with a disapproving smile....
Before the living tide that changed
shape and hue constantly, his loneliness accented by the ebb and flow


30


  


of laughter, color, movement, knowing he did not belong there, in the
holiday city in the summertime (the
silken rustle of skirts in the halfdark aisles of the theaters, extravagant repartee in the chromium
soda-fountains), he would ask of
himself, stilling the inward storm
of his bewilderment with an effort
of will, desperately: What does a
man want? And where will he
find it, and how? Sitting in the
park one afternoon, staring absently at the mountains and oblivious
of the murmurous clamor around
him, he remembered his board-mates
in college, and tried to unravel
from their intense if unconsummated groping the door they sought, the
answers they never found. He remembered George, handsome in a
pale, effeminate manner, frantically clinging to a social ladder and
displaying engraved invitations to
Saturday parties and displaying
them as a hunter might his trophies: George, who would lie in bed
the morning after, his eyes glazed
and unseeing, his coat crumpled and
thrown upon a chair. He had shared
his room with Elias, tragic, taciturn, bitterly warding off every
attempt at friendship, devouring
tomes of Tolstoi and Dostoevsky, and
writing poetry which he kept hidden like some secret sin. In college he had his own coterie of
friends, and he recalled the nonsensical ribbing and the raucous
laughter, the nights when they
walked the streets shouting their
defiance at life and the world, their
brave conviction that they would
never die, he remembered the songs
that were a record of the longing
of their youth, the seasons of their
inchoate desires, the dances (A long
time ago, everything is a dream),
and the girls they met there, whom


they visited after the uncertain
phone-call, hoping to find at the
new addresses a semblance of true
grace and beauty, only to go away
with a troubled frustration. There
had been Marita, and Trining, and
other girls, the faces and voices
now blurred in his memory, except
for Helen’s, whom he could picture
to mind as though it were not a year,
but only yesterday, when he last
saw her, Helen, whom he had loved
in another city, in another time.
One afternoon, in the park before the promenading summer crowd,
he remembered his friends and classmates, people he had met, restless,
forever searching it seemed to him,
driven on by a terrible hunger for
something he knew not what: Ben,
who wanted to study for the priesthood (It’s the best life a man can
aspire for, Raul), Joe, telling him
of the revolution that shall shake
the world, the people of his town,
working and living and dying, driven on by a silent fury through
all the years of thelr lives, a friend
who taught in an anonymous highschool in Mindanao, where, he once
wrote him, the hills are green and
the sea is gentle warm in the sun,
a girl he once met at a town fiesta now a nun (the vision of long,
ascetic corridors filled him with a
nameless dread), the manflood of
Quiapo, pushing, hurrying, riding
in the jeepneys to love and hope
and disenchantment and death, the
lost atoms flung across the barren
earth, the voiceless ghosts haunting his brain as he lay numb in the
boarding-house room, bruised in spirit, bewildered, listening to the late
trains rumbling out of the station
in Paco, haunting him now wordlessly screaming for the answers to
their ten thousand dreams, even as
he sat in the dustless park in the
mountain city (names carved on the


OCTOBER, 1951


31


bench: Bert loves Mely: the letters
now faded and blending with the
rain-lashed wood), the waters of
the lagoon alive with tin canoes
painted red and orange, the young
men strolling down the pathways
holding hands with the girls, their
laughter like bright pollen falling
through the sunshine air....
He ran into Mon and Oscar, his
college friends, after a morning of
purposeless wandering, and in the
sudden glow of an awakened comradeship, he treated them to a round
of cokes, theatrically clinking their
glasses and toasting the beautiful
women of the world. Where have
you been hiding yourself, you sonamagun? Oscar said. All over the
world, he said. How’s Fred? And
Tony? The old gang? Fred’s gotten married, Mon said. The womanhater. Tony’s in the States, Oscar
said. How’s your writing coming
along? Mon asked. Haven't written a line since graduation, he
said. What’s happened? Oscar asked. I don’t know he said. I guess
I’ve written down all the stuff I’ve
wanted to write. Love, love, you'll
never come home again, et cetera.
You wrote quite a lot in college,
Oscar said. It was different then,
he said. Those were the days, Mon
said. Crazy as hell, Oscar said.
You look peaked, old boy, Mon said.
What’s eating you? Nothing, he
said. A jam-session will do you good,
Mon said. There’ll be a dance tonight. No admission. My sister’s
gang’s having a party tonight. The
more the merrier. You’re invited.
The whole town will be there. I
don’t know he said, I’m not sure
about going, I— Make up your mind,
Oscar said. What are you, a hermit? You come along, Raul, Mon
said. Don’t be a k.j., Oscar said.
Once, I was young in heart, et ce

tera, he said. You sound like a
movie, Oscar said. Well, I’ll come
along, he said. For the laughs. Hey,
Mon said, what do we do, stay here
all morning? Let’s bum around, Oscar said. Okay by me, he said.
He accompanied them into the
high-ceilinged lobby of a hotel where
he was unceremoniously introduced
to a cluster of girls sporting opulent family names, uniformly pretty to a type, impressing him as selfconsciously snobbish. Have you been
here long? they asked. A week, he
said. It must be terribly hot in
Manila, the poor people, what a pity, que horror. Yes, he said. He
went bowling with Mon and Oscar
and some of the girls (somebody had
been clever enough to make a reservation): the girls now called to
him familiarly, Raul, it’s your turn,
Raul, give us a strike, Raul, thawing his reserve, and he laughed
with them over Mon’s jokes, and for
once he did not regret his joining
them, everything was going to be
all right now, he was going to enjoy his stay after all, this was
what he had come for, it was great
to be with Mon and Oscar again.
Later, in the evening, they laughed and sang in the taxicab, going
to the dance, and he felt the same
proud elation of the morning. The
party was in a brick bungalow set
on the crest of a low hill, fronted
by pine trees strung with colored
bulbs shining frosted in the crisp
cool night. The dancing had long
since begun when they arrived, and
he stepned onto the roseate living
room astir with the shuffling of
shoes and sandaled feet, aware of
a keen sense of waiting and discovery. Mon kept urging him to
dance, dance, Raul, what’re you
waiting for, this is a free-for-all,


32


  


and he said, Sure, I can taka care
of myself, laughing now, confidently, watching the ballerina-skirted
girls rise from the chairs backed
up against the walls, rise and glide
into the enfolding arms of the young
men as the phonograph’s saxophones
started to weave bright tinfoil patterns of sound in the room.
Then he saw Helen at the far
end of the room, seated on a chaiselongue, conversing with a cigarettesmoking young man, the strange,
familiar face in profile: the thin
delicate nose, the proud lips, the
hair brushed back and tied with a
ribbon. Isn’t this a pleasant surprise? he thought. The girl I loved.
Why the past tense? The girl I
still love. That sounds better. Or
does it? Stop being tragic, he said
to himself. He stood in the doorway leading out to the terrace,
looking at Helen at the far end of
the long room, and what had been
seemed absurd and silly now, the
whispered pleas sounded painfully
adolescent, the fervid letters, and
afterwards the misunderstanding (so
mawkish now and trivial), his anger and resentment.
The cigarette-smoking young man
left Helen, and on an impulse he
crossed the room through the maze
of dancers, wondering with a detached curiosity how she would receive him. She had not noticed him,
and he said, Helen, tentatively, Helen, and she looked up at him (the
dark, clear eyes that he remembered of her), and then she was rising from her seat, blinking her eyes
in unbelief, saying, Oh Raul! Raul!
and he said, softly, Hello, Helen,
and she stood there before him, in
her tall slenderness, all at once full
of questions, How’s everything with
you, how’s everything? laughing her


warm, familiar laughter, Oh Raul,
it’s so nice to see you again, how’s
everything? As usual, he said. The
whole world’s a mess. (What is
there to say to a girl you once loved
and have not seen for a year?)
Aren’t you dancing? he asked. I’ve
had enough for the evening, she
said, I’m dead tired. How about
the next one? he asked. All right,
she said. For an old friend. Helen, how’s everything with you? he
asked. Fine, she said. You look
grown-up now, he said in an attempt at humor. And you, she said,
you have changed. Have 1? They
were dancing now, and he tightened his hold around her palm-slim
waist, and everything seemed different now beyond pain and loneliness. Yes, you’ve changed, she
said. You look — grown-up, too.
He laughed. You look sober, even
when you laugh, she said. Is that
a compliment? he asked. Remember
Cecy’s party? she said. You were a
riot then. I was a riot then, he said.
A lot of things can happen in a
year, she said. He felt now in her
voice the beginning of a shared
knowledge, a new and vital understanding, and while he wanted to
speak of time that was, he could only
ask questions he might of casual
friends, polite, almost impersonal.
The family here with you? he asked.
No, she said, I’m staying with some
friends. Can I drop in some time?
If you'd care to, she said. When?
Tomorrow afternoon, she said. It’s
about time I take a break and stay
home. We can talk about a lot of
things, he said. For old times’ sake.
Yes, she said. When did you come
up? Last week, he said.
HE DIALLED THE NUMBER,
was answered by a blank, repetitious buzz, and after a third futile
try, decided to go to Helen’s place,


OCTOBER, 1951


33


tracing the address on the phonebook in an outburst of impatience.
It was not a long walk from his
uncle’s cottage, and on the way, he
thought of the right words to say,
the correct gestures. The afternoon
slanted across the mountains sharply defined against the marine sky.
In the streets paraded the tireless
summer crowd, converging on the
central park of the city in twos and
fours and fives, strolling indolently in the cool unhurried sunshine.
You’ve changed, Helen had said. A
lot of things can happen in a year.
Helen, there was a girl I used to
know. That sounds like the first
line of a song. The girl I used to
know. What shall we talk about?
December in Ermita, conversation
by the sea, aloneness in a crowd,
confusion and bewildered brooding
like giant worms feeding on the
heart, a faraway town with streets
of acacia trees, unwritten poems,
rain in July, the death of illusions,
time of youth and music in the
world. For old times’ sake. He
quickened his steps as he neared her
address, glancing at the numbers on
the grilled-iron gates of the greenand-white houses. Overhead the
wind soughed through the pines, and
stirred the flowers of the sloping
gardens.
He pushed through the half-open
gate, ascended the stone steps, and
pressed the button. A bell chimed
in the vast interior of the house:
the patter of approaching slippers,
and presently the door opened, and
a thin pale woman stood on the
threshold. He sensed her silent hostility, and he said, Good afternoon,
meeting the birdlike stare, trying to
discourage her resistance with a
smile. The woman responded with
a curt nod of her graying head.


Somewhere inside the house a quarrel raged in rapid Spanish. Is Ilelen in? he asked. He saw the anemic tendrils of veins spread across
the woman’s forehead. Suddenly the
woman burst out in rasping bitterness, She isn’t here she went
on a picnic with her friends what
is it you want? I just thought I’d
drop by and say hello, he said hastily. The woman’s words had not
pained nor surprised him, and at
the back of his mind he wondered
why he should not feel resentful or
disappointed, as though now he did
not care, as though he were capable of a strength that had been
his all the time without his knowing it, feeling no more than a flicking annoyance.
He thanked the woman: the door
closed: it was a mahogany door, inlaid with ornafental wrougnt-iron
and opaque glass. He retraced his
steps through the gate, and walked
away briskly up the asphalt street,
breathing in the cool wet scent of
the pines on the wind. With focused clarity, he heard his footsteps
on the street, radios playing in the
houses, a piano tinkling little notes
into the street, people talking at
windows rose-gold with sunset.
Across the narrow purpling valley,
the mists of evening curled and
rolled over the pine forests of the
mountainsides. I can call her up
tomorrow, or tonight, but I guess
everything’s over now. Like brown
leaves falling. Everything’s over
now, I love you Helen, that was
more than a year ago, the dearest
things I know are what you are,
that was in Ermita, a year ago,
so what? Stop kidding yourself,
and go on, laugh, sing, dance. Smile
in the sun. He slackened his stride
to light a cigarette, cupping the
matchflame against the wind.


34


  


But the nonchalant bravado left
him suddenly, dving with the abrupt
cessation of voices before a barricade of silence, and something dark
and sad moved in his throat, and
he threw the unsmoked cigarette on
the road, crushing it with his shoe,
and the wind rushed through the
pines, and across the narrow evening valley, the bluish mist shrouded the pine forests of the mountainsides. The confus on, the bewilderment, beat savagely at his brain,
and the remembered faces and voices
came to him, a thundering legion,
brothers of his in their wild search,
their vast relentless groping, driven on by a terrible hunger for something he knew not what through all
the years of their lives, his friends,


the people he had met, the people of his town, the manflood
of Quiapo, screaming for the answers they never found. The
sweeping onrushing panic faded away like quick, violent rain, and
there descended upon him a hushed
peacefulness, and he stood in the
street in an attitude of listening,
and again there was loneliness, and
now it was a white cool flame burning inside him, and a vast choral
singing beside and above him, and
then he knew beyond all understanding that there will be loneliness until the day when he would find,
jewel-bright beneath the trees of
another country, in another summer,
the end of all desire.


AVA


LEONIDAS BENESA, '52


IRONY
I went in quest of song one day.
Songs weren’t scarce then. (It was May.)
Sing, bluebird! and she forthwith sang.
The streams with silver answer rang.
Bloomed poems shy asters in the sun.
The robin, not 'to be outdone
With bird song thrilled the leaves and me
The world was one grand symphony
With me conducting. But I was sad
A single note I could not add.


OCTOBER, 1951


35


The Humanity of War


LAST CHAPTER
By ERNIE PYLE
New York: Henry Holt, 1946
WORLD WARS have had their overwhelming share of correspondents and
novelists, the John Herseys, the Remarques, the Norman Mailers, and all
of them have practically treated the subject in the same depressing manner: feats of heroism against a background of utter barbarism, the groans
of the dying and the wounded, the rancid tang of dust and sulphur, and the
stench of blood and death. But in Last Chapter, a famous war-correspondent, Ernie Pyle, talks of war in the freshly simple and straitforward
language that has won for him a distinguished niche in the hall of contemporary journalism, as well as a beloved place in hearts of democratic
peoples. From Italian beacheads to le Shima, he was always the jovial,
unassuming, friendly reporter who made a pleasant comrade to common
soldiers sweating it out in foxholes, who found him worthy of their mettle.
In his Last Chapter, a story revolving around the life of the average
warrior, the lowly “Joe” Ernie does not talk much about details of battle; in fact, he mentions almost nothing about it. He simply describes
the soldiers he brushed shoulders with, their joys and fears, and accents
the brighter side of the battle: how weary infantrymen forge comradeships that last long after the smoke of fighting has faded away, crack
a hearty joke under fire. Ernie Pyle’s book is not the usual story of
man’s inhumanity to man, but a 21-gun salute to man’s humanity. Through
his eyes, war ceases to be the scapegoat for once, and becomes in these
pages the grimy testing ground of man’s humanism and courage. Pyle
renders memorable such epic encounters as the Okinawa spearhead, as only
a confidante and comrade of the unsung foot-soldier who knows the war
firsthand can narrate: he gives the impression that he is not merely reporting battle scenes but is portraying the real thing. Last Chapter carries a prophetic title: a few months after he finished the book, a Jap machine-gun bullet snuffed out Ernie Pyle’s life on Ie Shima, a couple of
weeks before war’s end.
—JOSE P. BENGZON JIC., '53


36


  


Violence With Meaning


THE BROTHERS KARAMAZOV
By FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY
Modern Library, 1946


THE BROTHERS KARAMAZOV, Dmitri, Ivan, and Alyosha. Born of dif.
ferent mothers and reared separately from each other, yet truly Karamazoy in their passion. With these characters Dostoyevsky has written a
powerful novel, full of suffering, pathos, and the mysticism that belongs to
the Russian character. Although this story has its share of blood and violence, they are as nothing when compared to the spiritual struggle gnawing
within the characters.
The introduction of the father, Fyodor Pavlovitch, marks the turbulent
beginning of a turbulent chain of events. A more dissolute old man never
lived: not only does he carry on orgies of debauchery, but he likewise
neglects his sons who grow up to be almost strangers to one another.
Dmitri joins the army, is absorbed in wine and woman. Ivan, the more
sensitive and proud, becomes a brillant writer and an atheist. Alyosha enters the monastery. At once there arises a violent and passionate love
triangle involving Dmitri, his father, and the elusive and beautiful Grushenka. All have led notorious past lives. Fyodor tempts Grushenka with the
money he has swindled from Dmitri, who in turn threatens his father with
death. Another grotesque love triangle involves Ivan, Dmitri, and Ivan’s
lawful wife, Katerina Ivanova. She is placed in the psychologically impossible position of loving two men at the same time. Her peculiar Russian
character enables her to love Ivan, and by "self-laceration" persuade herself that she loves Dmitri as well. Smerdyakov, the valet, who has been
poisoned with the ideas of Ivan that “everything is lawful" murders old
Fyodor and later hangs himself. The circumstantial evidence against Dmitri
is damning. He is sentenced to Siberia. As in mest Russian novels of
crime, the end is full of self-purgation and repentance. In the midst of
plans for escape, Dmitri, Ivan, and Grushenka find new faith for the future.
So much for the physical aspect of the struggle in which Alyosha moves
about more as an angelic mediator than as a decisive participant. But the
force of this book is precisely in its portrayal of the intense spiritual suffering that underlies all the train of events. It is here where Dostoyevsky
reveals his understanding of the Russian soul.
Alyosha’s is a purely spiritual struggle of faith. He enters the monastery where he finds his idol in Father Zossima whom he believes to be
a saint, and therefore incorruptible. Despite the malice of Rakitin and
the profound but depressing philosophy of Ivan, Alyosha keeps his faith.
The death and corruption of Father Zossima shakes that faith to its foundations. But after having a dream of Father Zessima in heaven, Alyosha


OCTOBER, 1951


37


finds so much renewed faith that he reaches a passion of utter self-effacement. “There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds of
God, likening his soul to them, and it was trembling all over in contact with
other worlds.” In this is the reader brought before a vision of mystical
ecstasy at its peak.
No less brilliant is the portrayal of Dmitri, the most excessive of the
brothers. In him is perfectly exemplified the strange paradox of the human person, sensuous yet spiritual. Of him the prosecutor says, "While
his brothers seem to stand for Europeanism, and the principles of the
people, he seems to represent Russia as she is.” And indeed, for all his
lust Dmitri still preserves a high sense of honor. He cannot steal his
wife’s money to run after Grushenka to whom he has already pledged himself. Although the most shallow of the brothers, Dmitri, suffers from this
mixture of two extremes in character. But through much trial he also
receives faith to face the future.
Nowhere does the poignancy of spiritual struggle descend into murkier depths than in the soul of Ivan. His is a struggle of ideas. The key
to his philosophy is to be found in his grotesque poem, “The Grand Inquisitor". Here Christ is pictured as coming down to earth once more and
falling into the captivity of the Inquisition for "adding to what has been
said of old.” This is mainly an attack on human freedom. The Inquisitor
asks: "Didst Thou forget that man prefers peace and even death, to freedom of choice in the knowledge of good or evil?” The distorted excess of
love in Ivan is revealed in the words, “We will allow the people to sin because we love them, and the punishment for these sins we take upon ourselves.” But perhaps this is mere quibbling. In a moment Ivan, deciding
that “everything is lawful", plans on draining the cup of pleasure until
he is thirty, and then “dash the cup to the ground." In both passion and
impulsiveness he is typically Karamazov.
It is through this tormented intellectual that Dostoyevsky utters
his great message and warning:Man, if he choose, may disregard the existence of God, but he cannot deny the existence of the devil. Ivan is that
man who has turned his back on God. Having branded himself the parricide owing to his evil influence over Smerdyakov, Ivan undergoes hell in
his heart. Not only that, but the devil himself, in the guise of Ivan’s
character, appears before Ivan. In utter revolution Ivan, for all his
scepticism, performs a heroic act of faith, and finds what little peace of
conscience is left of him.


This book has its place in the world’s classical shelves. Few books
have been more powerfully written; fewer still have had a more profound
and sympathetic understanding of the spiritual struggle involved, a struggle
of great faith. Mature college students can appreciate this fact, and to
them is this book recommended.


If Dostoyevsky has portrayed exceptional characters, nonetheless they
are true. But all is not morbidly passionate, nor is the ending full of des

38


  


of the boy Ilusha and the sorrow of his classmates and of Alyosha. This
group represents the new Russian generation, struck early by tragedy, sensitive to pain, but full of affection and innocence. To them Alyosha addresses his tender “Speech at the Stone”: "And so in the first place, we
will remember him, boys, all our lives. And even if we are occupied with
the most important things, if we attain to honor or fail into great misfortune—still let us remember how good it was once here, when we were
all together, united by a good and kind feeling which made us, for the
time we were loving that poor boy, better perhaps than we are.”
On this note full of sorrow and hope, the light of dawn breaking after a dark night, Dostoyevsky ends a masterpiece.—ROMULO LARA, '53


AVA


REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
WORKS AND COMMUNICATIONS
BUREAU OF POSTS
MANILA


SWORN STATEMENT
(Required by Act No. 2580)
The undersigned, Gregorio C. Brillantes, editor of the  ,
published in English at the Ateneo de Manila, after having been duly sworn in
accordance with law, hereby submits the following statement of ownership, management, circulation etc., which is required by Act 2580, as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 201:


NAME


POST-OFFICE ADDRESS:


Editor: GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES .....................
Ateneo de Manila
Managing Editor: LEONIDAS BENESA .....................
Ateneo de Manila
Business Manager: ROBERT WILSON .....................
Ateneo de Manila
Owner: ATENEO DE MANILA ...................... . . . . ....
Ateneo de Manila
Ateneo de Manila
Publisher: ATENEO DE MANILA .........................
Printer: M. COLCOL & CO. ................................
36 Cruzada. Manila
Office of Publication: ATENEO DE MANILA ..............
Ateneo de Manila


In case of publication other than daily, the total number of copies printed and
circulated of the last issue dated August, 1951:


1. Sent to pald subscribers ... 600
2. Sent to others than paid subscribers ....... 100


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES
Editor-in-Chief
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ist day of October. 1951, at Manila.
Philippines, the affaint exhibiting his Residence Certificate No. A-3699246 issued
at Camiling, Tarlac, on March 29, 1951.


DOMINADOR CASTILLO
Post Office Inspector


(NOTE):—This form is exempt from the payment of documentary stamp tax.


OCTOBER, 1951


39


JOSE CASTILLO, '55


the rememorance


ONE SATURDAY AFTERNOON,
after translating my Catullus, I got
my Daily Roman Missal to prepare
it for the next morning’s Mass. As
I opened the missal, I found a small,
white card adorned with red lace
around it. In the upper right-hand
corner were three little silver bells
and below was a picture of a small
chateau covered with a white cloak
of snow. I opened the card with certain care, and found a simple yet
loving note. It went like this:
"For you, my boy, on this 25th of
December Please offer one Mass
and Communion for me.
With love—Mama.
Gently, I returned the card to its
place and went to the window and
stoed there, -taring at the long vista
of barren fields left untouched by
farmers’ hands. Minutes passed, and
still I stood there recollecting my
past seventeen years with Mama
when she was yet living.
My knowledge of God, I owe it to
her: she had instructed me in my
first catechism, taught me to recite
the Rosary. I did not know how I
could thank Cod Almighty for giving
me such a loving and very understanding mother.
In all my life, I would want nothing better than the soft voice, the
gentle touch, the tender face of my


mother. And now that her heart
had ceased to beat, all else around
me seemed to have died, too, to be
dead and gloomy. For me the earth’s
heart had ceased.
"O God,” I cried, "why did you
have to take her away from me?'
There, by the window, that Saturday afternoon, I sat for a while and
recited the rosary for her departed
soul. At the end of my prayer, )
kissed the Cross and asked God to
keep her with Him. I wanted to
weep, but the tears did not come, and
all I could feel was a sadness, a
quiet loneliness.
I tried now to dismiss the aching
thought from my mind. I stood up
slowly and went over to my study
table. Beside the books was a small
calendar. I had not noticed it before. The date was September 15th.
An odd thing, wasn’t it? For the
next day would have been my mother’s forty-seventh birthday.
That next day, I woke up early,
though I wasn’t used to doing so;
put on my Sunday best, and went
to Mass and Communion. I offered
that day’s Mass for my mother, and
there on my knees, asked God that
these sharp and loving memories of
her would never pass from me wholly, until the time when she and I
would be together once again.


AWA


40


  


Credo lor


October


THE SPECTACLE OF THE YOUNG MAN who is eager to go to the rice
paddies and the scrub-pine hills of Korea to "win world peace” is no longen
funny.
Day by day, it is becoming more and more of a tragedy. Today, there
is blood on those rice paddies, and there are little white crosses among
the scrub pines of those hills. The blood may be American blood, fed and
nourished by American winds. Or it may be Greek blood, rich with tradition and history. Under the white crosses may lie a South Korean youth,
who has known nothing but worry and hunger and fear. On again it may
be a twenty-year-old from Barrio Jangan, on the south coast of Masbate.
There is death on those paddies and tragedy on those hills. Dead men
who could have been alive today. Grief that could have been joy.
The peace cannot be won in Korea.
Nor can the peace be won by war.
Long long ago, long before the thirty-eighth parallel, long before V-E
Day and the Cold War, long before the Berlin airlift or the Politburo trials,
the solution for Korea and Cold Wars and Airlifts and the Politburo had
already been given. Long before the Second World War, the solution for
the Third World War had already been offered. It was a solution that
did not demand the use of jet planes or hydrogen bombs. It was the simplest of solutions.
It was the Holy Rosary.
Men are searching for solutions that do not exist. They are searching for something new. But they will not find it. The solution is something old. They have already found it. It is one of the most common
errors of man. To search for something he has in his pocket. We are
searching for solutions. Yet most of us have it in our pockets.
The Holy Rosary.
Man is half crazy, trying to forge a chain that will hold a crumbling
world together. He is going insane, trying to remain sane. He wants
peace so badly that he builds more guns and ships and planes. He wants
to be so safe that he builds atomic bombs and germ bombs. And yet the
solution is there. It has been, since 1917.
The Holy Rosary.
It is not too late. We have the Moth r of God behind us. It is not
too late. We have her Rosary behind us.
It is October.
Come, let us pray.


-MELITON V. SALAZAR, '53


TEMKRGMEECRRERRERRRRR


to Our Lady of bethlehem


the ateneo quarterly
december
1951


ARETNMMMMMMMRNMMMMMMMMMMKMKMMANMMMMMMMKMMMMMMMNAN
KKMMHHEMKTEEEMRKEMMMTCICMMIMMMAMTAMLRNARIEAREMMMNCGMCMMNMMG


contents
volume three, number three


prose
7
the dreamer
RENATO S. IRA
BENJAMIN P. BELEN
crucifixion at bethlehem
13
JAIME E. DY-LIACCO
the song of the Christmas stars 14
MELITON V. SALAZAR
what happened to bustamante
32
ARMANDO JOSON
37
Christmas is for the poor
VIVENCIO PERALTA
a story for Christmas
39
PLACIDO MAPA JR.
the greatest gift
44
FRED P. CLEDERA
merry Christmas, i love you
45
EMMANUEL TORRES
of books and things
53
poetry
MELITON V. SALAZAR 
Christmas night
21
ERNESTO SEVILLA
22
gifts
LEONIDAS V. BENESA
Christmas, 1951
22
EMMANUEL TORRES
lullaby for Christmas
23
EMMANUEL TORRES
figure of a crucifix on a wall
24
GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES my God is a helpless God, randaya 25
EMMANUEL TORRES
the renegades
26
LEONIDAS V. BENESA
seeds
27
GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES i wanted to build granite cliffs
27
EMMANUEL TORRES
28
lyrics
GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES
elegy for exiles
29
ANTONIO B. JOAQUIN
dry dust
30
EMMANUEL TORRES
o ant, the marvel of your poesy
30
reviews
EMMANUEL TORRES
drama sound and fury
48
GABINO MENDOZA JR.
books the poems of chesterton 51


   is published four times annually by the College of Arts
and Sciences. Ateneo de Manila. Its editorial offices are at the Ateneo de Manila,
Padre Faura Street, Manila, Philippines; its publlshing office at M. Colcol & Co..
878 Rizal Avenue, Manila. This publication was entered in the Post Office of Manila
as second class mailing matter on September 10, 1949.


bromontory


bethlehem: hiroshima
THE MODERN LITERARY WORLD is still reeling from the impact of some
novels written by two Catholic novelists, Graham Greene (Heart of the
Matter, Brighton Rock, The Power and the Glory), and the subtle Evelyn
Waugh (Brideshead Revisited). Their appeal lies in that the characters
they portray are found perennially wrestling with the problem of Good
and Evil, the clear concepts of which have been lost to modern minds, to
generations of men cut off from the mainstreams of traditionalism. The
way these novels were received in U.S. literary reviews gives the impression
that the problem of good and evil is a novel idea, a sort of a literary
Einsteinian discovery. For us Catholics, and a goodly number of people
outside Rome too, the problem is not new. It is as old as human nature
itself, dating back to the apple in the paradise of pleasure.
The problem is nothing new. Before Christ was born, the pagan world,
epitomized by licentious Athens and Rome, was a helpless victim in the
face of the problem. Man’s unaided nature simply could not cope with
it. The problem remained unsolved, with the emphasis on the evil. Then
came Bethlehem and the manger. For centuries after Christ, the Fathers
and the Doctors of the Church, in their writings and exhortations imbued with Christian supernaturalism, tilted the balance in favor of the
geod, giving the world a unity of peace it never experienced before. The
brilliant St. Augustine exertod great positive influence on Western thought,
followed by St. Thomas and a galaxy of others. Then came the great
religious upheaval which split Christian thought in two. Half of it is
known as Catholic traditional thought. The other half in turn gava way
to different streams of secular thought: Naturalism, Rationalism, Humanism, Agnosticism, Behaviorism. These are summed up in modernism, which
denies, or at least ignores the supernatural in man’s make-up, and dismisses anything that smacks of traditionalism as out-moded. The notions
of good and evil, i.e., of sin, which can only be fully validated by traditional
supernaturalism, have become cliches to be discarded.
But however man tries to ignore sin, he cannot escape it, and the consequences. For it is a fact based on unchanging human nature. The problem remains. Our world wars during the first half of this century are terrible testimonials to the fact of sin. For as Thomas Merton says in his Seven
Storey Mountain, the malice of one mortal sin is enough to wipe out
wholo cities. He wrote on the eve of World War II that we did not
realize “that the world had now become a picture of what the majority
of its individuals had made of their own souls. We had given our minds
and wills up to be raped and defiled by sin, by hell itself: and now, for


3


our inexorable instruction and reward, the whole thing was to take place
all over again before our eyes, physically and morally, in the social order..."


This December, 1951, in the Year of Our Lord, Jesus Christ, He comes


only solution to the Problem of Good and Evil. Unless we accept this
solution which He is offering us, we shall have, instead of Bethlehem,
Sudoms and Gomorrhas flowering in smoke on all continents.


—L.V.B.


reflections on a theme
I, silent night, holy night
SOMEDAY, perhaps by December of 1955—the date does not really matter — a bright, young band leader will record "Silent Night, Holy Night"
in mambo-time: one two-three, one two-three, the famous Guaracha Sisters warbling the old beloved tune to the sustained Afro-Cuban beat of
the tom-toms and the maraccas.
Now available at all record stores: "Silent Night, Holy Night" by
Miguelito and his South Americans. The records will sell like carnival
tickets on opening night. The platter-patter editors of the Sunday rotogravures will rave over this sparkling version of the Christmas hymn.
It’s new, it’s exciting, it’s wonderful — take it away! One two-three:
the tom-toms and the maraccas.
A Christmas gift for Chita, she’ll love it.
Just the one for that Christmas Eve dance.
It’s got that Christmas Spirit — you know, zostful and bouncy.
All is calm, all is bright: the marimbas and the syncopated drums,
the shrill hysteria of the coronets, the formless primitive undertones. Ladies and gentlemen, friends of the radio audience — here’s the hit tune
of the season, a fast number, everyone’s humming it — but first of all,
a word from our sponsor....
We are perhaps being too imaginativg: but it would not be at all surprising if someday, "Silent Night, Holy Night" is played to the accompaniment of jungle drums: for the materialism and frivolity of the times
have blurred and distorted the shining vision, the beautiful story that is
Christmas.
In the place of the Immense God who became a Child, in a gesture of
love, so that man could embrace Him, man looks to a mechanical Santa
Claus in a department store window to quench his thirst and ease his
hunger, the emptiness of his soul.
On Christmas Eve, the night-clubs and the dance-halls compete with


4


the churches in the number of devotees. A majority of the church-goers
attend the Midnight Mass out of an undefined sense of obligation: St.
Luke’s chronicle of the First Christmas fails to strike the responsive chord
in the heart: the night awaits another completion, the laughter at the
Christmas dinner.
We must have a Christmas tree, here, by the window. What will the
neighbors think?
Let the poor rot in their hovels of misery: they depress me: Christmas is a season for good cheer. Dear Sir: I have the honor to order a
hundred of your plastic pistols for my godchildren.
The Virgin-and-Child motif for our Christmas advertising. Appeal to
the masses. Make it in five colors. Courtesy of Superior, Inc., sole importers of Superior Shoes. Glory be to Commerce and Industry, hosanna!
Someday, a bright, young band leader will record "Silent Night, Holy
Night" in mambo-time. One two-threa: the tom-toms and the maraccas.
Sleep in heavenly peace: the Afro-Cuban cacophony, the screaming rhythm.
And perhaps on the flip-side, Comrades, Men of Peace and Good-will — the
“Internationale.”
Christe, eleison.
—G. C. B.


2. Christmas is revolution
IF THERE EVER has been an abused subject, in prose and poetry, in song
and story — that subject is Christmas. The world has found millions of
meanings for it. Christmas has become, through the two thousand years
of Christianity, a series of symbolisms. “Christmas is Santa Claus.”
Christmas is Bethlehem.” “Christmas is the Christmas card.” A salesman in Akron, Ohio, thinks of Christmas in quito a different way from
a salesman in Teheran, Iran; in Manila; in Cadiz, Spain; or in Lima,
Peru. In general, they all share the salesman’s attitude toward Christmas: “Christmas is the Christmas Sale.” Thera is the Christmas of the
ham-curers, of the tinsel-producers, of the toymakers. Children of cight
years or below have a different Christmas from those that are cighteen
or above. Christmas has become the jingle of sleigh bells in America:
it has become the midnight meal here.
All of these interpretations, all of these meanings, all of these symbolisms have only one thing in common.
All have lost the Spirit of Christmas, for Christmas, if it be grasped
rightly, is not so much the beginning of peace as it is the beginning of
war. It is not so much “Silent Night" as it is "Night of Thunder.” It
is not so much a season of silent glory as it is a season of wild triumph.
Christmas is Revolution.
A few weeks ago, the armies and the police forces in almost every
free country in the world braced themselves against the celebration of


5


another Revolution. Marxism was again celebrating its birthday. Communism had reached another milestone. All over the world, its converts
came out in shouting, cheering throngs. They formed huge parades. They
waved the large, lurid banners of a “conquering cause” From balconies


es. They sang. They danced. They laughed. They were so triumphant—
and so wrong.
We cannot envy them their cause. We cannot envy them their fate.
We can envy them only one thing.
They have the Spirit of Revolution.
Wa have lost ours.
What a glory Christmas must have been — during the days when
Faith and Triumph were young! The spirit was there, then, still unscarred, unweakened, unbled by condescension and indulgence and compromise, still strong, still fierce, still conquering! They must have had
parades, then, parades that would rival anything the Communists can organize today, not only in splondor, in triumph, in conviction, but also
i strong young faith, also in the singing realization that a promise had
been redeemed, that from then on, the road would lead only forward
and upward. They must hava sung songs, then, marching songs, joyous
songs ringing with the glory they had in their hearts!
But that was long ago, when Christmas and Christianity were young.
That was long, long ago, when faith could move mountains.
Today we must be contented with sleigh bells, and Christmas trees,
and presents wrapped in tinsel-green and midnight-blue. Today we must
sing "White Christmas" and prattle silly and meaningless thoughts about
Santa Claus and peace to all peaceful men.
Another Revolution looms on the horizon, it is young and strong and
all compact of spirit. But the Revolution that began on a frigid night
in December many lands and many years away is, it seems, old and weak.
It is dying. In most of its members, it is dead.
This is what Christmas should say to us. It is a cry and a warning and a remambrance of what we have, somehow, forgotten:—
Christmas is Revolution.


—M. V. S


6


RENATO S. IRA, '52


First Prize Short Story


the areamer


DECEMBER NIGHTS in Manila
come in a swift silent rush. Although it was only six-thirty, it was
already dark, and one by one the
lights of the ships in the bay blinked, uncertainly at first, and then
with a definite lustre.
Jess stood on the sea-wall watching worms of light from the ships
creep across the water toward him. A
chill steady wind whipped his hair into coarse strands. He put up the collar of his jacket, felt for his lighter and a cigarette. He flicked the
Ronson twice, but each time the wind
snuffed out the light. Cupping his


hands over the lighter, he tried
again. In a half minute he was
blowing out wisps of smoke that the
wind promptly seized and carried away.
“So this is Christmas Eve,” he
thought, shrugging. It was just another evening. Beneath the sound of
surf and wind, the low humming
whir from the pop-corn stands nearby came, carrying with it the pungence of melted margarine that assailed his nostrils. “Reality versus
Illusion," he said to himself. As
usual, Reality wins, a hundred to
nothing. He had come to watch a


7


star rise. That alone of his boyhood
pleasures remained, and he indulged
in it furtively, ashamed if anyone
should know. To watch a star rise
and glow in pristine purity in a virgin blue sky — that was illusion. To
hear corn popping, the flames beneath hissing, to hear a voice call
out “Balut!" loud, in the midst of a
dream — that was reality. There
was a detached, amused superiority
in his discreet glance at the lovers
who strolled slowly by or sat around,
in pairs, alone for the crowd about
them. That was illusion too, love,
The statement formed itself in his
mind. Love, the illusion that drew
poople into the trap that is society,
that is life, or reality. He thought
that smart. Life and love equal illusion. Therefore people and lovers—little children, all of them...
like Dody, his young brother, who
tonight would expect Santa Claus to
bring his electric train... like "Little Jess” the boy dreamer, once upon
a time... Why, everything beautiful was an illusion!
“Take Christmas,” he said aloud,
then looked around hastily to see if
anyone had heard him. No one had.
What was Christmas? Christmas
was a pine tree and colored lights
and tinsel, and plenty of good food
and shiny new things, if you had the
money. Or if you had none, it was
going to the houses of ninongs and
rich aunts and uncles. It was sing
ing the same songs every year starting at the end of November. “The
trouble with the world," he muttered to himself, "is that it’s such a
child. People just won’t grow up."
Dangle something bright before their
eyes and they believe it. The ugly
they refuse to see. The only real
thing was Communism, and it was
coming upon all of them, and nobody
seemed to see. Eyes were much too


covered with — well, pretty illusions
and make-believe...
LITTLE JESS sat in the middle of
the room beside a lighted pine tree,
caressing a big box of watercolors
that smelled so very new. He had a
sensitive face and his dark eyes,
grave for a boy of seven, were now
cleanly lit and twinkly like morning
stars. Mama and Papa, proud
young parents, stood watching him
with happy smiles. Their little boy
was going to be a painter, the finest artist in the country. The teachers had nothing but highest praise.
Little Jess, the child prodigy. Very
promising. And so sensitive. A real
artist, everybody said. And now at
Christmas, this graduation from crayons in answer to a long-voiced
wish.
There were pictures and pictures,
until that rainy afternoon when he
slipped on a leaf on the wet cement
driveway. He’d flailed the air for
balance, but momentum had started
and only his right hand broke the
fall. There were no more pictures
after that. Somehow the fingers
wouldn’t summon the fine painstaking lines. He cried and cried then,
and Mama’s voice, soothing like a
dove’s, said “There, there," over and
over. And then she locked up the
watercolors and the pictures.
The poems and stories came soon
after, the little poems and stories
that Mama stil kept with the abandoned watercolor pictures. And all
the time, through the grades and
high school, the wistful look was
slowly altering to provide a mask so
that surprise and pain would not
show too much. He remembered
Lito, his boyhood pal and idol. Tall
husky Lito who, at twelve, was on
all athletic teams. It was Jess"
birthday on another Christmas, and


8


he'd planned on a day with only Lito — a movie, a snack somewhere,
and then Mama’s cake. But Lito
couldn’t make it and Jess had smiled
and said it was perfectly okay. In
college he was a campus legend,
writing poems and stories that told
of a secret world of benuty ani peace
and an absence of hurt. There were
the girls, pretty young laughing
things, but somehow he felt it was
simply the writer’s hato that attracted them, like moths. Then there
was Neni, and somehow she was dif
ferent from the rest and he wanted
with all his heart to believe his
search was over, but her voice was
gentle when she said, "I’m sorry,
Jess, it’s not that way.” It was
funny how he couldn’t picture her
face at will, but with no effort at
all remembered her perfume. Times
when, walking along the Escolta,
he'd catch a whiff of Blue Grass
and he would turn and look, but
in the sea of faces hers was never
there.
The telescope ranged over the
years, picking out the high spots.
Then all the scenes drew to a focus and there emerged the image
of Little Jess that Christmas Day
so far away. And little Jess became the symbol of the pitiful plight
of dreamers and faith-holders in the
world, not to be laughed at really,
just — "Poor Little Jess...
FAINT SNATCHES of music from
one of the ships reached and roused
him. Upon the wail of a clarinet"White Christmas"... fancy that in
Manila, where the only snow that
could be found was in rich people’s
refrigerators.
With one finger he drew up the
sleeve from his left wrist. It was
seven-thirty. He would have to
bring the car back. Mama and Pa

pa were preparing for the Midnight
Mass. There you were. Even Mama and Papa, caught in the whole
senseless illusion. All of life was
an illusion. Oh well. Reluctantly
he moved away and started for the
car.
He drove through flaring streets
past houses, lantern-lit, and all the
radio stations seemed to have were
Christmas carols. Bing Crosby for
“White Christmas”, Jo Stafford for
“Adesta Fideles” The old, old songs
in Twentieth Century voices. Where
he turned into the less shiny streets,
there were stands selling rice cakes
and puto bumbong. Jess stopped to
buy a packet of puto bumbong for
Dody. The little fellow would get
a kick out of it, would eat it and
in fact remember to thank him only
when there were bits of coconut and
sugar on his cheeks and nose.
“Here’s Jess, here’s Jess, Dody’s
high piping voice came to him as
he swung the car into the driveway. Dody, all of eight years in
flannel pajamas, was standing near
the tall Christmas tree with a big
star atop it; he danced up to Jess
with sounds of pleasure.
“Have something for me, Jessie?” he asked, round eager eyes
shining.
“Yep. Here. But don’t show Mama or you won’t get a bite of it,
Jess said, handing him the leaf
packet.
"Why? Is this bad?”
Dody, thought Jess, was too young
to be assailed by scruples.
"Mama said if I’m not good, Santa Claus won’t come with my new
train," Dody said. “Is this bad?”
he asked again.
"No-o. But Mama’s funny, you
know. Thinks I shouldn’t feed you


9


all sorts of things just before bedtime.
“Oh!” Dody’s little face was
bright with understanding. Mama’s
being "funny" when it came to being concerned over either of her
boys was a matter of fraternal conspiracy between them. It was an
alliance in which Dody took great
pride. Jess rumpled Dody’s hair.
“Be off now, guy."
Dody scampered away.
The scent of jasmine perfume
preceded Mama by a good five seconds before she walked into the
room in a soft gray shiny gown.
At forty-five, beauty was giving way
to grave charm and dignity.
"How’s
Jess kissed his mother.
my girl?" he asked.
“We were afraid you would be
late, Jesus. Don’t forget about Dody’s train. You are to put it under
the tree when he’s asleep. It’s the
big package, the only one wrapped
in blue,” his mother said.
“You’re sure you want to keep up
this rigmarole?” he asked. "Why
don't I just tell him, 'Look, Dody,
from Mama and Papa’? The kid
will be just as happy."
“You'll do nothing of the sort,
young man. You’re not going to
spoil the child’s Christmas with
your cynicism,” Jess’ mother said,
a trace of reproach edging her
voice.
Jess grinned. "Okay, Ma. It’s
Santa Claus for Dody. But he’ll
have to grow up someday — thought
I’d help him feel less silly when he
finds out it was all make-believe.
“That’s one way of looking at it,
Jess, his mother said gently.
"Opening your heart to let in the
spirit of it is another, even if you
call it make-believe. Tell me, hon

estly, are you ever as truly happy
as when you were little?'
“You mean, when I was "Little
Jess’, the sad-faced dreamer?” Jess
laughed. "Aw, Ma. But let’s not
have any melodrama. Dody shall
be as gullible as Little Jess was, for
as long as Mama pleases.
“That will be as long as I want
you both happy,” his mother said.
“Why aren’t you at Ronnie’s party?
Jess made a helpless gesturc.
"Too old for that sort of thing.
His mother scoffed. "Too old at
twenty-three?” Mama put up her
hands.
Jess squashed his cigarette on an
ash tray, blowing the last breathful of smoke to the ceiling. All the
servants were out. Dody was upstairs, trying hard to sleep so that
Santa Claus would bring him his
electric train. The house was so
still that as Jess fixed his glance
upon the Christmas tree, the colored
lights seemed to give off little
sparkling sounds, like the time long
ago when he hadn’t seen a cricket
and thought that cricket song came
from the stars at early evening.
Dody’s train in the big blue package was reposing on a prominent
place bencath the tree.
“Lucky fellow, Jess said, thinking of Dody and his child-like faith.
He yawned. “I could stand some
sleep myself.”
In his room Jess readied his bed,
making sure the windows were open
to let in the chill night air. Outside, fog and the Christmas lamps
in people’s windows and gardens diluted the darkness so that it was
softened to a half light and was
no longer darkness. He thought of
Mama and Papa amidst clinking
glasses and restrained laughter...


10


At Ronnie’s, the girls and the fellows would break up the party before midnight to go to Mass. How
many Christmases ago was he one
of them? Oh well, a fellow outgrew such things. He yawned.
What time was it? Ten, perhaps...
or eleven. The images in his mind
stopped coming. He was asleep....
SPIRALING, swirling mist cleared
for a moment, for just a brief moment, enough for Jess to see a light
at some distance from where he stood
in a narrow unfamiliar street
swathed in white. The dark, silent houses on the sides of the street
were bulks of whito. What queer
architecture, he thought. And it
was horribly cold. Like the time
he and some classmates visited an
ice plant and were shut in the cold
room for half an hour. They had
shivered like lost kittens, chilled to
the bone. Only this was much colder. “What the—” Jess said. "For
Pete’s sake — snow!"
Mist swirled again, and it began
to snow. The flakas fell in silent,
gentle pelts, glistening silver whenever caught in the oblique uncertain
light. “I shall freeze,” Jess thought.
“I hope I’m dreaming. He walked
around, hoping to see some people,
but there was no one about. The
street was deserted.
Jess knocked at the door of one
of the dark silent houses. There
was no answer: no sound stirred
from within. With the boldness of
desperation, he turned the knob.
It gave way, the door opened. Jess
went in.
It was a large room, dimly lit
from an old-fashioned wick lamp.
His cyes took in the strange interior decor. He turned up the wick
of the lamp so that the light shone
brighter and he could see things


more clearly. Lining the walls
were books, at least several hundreds of them. “What next?” Jess
said aloud.
There was a rustle somewhere.
Jess turned. A girl, apparently asleep on what seemed to be a sofa,
stirred. She opened her eyes.
“Oh, hello," she said, rising.
“Hello,” Jess answered. This is
fantastic, he thought. She hadn’t
spoken in English, but he had understood and, what was worse, had
answered in the same language.
“You look cold," she said. Her
voice was pitched low but clear.
“As a matter of fact, I am. I...
I hope you don’t mind my barging
in like this,” he said. As an explanation, he added, "I knocked."
She smiled. “I must have fallen
asleep. She gestured toward some
books on the sofa. "I was reading."
“What were you reading?” he
asked politely.
"All about the different cultures,
about the history of civilization.
You know it’s overwhelming when
you think of what people have gone
through all these centuries," sho
said, not a little sadly.
“Yes,” he said. “It’s overwhelming.
She was silent. Jess started to
fidget, felt for his lighter, but his
cigarettes were all frozen. He looked around the room. The calendar
said pointedly, "December 24.”
“My name is Zoe, the girl said.
“What’s yours?”
“Jess. That is, Jesus, he replied.
“How interesting,” she said.
“Names have origins and meanings.
Mine, for instance, is of Greek extraction and means 'life'."


11


“Oh, you’re Greek?'
“Russian. My father was a professor of Greek mythology. What
does your name mean?"
“I was born on Christmas Day.
They named me after our Saviour,
Jess explained.
Her eyes were wide with surprise.
“Christmas? Saviour? I don’t understand."
Jess threw a gesture at the calendar. “Tonight is Christmas Eve.
I was wondering if the people here
had forgotten. Tomorrow will be
Christmas. Everybody will rejoice
because Christ will have been born."
“You said your name was Jesus."
“That’s His name. Jesus Christ.
It’s a beautiful name.
"Please, she said. "I don’t understand."
Jess looked at her. It was incredible. But it was true. She did
not know.
Jess found himself telling her of
the Birth in Bethlehem, of the Child
Whom the angels and the stars in
the firmament, the shepherds and
distant kings, came to worship.
Moved by an eloquence he never
knew he possessed, he was speaking
of that beautiful night when all the
world of nature, the trees and the
flowers and the stones, became bathed in a magic glow. because Our
Lord had sent His Son to redeem
mankind. He told of the Mass, and
the words, coming back to him now,
sent a thrill through his hoart. ...
grant that by the mystery of this
water and wine we may be made
partakers of His Divine nature, who
vouchsafed to be made partaker of


our human nature..." In all art,
there was nothing with more perfection than Christmas.
There was a lump in his throgt
and he felt like crying, but Jess
never felt so good and warm in his
heart. The warmth grew, and
spread, and diffused, melting all the
snow, clearing the mist.
Awake now, Jess could face facts.
There was that girl, learned and
beautiful. Her name was "life,"
she said. She was life with beauty
and lore, but devoid of Christmas
or any knowledge of it, and therefore cold and dark and empty. All
this he saw in the dream. And he,
in his pride, had scoffed at the
child’s faith that made the simple
act of looking heavenward a ritual
and a prayer in itself. Christmas
was no illusion. It was as real as
Mama’s love, the same love that
shone in the Virgin’s face when she
gazed upon her Child that night.
While telling the story of Christmas
to someone who had never heard
of it, he had felt like crying; unashamed now he let the tears fall.
It was not a dream; it was a message.
It was probably morning. The
cold had deepened. But Jess felt
curiously warm and light-hearted,
as if a coating of frost had chipped
and fallen off. As he got up to
close the windows, he caught a glimpse
of himself in his dressar mirror.
He walked to the glass. The eyes
that looked back at him, dark but
clear in their depths, were familiar.
He had seen them somewhere before.
He grinned. “Merry Christmas,
he said, "Little Jess.”


AUA


12


BENJAMIN P. BELEN, '55


First Prize Essay


crucitixion at petnienem


CHRISTMAS is still weeks away
but already the soft gleam of its
bright jeweled star spears through
the hazy mists of morning and stirs
the fires of hope and expectation
in the hearts of men.
Yes, for years, many a Christmas
night has come and many a Christmas night has gone. But still with
all the charm and freshness of a
budding flower, it never fails to
catch the warm welcome of some
tender heart. It never fails to add
a sparkle, a gleam of joy to some
hearth, be it marble-gilded or drab
and unscrubbed on some dingy, lonely street in Tondo.
What a treasure chest of joys
unlocks itself on Christmas Day -
the peals of laughter that hover
during the media noche, the crisp
rasp and crackle of Christmas paper as we unwrap our gifts, the
many nights when we lie in bed and
listen to the clear, pure chime
of the church bell or lio half entranced by the soft, peaceful strains
of a Christmas carol.
This is Christmas and nothing in
the world equals it — and this
because of a Man who was also God,
who broke the chains that enslaved
the human heart, taught it the real
meaning of life of which Christmas
seems to be a perpetual reminder.
What is Christmas really? What
is this joy that is so peculiarly
Christmas-ish, if we can coin the
word? Let us hack through all the


gaudy tin-foil, cast away all Christmas trees for a while and hold this
gem, naked and gleaming, in our
bare hands. You say that on Christmas we give — we forget ourselves.
But whence comes the joy of giving—
that heart-satisfying thrill that
comes with such a heart-crushing
act — sacrifice?
The answer reads like a chapter
from a fairy book. But it is a million worlds better because it is true.
There was the Son of the Greatest
Being that exists, the Son who, unasked, unobliged — took on flesh
and blood, exchanged His cternal
joys for our earthly sorrows, undertook the greatest of humiliations
in order that we might regain our
full dignity as men.
That was the first Christmas
gift. There was no rustle of tinfoil, or crackle of stiff Christmas
paper to wrap it. There was the
rustle of hard itchy straw, the rough
unplaned wood of a manger for a
gift box, and in it was a Baby,
lips blue from the cold winds, barely covered with swaddling clothes,
into Whose Heart was crammed the
intention of thirty-three years of
pain which would end on Calvary.
This is the joy of Christmas
the joy of the fallen but redeemed,
not the peace of defeat but the victory after the rage and fury and
pain of battle, joy that comes from
the anguish, the agony of the sinful
but repentant son which is man himself coming home to the forgiving
heart of his Father.


13


JAIME E. DY-LIACCO, '52


Second Prize Short Story


tne song of the
Christmas stars


ENTENG Q. OLPOK pressed the
hand of his wife as they knelt together in one of the pews inside the
old town church. It was Christmas
Eve, and Enteng had come for the
Midnight Mass with his family.
He was 62, and he had never felt
so serenely happy in his life as he
did tonight. Tonight, he felt he
had every reason to thank God.
Why, Enteng thought happily, if the
many blessings He has showered on
me were tabulated, they would read
like an inventory.
As a matter of fact, twelve of
those blessings were kneeling in the
same pew with him tonight. He
pressed his wife’s hand again as he
leaned back a little to admire his
eight sons and three daughters
strung along the pew to his right
in order of age. They were all
healthy and clean-looking. Talented
too! — Enteng thought — like me,
naturally. Some of them were already married, and their own families were in the two following pews
behind them. On Christmas Eves,
it was customary for all eleven of
them to line up by age and kneel
in the same pew with Enteng.
But of course, Enteng felt that
the biggest and greatest blessing of
all was the woman who knelt beside
him, and whose left hand he held
warmly in his right hand. Her
hair, like his, was graying now.
But her eyes were as brilliant as


ever, and they still intoxicated him.
Padre Diego, the old parish priest,
ambled out shortly with two little
acolytes following him. When he
married us, Enteng mused, he was
very young. We were all very
young then. I wonder if Padre
Diego can even see three meters
ahead of him without those thick
glasses he wears now. I suspect
he says the Mass entirely out of
memory. He was a talented young
priest. Always had a good memory.
Baptized every one of my fine young
boys and girls here.
He leaned back again to look at
his eight sons and threc daughters.
He was about to turn around and
smile at his in-laws and grandchildren at the rear, when his wife
sharply pulled his hand.
“Teng!” she whispered, “the Mass
is beginning."
Enteng quietly folded his hands on
the pew and tried to compose his
thoughts. But tonight, he felt uncontrollably happy. The emotion he
felt was like the warmth which came
with a full, satisfying meal — also
a full, satisfying life. For an old
man in such a mood, composing
one’s thoughts is like cupping a bee
in one’s hands.
For a moment, Enteng’s thoughts
wavered on Padre Diego’s voice.
That was disastrous. For the voice
of Padre Diego carried Enteng forty years back into the past. It


14


always did, whenever Padre Diego
intoned the Confiteor at the foot
of the altar in that tremulous, pleading voice of his which he reserved
for special occasions like tonight, or
like that night forty years back in
1924 — the memory of which always
made Enteng feel very sheepish and
small.
CHRISTMAS EVE, 1924, Enteng
knelt uneasily in his pew. Padre
Diego, the young, newly ordained
assistant to the parish priest, was
saying his first Midnight Mass. The
aging parish priest was ill.
As Padre Diego intoned the Confiteor at the foot of the altar, Enteng shifted restiessly in his pew.
It seemed that all of Enteng’s heart
flowed into that one prayer, and his
blood pulsated with the trembling
timbre of the young priest’s voice.
He felt particularly pained as the
young priest beat his breast and
cried, "Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea
marima culpa...
"What am I to do, Lord?” Enteng
moaned inwardly He felt perplexed, lost, and miserably out of tune
with the Christmas spirit all around
him. He was graduating that year
from college with no prospect of a
prosperous job. There were already
too many lawyers in the nation. But
that was not the problem. He was
twenty-three and would soon be
twenty-four. That was the whole
trouble. Because for him, twentyfour was the Dangerous Age, the
Terrible Age. Twenty-four was the
marrying age.
Normally, Enteng would have
sailed into the Terrible Age with
high, adventurous spirits. But how
could he when an aching weight
pulled his heart down? And wherever Enteng’s heart went, his spirits always followed.


*K


The aching weight sat two pews
ahead of him. A black Spanish veil
shrouded her head. Her sweet head,
Enteng thought. Sweet — that’s
the word for her. Sweet head. Sweet
fragrant hair. Sweet mandolin
laughter. Sweet eyes, like pools of
wine. Lips of honey. Sweet Marinela. Everything’s sweet about
her. Everything — except, except—
hang it all! Why does she have
to be tall?
I was sixteen when I fell in love
with her. She was thirteen then.
Funny, how at sixteen, a boy’s heart
is like a restless colt in spring. It
leaps and kicks at the most unpredictable times. It happened only at
my school’s yearly public elocution
contest. why did it have to happen there? Why did it have to happen at all?
Enteng had gotten to the last line
of Patrick Henry’s famous speech


15


when Marinela came down the aisle
with her mother. Following the
fashion of the times, they had purposely come in late.
Maybe it was his excitemant, maybe it was the heat of his emotionwhatever it was, it came like spring
with birds and flowers and fluffy
pink clouds. It was the sight of
Marinela, looking suddenly very
pretty in her red dress, with a red
ribbon knotting her hair at the
back, which telegraphed the Shock
into his heart. Before Enteng
knew what exactly happened, his
young heart was deliriously leaping
and kicking.
The sensation was new to him.
Like a child, he clutched his chest
instinctively — the commotion being there — and his mouth dropped
open. “Give me liberty or give
me —" That was when the lightning struck and turned his heart
into a spring colt. There was a
long, agonizing pause. His face visibly struggled to regain the lost
word so brusquely kicked out. Perspiration collected on his upper lip
and glistened on the tip of his nose.
What was the word? Doggone it -
what is that word? Painfully, he
rolled his eyes about, seeking help
here, secking help there. Then he
gasped out: "—death!'
With the help of the colored footlights, the effect was devastating
The people howled. His friends
cheered and stamped their fect. The
judges later voted him winner
unanimously. But what tickled him
was the sight of Marinela applauding vigorously and stamping her
feet like the rest.
Enteng looked upon the incident
as divinely planned, and from then
on, he was madly in love with Marinela. As a matter of fact, he re

garded it as a sort of commission,
a gentleman’s obligation, to be mad
ly in love with her. He told her
so. He told her after much stammering of course, but he told her
nevertheless that their love was “the
song of the stars from all eterni“It must have boen so, Maty."
rinela,” he told her
otherwise,
how account for that mysterious occurrence at the school’s auditorium?
At thirteen, a girl is a flower bud
opening in the springtime. And boys
are bees in the youthful magic of
a girl’s adolescent heart. Enteng
happened to be the first stammering bee to come Marinela’s way; and
much to the stammoring Enteng’s
relief, Marinela dreamily agreed that
her part in helping Enteng win the
elocution contest was divinely foreordained, and that their love must
have, really begun to burn with the
first created star.
Everything would have turned out
all right. Only at sixteen, Enteng
seemed to have stopped growing.
That would have been all right too.
But Marinela kept right on shooting up like a green bamboo stalk.
Enteng watched her grow with
increasing uncasiness. When Marinela was sixteen, she began wearing thin-rubber-soled abaca sandals
whenever she was with Enteng. At
eighteen, she had grown two inches
more, and even going bare-footed
would not help at all. Enteng had
started wearing elevator shoes. But
even that did not help much except
for about six relieving months. Marinela was twenty now.
It was at this time that Enteng
decided that something drastic had
to be done. Even a starlit romance
must have to end when it begins
to border on — not even border
on but — crashes into the incongruous. There is nothing so em

16


barrassingly unromantic for a boy
as keeping company with a girl taller than he by three and a half
agonizing inches. Besides, there was
the matter of people laughing at
him.
It had gotten to be that whenever they stepped out together, they
had to keep to the back alleys and
the deserted streets. Then they began going out together only in the
evenings, when darkness made recognition difficult. Their beautiful
romance had become the big joke of
the town.
“The whole town’s laughing at us,
Lord,” Enteng opened his heart out
as he prayed together with Padre
Diego’s first Midnight Mass. "God,
what will I do? Ell be twenty
four soon, and that’s — that’s the -
the Tarrible Age. But I can’t marry her, Lord. We’ll be laughed at
all our lives. Never mind them
laughing at me, but it’s her I’m
thinking about. I can’t just drop her
cither. The pain of loss will be
unbearable. Why, that will be like
pulling out all our front teeth.
That’s how close we are, Lord."
Padre Diego was giving his sermon. He spoke of simple shepherds
on the hilltop, of angels singing in
the heavens, of three wise men who
followed a big star and found the
Divine Star. The young priest
spoke of love and sacrifice. God
made man out of love. God became
man out of love. God’s love was a
story of sacrifice. And that is how
it should be among men. True love
is a giving, not a taking. True
love is sacrificing, generous, unselfish. That is why there is so much
trouble in the world today. People
do not know how to love truly....
Enteng knew then what he would
do. His heart was heavier, and his


spirits sank lower. But the only
honorable course left to him was
clear. Padre Diego’s sermon pointed it out. Enteng prayed the Lord
for strength.
As the people poured out of the
church, Enteng kept his eyes on her.
When they were out on the dark
streets, he quickened his pace, and
nearing her, he called out softly,
"Marinela.
She turned around and gasped,
“Teng! Teng, Merry Christmas!"
“Merry Christmas, Marinela.
“Teng, where have you been all
evening? I was waiting for you to
come and get me for the Midnight
Mass. You said you would come
for me. That’s why I didn’t go
with mother and father. We always
go together every year, remember?”
“I — I —" Enteng’s throat lumped at the beauty and warmth which
met him, which smiled at him, which
always made him want to run and
climb trees and swim oceans and
ring all the bells in the town church.
It was like the moment she glided
down the aisle while he delivered
Patrick Henry’s patriotic cry. Only
this time, his heart did not kick in
ecstatic leaps. A raging force tore
it apart and rammed the pieces up
his throat.
“I — I— I — forgot. I’m sorry."
He gulped and faltered.
"Oh,” Marinela said.
They walked in silence for a
while. He did not take her hand.
He looked up at the skies, and he
thought that the stars looked dull
tonight.
A roving band of urchins, singing
hoarse Christmas carols, accompanied by the oomp-pah-pah of homemade bamboo flutes, passed them.
He thought he heard them snickering as they passed. He glanced at


17


Marinela. She was looking straight
ahead. Did she hear them too? he
thought.
As they neared the plaza, Enteng
spoke, "Marinela, let’s not go home
yet. It’s Christmas and your mother won’t mind. Let’s go sit on the
bench under the big narra tree in
the plaza."
Narra trees lined the town plaza.
They went to the leafiest and biggost, whose leaves and branches
overhung a lonely corner of the plaza. Nobody else was around when
they got there. Except for the
starlight filtering through the
branches, it was dark there under
the tree.
“Marinela, he gulped. "I want to
talk to you about... about... He
stopped and there was a long, agonizing pause.
“About what, Teng?” she said
softly.
“About — you and me.”
“Yes?'
“You see, it’s — it’s like this."
The words came out of Enteng painfully. “You and I have — well,
have been going steady for the last
seven years. I —I first told you I
loved you when I was just sixteen.
And — and I think at that age....
well....
“I think I understand,” Marinela
said. “You told me then that our
love was sung by the first created
star. That was seven years ago.
We were just children then and a
little foolish. But you know, maybe
you were right. Seven years have
passed, and here we are, under this
tree, still in love with each other.
I think it’s wonderful, don’t you?'
She smiled — and Enteng felt like
ripping the narra tree into firewood
with his bare hands.


“Ahh — y-yes. He stammered.
“But — but Marinela, is it not
strange that... that... he could
not go on. But he knew he must,
he must. He must. Did not Padre
Diego say that true love was sacrificing? Besides, he could still hear
those cursed urchins snickering behind his back. He started all over
again. "Marinela, is it not strange
that — you — and I — should fall
in love...
“It was divinely fore-ordained,"
Marinela whispered.
"No!
I mean it’s our
HEIGHTSI" Enteng blurted out in
uncontrollable anguish.
She said nothing. She merely
gazed out into the darkness and toyed with her fingers on her lap.
Enteng continued. “You — you
understand. This — this farce...
and the words cut deeply, "... cannot go on forever. Why — why, people ara laughing at us. We look
like Mutt and Jeff. You’re Mutt,
and I’m Jeff,” he said bitterly.
“I don’t mind it so much myself.
But it’s you I think about. I don't
want people laughing at you, he
said hurriedly.
Marinela gazed out into the darkness and toyed with her fingers. She
said nothing at all. Maybe, Enteng
thought, maybe she had been longing for this moment to come. Maybe, she wanted this all along! The
thought made him frantic. Maybe
he was not being a martyr after
all!
“Marinela, please say something,
he whined. “You understand, don't
you? We can’t just go on....
“Teng," she spoke very softly,
"you are not twenty-five yet. There
... there is still hope.”
"But I stopped growing at six

18


teen! While you — why you’ll grow
and grow and grow until you’re
twenty-five. And you’ve just turned twenty!” He was shouting.
The night was suddenly very
quiet. In the dim starlight filtering through the branches and leaves
of the tree, Enteng thought he detected one or two stars gleam in
Marinela’s eyes. Were her eyes wet?
“I’m sorry," he repented. "I didn’t
mean to hurt you. It’s just thatit’s no use.” He spoke quietly, with
all the emotion gone. “I have tried
all sorts of stretching exercises and
correspondence courses on height
increase. All I ever got from them
were pains in the neck and the appetite of a hog.” Now the bitterness returned to his voice. "What’s
worse: I ate a lot and never showed any results for it. My mother
thought that maybe worms in my
insides were eating up all the food.
She gave me weekly doses of castor
oil. She stopped it finally after
six months. It whittled me down
terribly. I never quite recovered
from it. I’ve been a little bit on
the thin side ever since.
The darkness was quiet again.
Then Marinela spoke, and she
spoke very quietly, almost inaudibly, "Teng, you... you can wear elevator shoes. I hear they make one
seem tall. I...I wouldn’t mind.”
Enteng coughed. "I am wearing
elevator shoes now,” he moaned.
Silence again.
“Teng,” Marinela said. “I hear
there is a doctor in Manila who
gives injections to make people grow.
You... you...
"I’ve tried that too,” he cut in
sharply. “That’s why I overstayed
in Manila last summer after school
closed.... It’s hopeless.


Silence again. And in the silence
cried the pain of young hearts breaking.
Marinela sat quietly with her
hands folded on her lap. Drops began to trickle down her cheeks. She
got her handkerchief and gently
wiped them off. But they kept coming, and she kept the handkerchief
near her eyes.
"Please don’t ery,” Enteng croaked.
“You love somebody else, she sobbed.
“No, believe me...
“You don’t love me anymore."
“But I do...
“Then why do you want to break
our... our engagement?”
“Engag— but, but — Marinela!"
“You have found someone else.
“No! — I’ve loved you since I was
sixteen!” he burst out. "Please try
to understand."
“I loved you when I was thirteen.
I still love you now. You... you
said," she sobbed and spoke haltingly, “our love was sung by the stars
from all eternity, and.. and I believed you. And — and I still believe it... and her voice broke and
she began weeping steadily and
softly.
And Enteng understood. It had
never occurred to him that it was
he who had wanted things to come
out this way. It was he who had
felt the embarrassment and the
shame. It was he who had always
wanted to take the back alleys and
the deserted streets. It was he who
was weak and selfish and couldn’t
stand the laughter of the rabble.
He had not really had her in mind.
It was Enteng he had always been
thinking of: Enteng, the self-con

19


scious, self-centered lover who stood
more or less four feet and eleven
and three-fourths inches tall with
ordinary leather shoes on
more or less depending on whether
the heels were new or worn down.
But now he understood. And he
felt abashed. The full impact of
her love hit him and caught him and
lifted him up, up, up until he
thought he was flying among the
stars.
The true spirit of Christmas
struck him like resounding gongs as
Marinela wept. He began to understand that Christmas was the spirit
of love “which surpasseth all understanding” True love is sacrificing
and generous and unselfish. But
true love is also eternal. And Enteng knew that despite his talks of
stars and eternity, he had been one
of those people who did not know
how to love truly.
As she wept in the darkness, a
balled ache welled up in his own
chest, broke through his tightened
throat, and watered his eyes. He
tried to kecp it back inside him. He
tore his eyes away from her and
fastened them to the stars above
the tops of the narra trees lining
the plaza. Strangely enough, the
stars no longer seemed dull as they
did earlier in the evening. They
were twinkling and glowing now like
softly glistening diamonds. Before
he could do anything about it, something inside him was kicking and


leaping furiously like a frisky young
horse in spring.
Choking and stumbling, he whispered deliriously, "Marinela, will yau
marr—"
“TENG, WAKE UP" his wife nudged
him. “The Mass is over. You have
been dozing in church again.
"Huh? Oh, no, no. I was just —
just
He looked at his wife,
and he smiled at her queerly. "
just thinking," he said. If you only
knew, he thought with some amusement.
“Well, let us go then,” she said.
“The food for our media noche will
get cold."
“Oh, yes, yes, let us go.” Enteng
got up, his wife got up, and his
eight sons and three daughters together with their own families got
up.
As he surveyed his clan, Enteng
felt immensely warm, and happy,
and proud of them. They were all
healthy, neat and clean-looking, and
talented — like him, naturally. He
chuckled. They were also all very
good-looking and very tall with brilliant eyes like his wife — quite naturally. He chuckled again as he
looked up into his wife’s eyes which
were like pools of aged wine, and
Marinela looked down at him and
smiled the smile which always made
him want to run and sing and ring
all the bells in the old town church.


AWA


20


MELITON V. SALAZAR, '54


First Prize Poem


Caristmas nignt


The Singing Legions made the sky
Powdery-bright,
Like dust-specks, swirling, caught within
A beam of light,
Each with a fierce, primeval glow
Starring the night.
“There is no peace on Earth tonight,
The Son of God is born!
Beat, drummers! Bugler, sound the call!
Waken your golden horn!
“Glad legions, stir the midnight air!
And rouse the voiceless deep!
The King — Our King! — has come to Earth,
Shall any creature sleep?
"No, God forbid! Awake! Arise!
The stars dance in the sky!
The Universe has wept to hear
A new-born baby cry!
“Behold! The pale moon bows and shakes
A tear from each pale eye.
Each silver ray upon the hills
Is like a silver sigh.
“This night will be a tidal-wave
To cleave the seas of time!
A flood to wash, engulf all peaks,
And smother every clime!"
“Glory to God! Peace be to you,
Men of Good-will!'
They sang a last fierce paean of joy
Over a hill,
Above a new-born Child who lay
Sleepy and still.


21


ERNESTO SEVILLA, '55


Second Prize Poem


Blessed monarchs from the distant East,
Floating over warm dunes in the night,
Bearing gifts of gold
Frankincense and myrrh,
Love and Honor for the newborn Light.
Barefoot servants of the wealthy dons,
Running softly through the singing air,
Bearing gifts of wines,
Necklaces and toys,
And mantillas for milady's hair.
Grimy soldiers with their weapons cocked,
Trudging onward through the bloody snow,
Bearing gifts of pain
Flying steel and death,
Ruin and sorrow for the Chinese foe.


LEONIDAS V. BENESA, '52
Caristmas, 1951
The thoughts of the proud are hungry wolves
Howling for blood (Your Blood!)
Let my thoughts be tame lambs
That by Your straw-bed nod,
And make them clean-clear as snow,
My Infant God.
Fierce winds howl in icy fits and growl,
Frightening the trembling countryside;
It is cold, Jesus, this sharp breath of death,
This world's winds of Pride:
May these wrap You warm tonight,
My wishes crucified.


22


Lookl one bright noble wish (the Star!)
Shine softly, kindly, Light that brings
On camels of Humility my wishes three
(These be the three wise Kings):


Imaginings.


You ask for my three gifts, Jesus? For myrrh
Receive my chastened Appetites,
For incense my Intellections, bold as mornings,
To chase off the world's dark nights,
For gold, Love, transfigured lovely by Faith
On Thabor heights.


Now Apocalyptic songs drown out the Cherubims'
While men slam their wills shut in grim
Unwelcome: they would not give You room.
Yet, God of mercy, bless them!
May my conscience, sober as virtue, be
Your Bethlehem.


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53
lullaby for Christmas
Sleep, Sweet Child; do not weep.
Only the shadows of leaves creep
On dumb white walls: no demon ghost
To haunt You from the City Lost.
Deep, deep, on dreamblue breast
Think not, My Babe, of the thunder lest
Crying the elves of night might hear
(Those are Mars' bootheels marching near).
Lasten not to the Hounds of Hate,
Nor whimpering wind of man’s fallen fate;
But dream, dream of songwhite star
Beautiful as fable in the blue deserts far
Where angels sing of a Pauper King
Whose liveloves from nailed palms will bring
A pillar of light in our secular earth,
That we may wake from slums to innocent rebirth!


23


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


figure of a crucifix on a wall


Out of the dayblind darkness of my room,
The pitch-flamed heat of conquering time
Invades the beaten skull with nebulous
Nightmares for a swifter doom
Than living death. For in broad light
I walked among strangers, builders of stone cities,
Spoke the jewelled word when heels
Turned round as from a leper with bells:
Their hates were buried mines plotting my disaster.
From the sweating palm falls the dry dust
Of a secret rose.
Trembles on leaden eyetips
Radium image of the Hanged Man,
Glows in the whirling darkness of a wall
In loud pantomine of anguish.
Although eye does not see the plastic tree
Where the outstretched arms are horizontal,
Where the wracked back plunging earthward is vertical,
Criminal cross is made.
His poor body sweats
In the cold heat of luminescent silence.
And I think of Him as One
Who spoke the jeweled Word when they
Gave Him the bitter sponge.
—Thunder in my brain the terrible sweet Words
Of His love flowering in five wounds
Plotting my destruction, prodigal love
Asking, begging safe harbor in the angry crossing
For the fugitive heart,
The utmost unviolence of His mercy.
This is the frightening reality of His victory,
Calling calling calling me to His defeat.


24


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, '52


my God is a helpless God,
randaya
My God is a helpless God, Randaya:
He does not breathe whorls of fire,
Nor speak in a voice like red thunders
Groping through the incense of diamond temples.
He walks like gentle rain
Resurrecting martyrs from the burial grounds,
And His words are swift birds
Flying across arctic wastelands
To the antipodal domes of eternity.
My God is a helpless God, Randaya:
He is a Child, fragile on a bed of straw,
Attended by a billion angels from Heaven.
He is a Man hanging dead from a tree:
His Blood forms oceans engulfing the continents,
His last gasp disorders the constellations:
Silent explosions alter the orbits of stars.
Laugh if you must, Randaya:
Your God's entrance is presaged
By the hysteria of a hundred drums:
You, Randaya, will not have a God
Hanging dead from a leafless tree.
My God is a helpless God, Randaya,
But in His helpleseness is the strength
That flung the warring angels into Hell,
That broke forever the boundaries of the tomb,
That created a planct and a rose.
I must be helpless, too,
Like my God, Randaya,
So He can draw me, unresisting,
Into the unending Calm of the Vortex,
The Center of His terrible Whirlpool.


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


renegades


To live and love: all that is left for us
The No has been said; the dove is a crocodile
In the olive grove; and a solar death
Has bloomed in the atom of our borrowed while.
Our fathers slide into abyamal night
Of flowering rockets and clawing hunger
As diplomatic haggling bangs on wood:
Year of helmed locusts, Churchill, the warmonger,
Of Faustian knowledge in a sink of gold
And empires parceled at the taz of blood
The damoclean hour hanga on a thread
St. John's apocalyptic period.
No time tomorrow when the serpent strikes
So sift this coin in the counter of Now
While light is young on the sprouting grase
And buds break warm on the naked bough
Before they slay our believing Yes
While the hayfields smell wet of adolescent sun
We are two colts chasing till we tire
Of thrashing the air and noon is done
Brave laughter will be louder than their hate
(Though brighter than burning seagulls in the air)
Invisible armor against a simian death
Of anarchists in alleys mouthing despair
This is the answer that we give
Amid the madness of tidal wars
We'll point a better madness than they know
In choiring love drawing vivid stars


26


LEONIDAS V. BENESA, '52


seeds
He comes — the Sower strewing seeds (lovely seeds!)
Upon the naked rocks of my existence:
I see young trees
Greening my neighbors' promised acres—
And look: beautiful souls, transparent as spring water,
Trading white thoughts under the leafy sunshine
Of the strong limbed trees!
But oh, my life lies withered
Beneath the white anger of Our frowning Father,
For I have let the birds of prey
Ravish the seedlings in their lovely youngness.
But no matter:
The Sower shall return with April in His breath.
Come upon the slaughter of winter, Christ my brother,
With the shining protectorate of Your mighty eagles
Guard Your seeds from the shadows of the shrill birds
So that the seeds may forest my rockclean (clear) nakedness
Nourished by the laughing waters of Your living (Mercy!)
Mercy.


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, '52
i wanted to build granite
cliffs of poems
I wanted to build granite cliffs of poems,
Violent mountains with a thousand whirling windows.
In my desert I piled rock upon crimson rock,
I labored in the shadow of the sun and the vultures.
A storm rolled from the west and rammed the growing hill,
And buried the granite slabs in the shivering sand.
I fled from my desert, following the tracks of chariots,
I wandered in the markets of many strange cities.
But in the long nights I was lonely for my desert,
The eternity of empty fullness and mournful laughter.
So I returned to my desert, to the buried rocks,
And lo! white melodious flowers grew among the ruins!


27


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


The way you entered the room
Is the way God enters my head.
Just as laughter like erystal falls
Musical is God's too when He loves.
Just as words from you are jeweled buds,
Lovely also must His like turtledoves.
And I know He created that Day
That in your womanhood I find Him too.
The way you said: speak not of Heart
But let this silence speak
Lake speechless waterwells;
The way your mouth moved,
The miracle of a hundred moments
Of petalled purity:
And the way your throat poised
Larical in sunworlds of song.
This I remember was His way:
That in your eyes I found
God laughing.


2
Because you were whitely regal rose
And I was lowly sod
I cried.
Each time the princely roguish sun
Warmed you like golden god
And sighed;
When chaste air of morning kissed
You on upcurled mouth,
His bride;
When the wanton wind stole your pearls
Of dew with songs from His South,
I died.
But oh a time there be
When tired of coquetry,
Will fall,
Each lovely petal,
And find yourself at my behest,
Weeping on my hungry breast,
My only and true conquest.


28


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, '52


elegy for exiles
The noon-day clangs on the roof of my father's house.
Dust grips the window sill with dry paper fingers,
And stares eyelessly into the sala
Where the portraits of three generations
Converse in the hieroglyphics
Of the long-forgotten dead.
My father sits in his ancient chair
Coughing in dry spasms,
Wishing the town would crumble into memories:
The rectangular yard, the arid street:
There are no cool shadows in the bright heat,
And ghosts wilt languidly in the sun.
A child cries. Pigs squeal in a neighbor's yard.
A quarrel flares infamy across a fence.
Dust enters the room like a thief.
I remember that in a long ago
I stood in an apple orchard.
The wind walked over the sea, bearing the voices
Of bright-shawled women singing of some unknown island:
A longing caressed my soul like a wine.
At sunset there came a boat and a stranger:
He strummed a lyre, his face was pale as a star.
Come, he said, and together we sailed to the island
Where the women sang of youth and tragic grandeur,
And eternal summer beneath the trees.
With trembling fingers I touched
The warm deep flowing waters.
My father sits by the window, coughing in hollow spasma.
His heart is crawling with worms:
He remembers nothing.
I turn to him, wanting to tell him
Of an exquisite crying remembrance:
Of longing like a wine,
Of voices in the wind,
Of an island across the sea.


29


ANTONIO B. JOAQUIN, '53


dry dust
Winds are blowing,
Breezes,
Sweeping the populace.
They are March winds — dirty, dusty
In the city.
City of dust and grime
Of corruption — and fraud.
My city! My land!
The women go to market,
The stench of rotten things smoking out
From it, nauseates.
But these are not all — there is also
The breeze.
The particles,
That cling to my eyes, — the dirt,
That engulfs me—
With a thin layer
Of the dusty atmosphere
Of the city,
My land!


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53
oant, the marvel of vour poesy
Between the silver phrase and the seed,
Between the golden symbol and the dream,
Mind roars the space-wide infinite dome
Of the star-sown metaphysical sky
Before the fruited fullness of the poem
Finds terminal fulfillment.
(Yes, the word must cut through dry rock,
Bleed on siberia wastelands, wilt in the
Soldering brightness of the cranial sun, before
It is young grass growing in oases of my song.)


30


And as I jurtapose rainbow jewels miserly
On the marble whiteness of a paper slate,
Comes he
Soldier of the silent cross across
My contrapuntal peetryBlindly
Stumbles the ant and does not find
The miracle of the song, oh bodiless great, there
That binds all mortal minds in the deathless Oneness
Of the spirit beyond buried time quickening the air:
Tagore touching God, poor Shelley breasting the wind,
Kafka, Rilke, and Yeats breathing blossoms from the dust.
Rising I threaten him with the terrible
Thunder of my voice:
"Blind fool" (mocking) "where is your greater song?”
Answers he in the loudness
Of his strict simplicity:
“Mine is a different one
Than yours, giant-man.
No more you move mountains
Than I in my syllables of silence.
Builder of empires I
Rear the scourges of the sun
Since time for you began, and toiled,
Soiled, dust by dust, for my perfection,
Dying a thousand births, and
Living a thousand deaths,
Without a word
In humble thanksgiving,
The poetry of resignation.
And thus he moves mountains too,
Convincingly,
Humbly serves, bringing crumb by crumb
Dumb homage to his beautiful blind queen
Of his monastic castle.
O ant, the marvel of your poesy
Is in the traceless invisible wordlessness
Of your silent love.


31


MELITON V. SALAZAR, '54


A Story


what happened to bustamante


THREE DAYS before Christmas,
our capon, Bustamante, was chickenapped.
“It is a funny thing," Meona declared. She indicated the coop where
Bustamante had grown fat for six
months. “This morning he was still
there.” Meona is our cook, and she
is almost as fat as Bustamante.
“Entonces,” my Uncle Atho was
being sarcastic. “Maybe he has
gone for a walk, eh?'
"“When I brought him the corn
for his breakfast,” Meona continued,
“he was still here.” It was a source
of constant wonder to her that
Bustamante was no longer in the
coop.
“Houdini, then," my uncle scoffed. “My rooster was a Houdini."
“It is true,” Meona sniffed.
“Yes, it’s true,” I said.
My uncle turned on me. “Oho,"
he cried sarcastically. "What have
we here? Another witness! Senor
witness, what do you have to say?”
“I saw Bustamante eating his
breakfast,” I said.
“You also swear that you saw
him dig a hole in the ground and
proceed to Mexico?”
n “Brazil,” I said. "If you dig
straight down you...
“Mexico!" my Uncle Atho shouted.
"In my geography book...”
“This is not a geography lesson!"
my uncle cried. “Well?”
“When I came back from school,"


I answered sheepishly, "Bustamante was gone.”
“Gone!” My uncle waved his
hands and stamped on the ground
with his right foot. “Gone! Is that
all you can tell me? Gone!”
I shuffled my feet uneasily. Meona began to sob. She sounded like
the 1938 earthquake.
My uncle kicked at the door of
the coop. It flew open. The wire
that had fastened it shut had been
untwined. “That rooster cannot
take one step to save its life," my
uncle roared. "He is too bulky! He
did not walk away from this coop.
He was kidnapped."
“Chickenapped,” I corrected him.
"Silence!” my Uncle Atho whirled
on me.
“Bustamante was a rooster,” I
explained. "If he had been a kid...”
"Kidnapped," my Uncle Atho repeated in cold fury. “You have
formed the unpleasant habit of correcting your elders, sobrino. I won’t
stand it!”
“My teacher...
"Silence!"
Meona began to cry convulsively.
Great, warm tears showered upon
me. I moved away quickly.
“Yes, weep,” my Uncle Atho
thundered. “The fields need irrigating."
Meona burst into a long wail. She
cried into her apron and ran back
into the kitchen. The house shook
with her sobs.
"Six months!” My uncle began


32


walking up and down the yard furiously. "Six months of caring for
that rooster. Feeding him until his
gullet was like a coconut. Fattening him, so that we would have
something on Christmas Day! And
what happens? What happens?"
“I saw him eating before I left,
I explained. “But when I returned...
My uncle waved wildly at me. "No
excuse, no excuse! What happens?
You and that fat turtle there stand
by and let it be stolen under your
very noses!
“Chickenapped,” I murmured.
My uncle stopped imperiously in
front of me. "What did you say?”
he roared.
"Nothing,” I said.
“Well, what are you standing
there for? Go and look for it!”
“We looked everywhere,” I said.
My uncle began walking up and
down again. He was still walking
up and down when Meona served
me dinner. When I woke up from
my siesta he was inspecting the door
of the coop.
“Come here, you two,” he called
after a while.


Meona and I went out guiltily. My
uncla pierced each of us with a level gaze before he spoke again.
“Who was in this yard this morning?” he asked Meona.
Meona began to sniffle.
“No one else," I said.
“No one else?”
I shifted my gaze to the house
self-consciously. “Mingoy came here
for a few minutes.
Meona blew loudly into her apron.
“Mingoy, ah?” my uncle’s eyes narrowed to a slit. For a while, he
looked like Tomoyuki Yamashita,
R.I.P "Mingoy who?”
"Mingoy Ubanos,” I said. “He
only wanted to see how Charleston
is doing. Charleston is our pig,
and only four days ago, Mingoy
found him pinned by a log in an
irrigation ditch. He would have
drowned if Mingoy had not been
there.
"We will go and visit Mingoy,”"
my Uncle Atho said.
"I do not think Mingoy took him,
Meona said discreetly. She was
talking into her apron.
My uncle waved a finger at her.
“You are being paid to cook and
to keep watch over the house, he
said. “You are not paid to think.
So far you have almost poisoned us
with your cooking and allowed some
rascal to steal my capon.
Meona’s shoulders began to heave.
I moved away from her hastily.
MINGOY UBANOS lives across the
river from my Uncle Atho’s Hacienda de San Antonio. He is twelve,
one year older than I. His brother,
Pedring, is nine, and Teress, the
elder of his two sisters, is eight. Little Delia is six. Mingoy’s father is


33


a day worker at the Luzon Sugar
Central, and his work is collecting
the cane that falls from the trucks
and the freight-cars. Mingoy’s
mother used to sew for my Tia Tintay until she became sick. The family is very poor.
Mingoy’s house is on a little hollow. There is cogon all around it
and guava trees to whip at your
eyes and bamboo thickets to clutch
at your clothes with sharp hooks.
Mingoy and I had often hunted the
nests of the mayas in the grass, or
groped for shrimp in the river, or
climbed the tall coconuts of the hacienda to get green nuts. Mingoy
and I were in the same grade, but
he was the better speller.
When we came to the rim of the
hollow, Uncle Atho motioned us to
sit quietly under a guava tree. He
crept forward noiselessly. We could
see Mingoy’s yard plainly, and hear
their talk. The house was of one
story, the windows closed tight, because Mingoy’s mother was in fever
all the time. Mingoy, his father,
and his brother Pedring were talking in the yard. Mingoy was sitting on a large bamboo basket. There
was a rooster inside the basket.
Meona began to sniffle.
"He must have fallen from a bus,
Mingoy was saying. "For how else
could he be sitting by the roadside
where I found him?'
“I pity his owner," Mingoy’s father said. "He must have taken very
good care of this capon."
“He will make good soup," Mingoy said. “Mother will like it.”
“Your mother will like it very
much. It will do her much good."
“She needs chicken-meat," Mingoy
said. "Didn’t Doctor Santiago say
that? Chicken-meat. And good
soup.


Mingoy’s father nodded. “She
needs that every day."
“Yes, mother needs chicken-meat,"
Mingoy said again. “You heard
Doctor Santiago, didn’t you, Father? He said she needed chickenmeat.
“Yes,” Mingoy’s father replied. "I
heard him."
“It will do her good," Mingoy said.
“It will practically cure her.
“It is very fortunate that you
found him."
“Mother needs the meat," Mingoy
said. “She may get well with the
meat and the soup.”
Meona began to cry. I nudged her
with my elbow several times until
she stopped. "We may be heard,"
I said.
Mingoy’s two sisters came out of
the house. They carried a pair of
scissors and long strips of brightcolored paper.
“Watch out that you do not dirty
the yard,” Pedring warned them.
“I have just swept it.”
“Ho,” Mingoy’s father called out,
"what will my senoritas do with all
that paper?”
We will put it on the Christmas
tree,” Teress said.
“That’s the tail of my kite!” Pedring howled. He ran to Teress,
examined one of the strips, and began dancing in despair. "Look what
they have done! My kite! My kite!
How can I race it now, without a
tail?
“We left some,” Teress said helpfully.
Pedring sat down on the yard and
kicked, still howling about his kite.
“What is a kite, Pedrito?” his
father soothed him. “The girls
want a Christmas tree.


34


“It isn’t your kite, that’s why,”
Pedring sobbed.
“You can use newspapers," Mingoy’s father said. “When I was
a boy, I always used newspapers."
“The paper is too stiff,” Pedrito
wailed. "I’ll never win another
race again."
The younger girl, Delia, began
winding an orange-colored strip around the lowest branch of a stunted guava-tree that grew in the yard
When it was finished, she stepped
back and cocked her head to examine it.
“It is very beautiful, Delia,” her
father said.
“Newspapers!” Pedring sneered.
“No indeed,” Teress said. "Your
fastest kite was the one you made
from newspapers."
Pedring glared at her. “Yes, you
say that because you already have
the tail of my kite."
“I mean it, Pedrito,” Teress replied.
“Oh, shut up,” Pedrito cried. He
made a face at her.
“I think the girls have a good
idea," Mingoy said. "Let us make
it a real Christmas tree."
"With my kite’s tail,” Pedrito
moaned.
Little Delia cheered. "A Christmas
tree!"
"For snow” Mingoy said, "we
can get that bag of salt we saw
on the river-bed, Pedring. The one
the traders cannot use because there
is sand mixed with it.”
“It will be heavy,” Pedring said
doubtfully.
“You two can bring the pushcart,"
Mingoy’s father said. "If you want
snow.
“We want snow!” Teress cried.


“Snow!” Delia cheered. "Snow!”
“Girls,” Mingoy’s father said.
“Come here.
For a long time they whispered to
each other. Pedring was continually glancing worriedly at the
closed windows.
“It is a secret for their mother,”
Meona sobbed.
Abruptly, Mingoy got up from the
basket, reached inside, and pulled
out the rooster. Delia cheered and
clapped her hands. Meona and I
groaned.
It was Bustamante.
"I found him sitting on the road,"
Mingoy said. “Mother will like him.
“I am worried about the owner,”
Mingoy’s father said. "“He may
come to fetch it any moment.
"I was thinking," Mingoy said,
"we have a sack of fresh corn which
we can spare. I would like to leave
it on the road, where I found this
rooster. If the owner comes back,
he may want to exchange."
"On the road?” Mingoy’s father
was doubtful. "People may take
it."
“Then they are welcome to it,”
Mingoy said. "It is a fair exchange.
“You are a funny boy," Mingoy’s
father smiled. “Go ahead, son.
"Pedring can make little lanterns,"
Teress said. “I have some birthday
cake candles to put in them.
“I have some more colored paper
if you need it, Mingoy told her.
Little Delia had already climbed
the guava tree. She was busy winding a blue strip around a branch.
Meona was crying softly.
Suddenly, Uncle Atho came back
to us. He motioned us to be quiet
and we followed him out of the
hollow When we were beyond ear

35


shot, my Uncle Atho stopped me.
"I must talk to Don Miguel about
Ubanos,” he said. Don Miguel is
the manager of the sugar-central.
“How much is Ubanos receiving?”
“One-eighty a day,” I said.
“With a sick wife,” my Uncle
Atho muttered. Suddenly his eyes
brightened. "Do you know what
they plan to do on Christmas Eve?”
“No,” I said. Meona shook her
head.
“They plan to hold a Christmas
party. They are going to invite the
neighbors. It will be a surprise for
their sick mother.
Meona began to sniffle again.
“What is the matter with you?'
my uncle asked her. “By the way,
be sure to send a quarter of the
lechon to the Ubanos. If they will
invite the neighbors, the chicken
will not be enough.” My Uncle Atho


chuckled. “Even if it is such a
fat rooster. Mingoy is fortunate
to have found him on the road. No,
Meona, you had better send them
one-half of the pig.
“Yes sir, Meona said. Then she
began to weep loudly.
"What is the matter with her?”
my Uncle Atho asked me.
“She’s sentimental,” I said.
“She’s guilty," my Uncle Atho
contradicted me. “It was her fault
that some rascal stole Bustamante.
He winked at me.
"What do you want to do with
the corn?” Meona asked.
My uncle smiled at me. “She’s
crazy, sobrino. Corn? What corn?
Bustamante was kidnapped.”
“Chickenapped,” I breathed.
“Chickenapped," my uncle echoed.
We went home.


AVO


36


ARMANDO JOSON, '53


Second Prize Essay


Christmas is for the poor


TO A MAN like Badong, Christmas
means much more than to anyone
else. It rekindles his simple hopes
that have faded away in the gloom
of preceding days. On Christmas
day he really lives.
We know him well, this man Badong — though perhaps we do not
understand his plight — for we see
him doing any kind of honest job.
He fights against the cold, rough
sea to catch some fish for food. He
is in the factory, tortured by the
choking air and the nerve-wracking noise of machinery. He is in
the streets, sweaping dirt or collecting garbage. He is willing to take
any job that comes along, for he
has many hungry mouths to feed,
many little bodies to clothe, many
helpless souls to keep alive. He toils
in the chilling rain or in the burning sun. He must work and work,
yet he eats less and less. No job is
too lowly for him, no hardship too
great.
Often, in the dreary drudgery of
his task, his sunken eyes would cast
a blank look afar as confused
thoughts crowd in his mind. He
wonders whether he is just a senseless stone on the street or a splinter of wood, a chunk of matter without a soul. For why is he so treated? Why is he ignored, kicked around? His life is without joy. His
master’s pet dog is much better off
than he is. At least it has a daily
supply of bones and meat, and provided with a well-painted, well-kept
house to rest in. While he, what has
he? His family has to survive on


boiled rice, salt and kangkong, and
often on just plain lugaw, or simply
on nothing. They crowd in a dilapidated barong-barong which hardly
keeps them dry during rainy days,
and bakes them in summer, yet he
cannot call it his own because the
owner of the land can have it demolished any time. Why all this?
He keeps on asking himself why.
Like a helpless philosopher confronted with a mystery, he cannot find
the answer. But deep in his heart
he knows that this must not be his
lot, that he must be destined for
something better, and for this he
prays.
However, today is different — a
smiling day in a tempestuous year.
Today is Christmas Day. For once
he is released from the dispiriting
monotony of his task. He is free
with his family to visit the few relatives and friends that he still has,
and renew old ties. His children
wear new clothes given by their ni

37


nangs and ninongs. He, and his wife,
too, have new clothes which they received yesterday from his boss
yes, the same boss who had been
grabbing and grasping and growling
during the rest of the year. Whereas before Badong was an outcast, a
seemingly unwanted segment of the
world, now he has become one with
the throb of joyous humanity.
And tonight, dressed in their very
simple best, they go to church and
hear the Midnight Mass. Badong,
wwho many times missed Mass because he had to work even on Sun
days to keep body and soul together, has never felt so free in going to
church as tonight. He and his family kiss the Baby in the crib and
together they ask Him for better
things, for Christmases more often
than once a year, and if this be impossible, to give them in the days
ahead, a bit of the courage He had
on the first Christmas night. When
they go back home, with renewed
strength and brighter vision, they
gather around a flickering kerosene
lamp and eat their media noche
which Badong’s wife usually manages to prepare from his Christmas
bonus. Scanty though the food is
for the whole family, yet it is more
than they have ever had. For the
first time in the long, weary year
there are tears of joy in their eyes,
tranquility in their hearts, and a
song on their lips. And they have
but one burning thought: that


after all there is love still left in
the world, thank God.
Why has been the whole year so
cruel and this day so kind? Is it
just one of life’s ironies? This
Badong perhaps will never understand.
TONIGHT, as Badong stretches on
the hard floor of the barong-barong,
and gazes through the big holes in
the roof at the dancing stars above,
he thinks of many happy thoughts,
of times when his family would be
as cheerful as those stars, when
each day would be as this Christmas Day — he, unruffled by cares,
communing with his friends, family
and God, sharing sympathy instead
of a gnawing greed, love rather
than bitterness. All these, he believes he can hope for, so long as
there is Christmas Day and there
is the Baby in the crib. As Badong closes his gleaming eyes in
sleep, the same thoughts linger on
even in his dreams.
A hopeless hope? No more than
an empty, elusive dream? What if
he wakes up tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, every day, only to hear
again the growling of a soulless
master, the forlorn cries of his starving children? Poor Badong!
Holy Infant of the Crib, grant
him the strength of will to wait for
many more Christmas Days. Grant
others the grace to make many more
Christmases each year possible for
such as he.


AWA


38


VIVENCIO PERALTA, '54


Third Prize Short Story


a story for Christmas


THAT MORNING I accompanied my
sister and my brother to the railroad station to see them off. Kampupot as usual was vehemently against my staying alone here in the
city. I was irresponsible, I ought
to know that. Besides, Mother would
miss me and Father would again
put the blame on them. My brother, however, was on my side. I was
no longer a baby. I could take care
of myself. And anyway there was
Tia Felisa who was like a mother
to me. Perhaps, too, Mother would
be better off without me this Christmas. Nobody would be there to
ask for more than his rightful share
of rice cakes. And Father would
not blame anybody this time. He
was a writer himself once. He would
understand.
“But don’t you want to see our
friends? I know Purita and Nena
and Marikita will be there this vacation."
“Lover Boy can take care of those
cave-women,”" I smiled. “If I...
My sister did not let me
finish the sentence. I shouldn’t ever
call her Purita a cave-woman. When
the train gave a sudden jerk and
threw Kampupot back to her seat,
we were no longer debating on whether Purita, Nena, and Marikita
were cave-women or not and on
whether I was a gentleman or not.
Tia Felisa would not believe I
had decided to stay just because
I wanted to write a story. A spinster, she is well-liked by her young
boarders and we call her tia, although she is not a real aunt. If


she did not believe me now, it was
because my brother had given her
the impression that our interests
were still limited to that portion of
the human race to which she (well,
at least in a sense) belongs.
"A story? Of all things! My boy,
that is a most ridiculous excuse.
Mmm... Who is the girl?”
“It’s no girl, tia, I insisted. “I
do want to write a story, but I
couldn’t possibly write it at home.
I wouldn’t have the time there.”
In my room later on I did find
the time, but I did not find the
story. The first day I faced my
typewriter for a while, then I turned on the radio and promised myself I was going to write it the next
day: The second day I hit upon an
idea about a cave-woman who


39


wanted a beautiful comb for
her long, long tresses. I found
out just in time that a comicstrip character, a fellow named
Henry O. or something had stolen
it before I was even ten years old.
The third day Tia Felisa asked if
I had finished the love-letter.
was so insulted I couldn’t write a
thing. The fourth day I typed intermittently until late afternoon. I
did not have the courage to re-read
it. I made paper airplanes out of
the whole batch and threw them out
of my window. I had no waste basket
in the room.
I went downstairs and told my
landlady I was going out.
“But I thought you were going
to write a story,” she said, her eyes
twinkling with amusement.
"“I — I believe the Christmas atmosphere is what I need,” I explained.
“But of course!” she agreed. "A
little inspiration will do you good."
“Oh, tia!” I protested, and then I
went out with a dour face. I could
forgive the old lady for confusing
me with my brother, but I couldn’t
get over the fact that after four
days I still had not got a fragment
of a story to justify myself.
I shivored a little as I stepped out
into the street. After having coop
ed myself up in my room for the
whole day, the air outside, though
cold, was tingling and refreshing. I
walked with quick strides and tried
to forget my tia’s remarks. The
whole city, I noticed, had prettied
up for the season. Here and there
I saw lanterns hung from windows.
In one home the pine tree in the
front yard was beautifully lighted
by small vari-colored bulbs and was
transformed into a huge Christmas
tree. One display window showed
a merry, little old Santa Claus in


a sleigh pulling the words, "Merry
Christmas and a Happy New Year"
over a night-sky a-glitter with tinsel stars. Maybe, I thought, I could
make a story about these. Whep
no story came, I began to suspect
that my idea about the cave-woman
with the long hair was not the
only idea that Henry stole from me.
Only when a heavy, revolting
smell suddenly gassed these wandering thoughts into nothingness did
I realize that I wandered down an
unfamiliar street. If I had looked
for a Yuletide atmosphere, then this
was hardly it. The neat rows of
well-kept houses abruptly gave way
to makeshift dwellings of the most
miserable kind. One of them was
at the very edge of the mud and
filth and it seemed ready to topple
right into the canal. Its walls were
that of tin cans flattened into
shape, of loose boards and old gal
vanized iron that sagged dejectedly
to one side; two of its posts were
sunk right into the oozing slime,
while the other two clung desperately to the cement wall that lined the
sewer. I held my breath and crossed the bridge. As I approached the
hut, I became aware of two figures
huddled at one dark window and
quietly observing me. They were
those of a woman and a child. The
boy was talking to his mother. Distinctly I heard him ask:
“Where is Father, Mother?” I
paused briefly in my steps, but I
could not hear the woman’s reply.
As I passed by, again I heard the
lad’s high-pitched, complaining wail.
‘Mother,” he said, “can’t we too
have a star? Mother, please...
Mother "
I looked down the street and saw
that it was indeed the only house,
if house that was, that did not have
a lantern of some sort. More than


40


anything else, more than the big
Christmas tree in the yard or the
gaudy streamers or Santy in his
sleigh or the tinsel stars, it was on
this scene that my mind brooded,
even while on my way to Celing’s
place. I knew there was a story here.
I felt it. But I was afraid to think.
Even if I knew something about it,
I still had misgivings. I had never
been able to write about anything
that stinks. If I must write about
Christmas, I was certain it would
have to be about rice cakes, or something equally appetizing. I walked
more briskly, but the picture would
not leave my mind. And I could
not forget the smell.
“Maybe I ought to go over to Car
los' or Diego's,” I muttered when
I reached Celing’s home. I remembered Tia Felisa’s words and I
couldn’t help feeling a little guilty
now. I hesitated for a moment at
the gate and then I rang the bell.
"I’ll just drop in to see what gives,”
I reassured myself.
Celing is pretty in a quiet, unaffected sort of way. She can get
along without the red paint, but she
wears her hair short and that day
I found her in man’s clothes. She
is hardly of the cave-woman species
that comb their long, long tresses
by the mountain streams in Umucan,
but she is easy to get along with
and, well, sometimes she writes beautiful poems for their school paper.
“What’s up?” I asked, eyeing her
mannish get-up.
“We’re decorating," she replied
excitedly.
Their sala was cluttered up with
bits of tinsel and colored paper. A
Christmas tree was in the middle
of the room, but what attracted my
attention was an impressionistic Nativity group in oil hung on the wall.


The work was entitled “Mother and
Child". I stared at the spectral figures with curiosity and interest.
I remembered a similar group with
similar gloomy, grotesque features
framed against a dark window of
a barong-barong. Again 1 heard
the little child’s sorrowful, questioning voice:
“Mother, where is Father? Can’t
we too have a star, Mother? Mother,
please... Mother...
“I thought you left for the province," Celing was saying.
I did not answer for a long time.
I wondered if she would understand.
Finally I turned to her and told
her why I did not go home.
“You always do the strangest
things,” was all she said.
“But you’re a writer yourself.
Surely you can see why I can’t go
home. I can’t do it there.” For the
first time that Christmas season I
thought of home — of Father perched on a table, trying to hang decorations on the wall, of Mother and
her delicious rice cakes, of darling
Kampupot trying to make a Christmas tree out of a shapeless branch
of our salamagui, and of Lover Boy
with his cave-women who comb their
long, long tresses by the mountain
streams in Umucan. I thought of
myself going to the pantry every
now and then to steal Mother’s rice
cakes. “I — couldn’t possibly write
at home,” I repeated.
“I hope then you can write it
here.
"I have a beautiful idea for a
story,” I lied. “That picture reminds
me of it. And I began to tell her
about the real mother and child
whom I saw with a sorrow-laden expression upon their gaunt and wan
faces. I told her about their ugly
hut of tin cans and loose boards,


41


about the black, sluggish water around them and the putrid, nauseating smell, about the boy crying pitcously for his father and for a
Christmas star to hang in their own
little window.
Celing made star-like patterns
with the tinsel things in silence. She
seemed surprised when I had finished. “Is that all?” she asked.
I nodded.
"Do you call that beautiful?”
I nodded.
“If you call that beautiful, then
there is nothing painful and ugly in
this world. If you call that beautiful, then your beautiful and my
beautiful are really poles apart.”
I smiled secretly, for I remembered I had made a similar remark
when I told her she would look more
beautiful, if she would only wear
her hair long like a cave-woman.
“What then would you say is
beautiful?” I asked.
She said there was nothing beautiful about the dirty hut. There
was nothing beantiful about the
starved mother and child whom I
had seen. And what was so beautiful about the black, stagnant water and the smell? Nothing, I
thought, but I held my tongue and
listened in silence. She was becoming more interesting. Did I
have a story? No, I didn’t. Not a
single bit. How about the boy crying for his father, for a star? That
wasn’t a story — not the whole stor It was tha mother who told the
whole wonderful tale.
“But the mother did not say any
thing,” I objected.
"How do you know?”
“Well, I didn’t hear her.
But the mother must have said
something, only I did not hear her.


She wouldn’t let her child’s queries
go unanswered. She would tell her
child that his father was in Heaven.
“In Heaven?” I interrupted. I.
might have always been doing the
strangest things, but now she was
talking strangely.
“In Heaven. Why not? That is
what all mothers say to their little
children when they ask for their
lost fathers. As for the star, she
would say they do not need that
kind of star — this kind of star."
She threw the paper stars which she
had made into the air. “The stars
in heaven are much more beautiful, aren’t they? Aren’t they?”
“Yes,” I agreed hastily, for I saw
that there were tears in her eyes.
I had forgotten. A year ago, she
had also lost her father.
It was twilight when I left. I looked up to find a few stars already
aglow in the purple sky But as
the darkness deepened, those that
were before tiny and distant now
twinkled with a brighter sparkle,
while still others, newer stars, began to appear. The whole night
just seemed to burst forth in laughter with a thousand little lights. I
thought then maybe Celing was
right. Maybe the father was really
in Heaven. Maybe they did not need
those silly paper stars. “The stars
in Heaven are much more beautiful."
Now I knew the mother’s answer
to her small boy. His father was
a big man; his star must then be
a big one, too. Perhaps, it was
that one close to the zenith — that
star which sparkled with a red and
a blue and a white light. His father had loved those colors. Yes, he
had loved them dearly....
I suppressed a desire to shout and
sing in the streets. The night was


42


beautiful and I had a beautiful story. Night beautiful, because of the
million stars in the wide, wide sky.
Beautiful story, because somehow
now the ugliness was gone and I
felt sure that I could write it.
I hurried then, because I remembered I was late for dinner. The
streets were empty, but from the
homes that I passed by I heard the
sound of music and merrymaking.
Even in the open, the air seemed
to lie still, as if frightened by this
hidden, magic warmth of a city that
was once more full of laughter, full
of love.
It was not until I had almost
reached the small bridge that spannod the sewage canal that I became
aware of a cluster of people gathered before the house, if house that
was, where lived the mother and
the child. There was unmistakable
commotion within. I stood listening in shocked, dumb-stricken horror. My story — my beautiful story! This couldn’t be its ending.
But it was! I was seeing it and hearing it being enacted in all its naked
reality and ugliness. A man look
ed out of the window and seeing us,
his face contorted with rage. "Go


away, go away!”" he bellowed, and
he shouted curses upon us. We
scattered in flight, because he started to come down after us with a
club.
Far away, in another world in
my room, I faced my typewriter and
tried to write a story for Christmas, but after what I had seen and
what I had heard, I knew it would
not, it could no longer be the same
story that Celing ended so beautifully. iFor it was drenched too
much with the tears of a woman
sobbing and pleading in one dark
corner of a hut that wallowed in
the mire; for it was pierced by the
thin screams of a boy who cried in
vain for mercy, mercy; for it was
crushed by a hungry, embittered man
who asked, "Is this...is this what
you buy for our supper? Eat it,
then! Eat it, eat it!" and who
finally threw in desperation a battered object that was once a Christmas star out of one unlighted window into the slough....
I sat before my typewriter, deep
into the night, trying to write a
story. The words came slowly,
painfully, and my heart ached for
the warmth of home.


43


PLACIDO MAPA Jr., '55


Third Prize Essay


the greatest gift


IN THE PREFACE of the Mass for
the Dead we read, "“Through Christ
Our Lord, in Whom the hope of a
happy resurrection has shone on us,
so that those whom the certain fate
of dying renders sad, may be consoled by the promise of future immortality."
To mourn the death of a dear
one is very natural for us. We
sometimes, however, unnecessarily
augment our grief especially when
we think primarily of our own loss.
But, if we were to concern ourselves
more about the welfare of our departed beloved, we would feel comforted. If we know by our intimate
acquaintance with him while he was
living that he lived a life conforming to the will of God, the thought
that he is happy in Heaven, happier
than he could ever be on earth,
should make us rejoice. The possibility of his being detained in Purgatory should not dishearten us but
rather animate us to pray for him.
The hope that he will someday be
in Heaven through our prayers
should thrill us.
Suppose, however, Christ had not
willed to be born in the stable in
the sharp cold of winter and endure the sufferings, which were but
a prelude to the sufferings of His
life, His passion, and the gory
death through which He would merit for us the gift of eternal life?
Suppose He did not stoop to do it,
because we did not deserve it? What


could we look forward to in life?
What hope could comfort us at the
death of a dear one? But the fact
is, He did. Because of His love for
man He could not resist coming
down to become one of us, giving all
of Himself to us, offering Himself
as expiation for our sins, and thus
gaining for us the opportunity of
attaining everlasting happiness. For
all that He did, therefore, we have
to thank Him, for in Him and
through Him we have the meaning,
the hope, the joy, the means, and
the end of our life.
During Christmas we commemorate
Our Lord’s birth, with which He
began His lifetime toil of love, of
redeeming man. Just as we give our
friends presents on their birthday,
so also should we bring Him gifts
on His Birthday. We should give
Him, at least out of gratitude, that
which He asks of us and to which
He has a right.
What shall we give? Return for
His love, our love, and give Him our
hearts to clasp to His, that He may
realize the fruits of His love. How
shall we give? Let us offer our
gifts through Mary, who tenderly
nursed Him in the stable, who faithfully stood by Him at the cross, and
Whom He gloriously welcomed in
Heaven, that she may transmute the
dross of our hopes and our desires
into spiritual gold, truly worthy of
a King.


AUA


44


FRED P. CLEDERA, '52


A Story


merry Christmas, i love you


WHEN BERT AND I knelt down
in the pew, I knew Bert would be
uneasy. That was one of the rare
times a girl was beside him. His
eyes rolled towards the girl. The
girl noticed his attention, and grew
restless and uneasy.
Curiosity got the better of me,
and I peeped through the open
right arm of Bert. The prayer
book of Bert was upside down! Poor
Bert! He was not like me who took
things easy, even when my Coring
was around.
The Mass ended, and the crowd
poured out of the church. For the
first time in his life, Bert hired
a calesa from the church to his
house, fifty paces away. Of course
I enjoyed the ride. Bert puffed
out his chost, and smiled mysteriously....
That evening there was an carly
Christmas dance. You know Bert—
he was never easy to invite. But
that time, he said he must go, by
all means. So he did. What was
more, he dragged me along.
The dance was ten times more
magnificent than the wedding of
Tiong Bosio — you know, the cochero who used to brag about his
strength. Streamers of tinsel decorated the walls, little paper bells
dangled from the ceiling. Food?
There was plenty. Sure, there were
many beautiful girls but I did not
think they could cook, like Coring.
Nor could they wash their own
dresses, like Coring. Eh, Coring
will make a good wife!


I was finishing my fifth CocaCola when Bert exclaimed suddenly:
“She’s an angel!"
“Who?” I asked, and then I saw
the girl, the same girl we’d seen
in church. "Why, yes,” I answered
meekly.
When I saw Ben — you know, the
wolf — eyeing the girl slyly, I prodded Bert forward.
"Good evening,” Bert greeted her
in his timid way. She answered
with a beautiful smile. I heard Bert’s
knees knocking. The girl’s eyes
pointed to the vacant seat beside her.
Bert sat down, nervously.
As you well know, I’m not slow.
So I braced myself and a moment
later I was in front of the shy girl
sitting beside Evelyn, the girl talking to Bert. I introduced myself
the way any other gentleman would.
The girl only looked surprised. So
I did the talking. When I sat beside her, she leaned away from me.
When I winked my left eye at her.
she turned her face away.
As for my boss, Bert, and Evelyn,
everything was fine, except for
Bert’s nervous twitching of lips.
Evelyn was okay. She glowed with
Christmas good-will. For a moment,
I even feared that she might wink
first at Bert and then he'd run away.
As for me, the moon and stars
were already mine. I even forgot
about Coring. After a while she—
the girl beside Evelyn—lost her shyness and pinched me on the arm when
I winked my left eye. I asked her for


45


a dance, but she said: “I’ll have to
ask Evelyn.” I knew now that everything was going to be all right.
She was Evelyn’s companion, and
I was Bert’s bodyguard.
Bert danced with Evelyn; Petra,
who turned out to be Evelyn’s cousin, had the rare pleasure of dancing with me. I heard Bert whispering to Evelyn. So I whispered to
Petra, too. When Bert said: "Dancing with you, Evelyn, is like dancing on a magic carpet,” I also
said: "Dancing with you, Petra, is
like taking a bath after driving the
carabaos to the cuadra.” And she
blushed and slapped me on the arm.
Twelve o’clock. The dance ended
with a groan of disappointment.
Bert was fast and so was I. When
Evelyn and Petra walked home under the December skies, we tagged
along, swaggering like Tiong Bosio
before he married. Evelyn had an
escort — her third cousin, she said
but he had fled when he saw me,
scared perhaps of my big, black
nluscles. We talked gaily along
the way.
Earlier in the evening it had rained hard. The ground was wet and
muddy. But we walked with sure,
unhesitating steps.
Bert kept pouring out every line
he had memorized from Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet.
“‘But soft”” he was whispering. ""What light through yonder window breaks? It is the east,
and...
“Bert!” Evelyn cried suddenly,
holding on to Bert’s arm, but she
was too late. Bert slipped and fell
resoundingly on the muddy ground.
Evelyn reached for his hand, and
there was no resisting from Bert.
Evelyn’s helping hands were soft
and warm, so he lay in the mud for


what seemed five minutes. When he
rose, he was muddy all over, except
for his face. He didn’t mind the
loud guffaws of the home-bound
crowd. What mattered was Evelyn’s
holding his hand to help.
Evelyn’s house stood beside the
Bicol River. Evelyn’s mother opened the door, and her eyes bulged
when she saw Bert’s mud-splattered
clothes.
“Who are you?” she asked. Her
voice was threatening, and it almost
scared even me. Bert’s knees knocked again, and particles of mud fell
off his pants to the floor.
“Merry Christmas, Ma’am,” Bert
managed to say.
Evelyn stepped forward to the
rescue. "Why, Ma, he’s Bert! Surely,
you know him. He’s Mr. Tiburcio's
son.” Her voice sounded like Sepia, my little sister, begging for
a centavo from me.
Just then, I heard the cry of a
baby—Evelyn’s baby brother, I supposed. The fat cranky woman,
Evelyn’s mother, walked away from
us, half-scared perhaps of my big
black muscles. Evelyn moved to one
corner of the porch, and Bert followed. I could hear them whispering. So I decided to concentrate
on my partner, namely, Petra.
“I love you!” I told her fast.
"I will give you my ring tomorrow.
But she only giggled and moved
away from me. I wanted to kneel
down before her, but the floor was
wet, and my white shark-skin pants
might get soiled.
When I turned around, I thought
I was dreaming. For there, five
meters away from me, Bert was
kissing Evelyn’s hand. And, mind
you, she did not resist at all. At
first, I thought Bert was being re

46


spectful, but Evelyn was certainly
not older than Bert.
I wanted to try the same thing.
But the way I sized Petra up, she
would slap me if I did. She seemed
to like slapping.
Just then, Evelyn’s mother blocked the door again, a baby in her
arms. Bert was still under a terrible spell, and what do you think
he did? He ran to Evelyn’s mother
and kissed her on the face, and ran
down the stairs, kissing my hand
as he darted away. Evelyn’s mother did not move an inch. She only
opened her mouth in surprise.
I, Kulas, am not slow. And my
motto is: a tooth for a tooth. But
Bert, who had offended me with a
kiss, was already gone. Angrily I


grabbed Petra’s hand and kissod it
hard.
“Good night, Merry Christmas, I
love you, I told her. She just
smiled and turned away her face.
I ran down the stairs — like
Bert, I was so happy I did not know
where I was going. My right foot
slipped and I landed on the thick
mud. I stood and flicked off some
of the mud clinging to me. The
early December sky had now cleared and the stars glinted like diamonds. Under that diamond sky,
I ran after Bert, silver bells riotously ringing inside me. I knew he
won’t mind at all the mud now splattered all over the shoes, the socks,
the pants, and the shirt I had borrowed from him.


4


sound and fury
IN SPITE OF A POTFUL of opening-night jinxes, the Juniors' Macbeth
came to sober life in its next two performances in what may yet be the
best play of the season’s Shakespearean quartet which started with the Seniors' able if lukewarm version of Othello. No ingredient to make the broth
bubble with horror was left out, visual and auditory symbols of violence
recreating the climate of a homicidal theme. Blood struck the keynote of
the evening, and a thoroughly eager cast gave a convincing impression of
just that. But it is still the tale of a tyrant spurred by lust for the
Scotch crown, who butchers his way through until he reaches a point of no
return where his wife and co-worker in crime goes mad and Fate keeps
up with him.
The tragic mistake of the first performance was slackening the pace
to a somnambulism. Wisely, Director Luis von Heiland accentuated the
brevity in succecding evenings by getting his principal actors properly
into the whirlwind crescendo of bloody executions, mounting to a jarring
pitch that ended in a hacking duel. The production scored another triumph.
Following what seemed to be a cinematic technique but is basically Elizabethan, it disposed the unwieldiness of acts, broke the play into briefer,
compacter scenes. It was not surprising, therefore, that the play moved with
a fluidity that emphasized the violent element of greed and carnal ambition and fear. Discursive passages were cut out, without sabotaging the
political significance of the scene between Macduff and Malcolm before
they plot to overthrow the usurper. Nor did the play lag in artistic suggestion. Use of a white cross for background seemed to suggest unconsciously that the Christian sense of right would inevitably crush the evil
reign of witcheraft with which Macbeth is identified, order supplanting the
anarchy of Macbeth’s nightmare world.
The first night, Gabino Mendoza as Macbeth looked like a jaded HenS
ry VIII lost forlornly in a welter of blood. But on the ensuing nights
he warmed up to the meaty role and gave it a somber dignity. His interpretation showed intelligent understanding by depicting Macbeth sympathetically as a weak-willed despot under the pressure of terrific forces
rather than as a crude hatchetman. What he lacked was a rolling bass
voice thundering with virile vigor, but he succeeded with a power all his
own in such familiar monologues as “Tomorrow and tomorrow".
Lady Macbeth stole much of the thunder. As played by Ricardo Nepomuceno Jr., Lady Macbeth was an austerely formidable murderess with


48


a masculine determination, an epitome of evil who lived up to the words:
“Look like the innocent flower, but be the serpent under it.” The gestures
were serpentine enough without the words. The sleep-walking scene was
acted beautifully with a confidence and insight and sensitivity seldom
matched these days at the Ateneo, a chilling dramatic piece de resistance
unmarred by the antiphonal chorus of a doctor and a nurse (well played
by Arturo Tanco and Alberto Ampil). In that single scene alone, Nepomuceno made the very air stink with blood. He did the role full justice.
The supporting cast stood out as almost perfect save for a few stilted
assists. Rodolfo Farol, Ricardo Paras, Jr., and notably Arturo Consing
as a trio of horridly hysterical witches were flawless beside their boiling
pot. The only comic relief in the production, the porter scene, was showstopping and highly enjoyable as played with crackling dry humor by Amado Gomez. Honesto Adviento as the murderer was perfect for the part,
complete with diabolic leer and the most flesh-crawling pair of vocal chords
we have heard. The others gleamed in this order: Ramon de la Fuente
who portrayed a half-pathetic Macduff; Irineo Ranjo as Malcolm; Valentin
Daez as a beard-plucking Duncan; Florentino Silayan as Banquo.
Besides the mad scene of Lady Macbeth, the banquet episode was a
brilliantly worked spectacle that would not have been possible without the
competent skill of the stage crew. For once, special plaudits go to the
fine job of an almost unknown department: the musical scoring. For the
first time, a Shakespearean play received the benefit of an energetic background music that avoided the overplayed marches from Aida and Lohengrin. This time it had vigorous snatches from such moderns like William
(Henry V) Walton and Gian-Carlo (The Consul) Minotti. Just how im

49


portant a part music plays in a tragedy like Macbeth is noticeable in the
interest of producers of Shakespeare revivals in getting a good score to
keep audiences familiar with the story perked in their seats. Music can
supply the necessary spice to stimulate the audience to get into the mood—
irit—of the thir
eduction sticks te an overwer
. If the pi


ventional, unimaginative version of a familiar opus, the need for a good
score becomes a desperate must, just as a Rudolf Bing is needed in the
Met to give Faust a good, novel ballet sequence which will keep jeweldecked dowagers from yawning. But the scoring in Macbeth was far
from letter-perfect, and needed more than the scant two days alloted to
prepare a satisfactory musical background, one bursting with terror and
cerieness. Some passionately lyrical strains from Shubert and Tchaikowsky were out of place if Macbeth is indeed supposed to be the goriest drama
ever written since the Oedipus Rex.


-EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


AWLA


50


the collected poems of chesterton
dodd, mead, and co., 1932
GRFAT IDEAS make great men. If an idea worthy of a man can so possess a person that all his thoughts are governed by it, that all his actions
spring from it, all his life aimed at it, then to my mind, that person is
great; as great as Virgil who lived only to glorify Imperial Rome; as
great as Catullus who was so possessed by his love for Clodia that he
slowly died when he lost it. Now Chesterton had one big goal in life: to
defend the precious idea he had found, the Catholic Church. And this he
did with all his genius, with all his heart. He was a great man.
Leafing through the book of Chesterton’s poems, I noticed one theme
running through it: The Catholic Faith. His great masterpieces, “The
Ballad of the White Horse” and "Lepanto", his humorous verses like “The
Philantrophist" or “Jealousy" are all filled with the Catholic Spirit, permeated with the Catholic attitude. Paganism, Mohammedanism, Godless
Communism, senseless Atheism, and muddled Protestantism, all are targets
of G.K.C.’s pen.
I have mentioned in passing that Chesterton’s great works were "Lepanto" and “The Ballad of the White Horse”. Perhaps in other people’s
minds some of his other poems are better, perhaps my decision has been
influenced over-much by professors who have told me that those two were
his master-pieces. Still I think that if this were the first time I read Chesterton, and all my prejudgments were erased I would still rank them “the
best” Not even in his essays have I enjoyed G.K. Chesterton more.
Never has he been as blazingly colorful as in "Lepanto". Without any
doubt, this is his technicolor production. He shows us the courts of Europe and Mohammed’s paradise; he pictures for us bitter battles between
Christian and Moor, and the joys of triumph, and the sense of disaster.
All through the poem we hear the rumbling of martial music, tho shriek
of fifes and the thunder of drums and the pounding of horses’ hooves. His
description of the phial of poison in Philip’s hand brings back to me Thompson’s picture of evil in his story, "Finis Coronat Opus".
One of the first rules we learn when we first try to write verse is,
“Only amateurs end-stop every line.” ' Chesterton does this deliberately in


51


“Lepanto” And with it he achieves a particular effect: the throbbing
thunder of his peculiar six-beat line, the glorious rumble that seems to be
the back-ground music of the entire poem.
“The Ballad of the White Horse" the longest of Chesterton’s poems is
a still greater poem. In one retreat we had in High School, the director
quoted a stanza from this poem to us. It went:
“Belief that grew of all beliefa
One moment back was blown.
And belief that stood on unbelief
Stood up iron and alone.”"
While reading the whole poem, a reading which for years I had looked forward to, I came across these lines and, as they had impressed me
with their meaning then, still now did they awaken in me awe at Chesterton’s ability to express that simple and profound truth which others
have tried to state in lengthy sermons, so concisely and so completely, so
impressively.
In my opinion, the best part of this poem is “The Harp of Alfred”
Here we see the Christian king entering the camp of the enemy disguised
as a minstrel, and with his ideas defeating the strange fearful gods of the
barbaric invaders. They laughed at him, those unthinking warlike men, little knowing that the morrow’s battle was being fought and won by Alfred
in their camp that night.
Taken as a whole Chesterton’s poetry has a warm, laughing clarity
to it that all of us enjoy. And though it appeals to the mind, because
the thought is often subtle, it also pleases and satisfies our senses. Color
is one of his most important tools. Another tool is sound (read "Lepanto"
aloud!). When he writes of camps, you can hear the kettle-drums and the
singing of soldiers and the restless war horses whinnying in their stalls.
But I still think his most important contribution to the most important
people on earth, is his defense of “The Myth of King Arthur". The round
table a myth? Camelot a myth? Gawaine? Launcelot? Percival? Tristan?
All who have been children and have built castles in the air, gone forth
to battle for their ladies fair will agree with Chesterton that this is unpardonably heretical nonserse. The poem does, in epitome, what all Chesterton’s poetry tries to do: reassert unto sharp realization the unshakable
value of the old ties, the ties to the things of the spirit and, through them,
to Eternity.
—GABINO MENDOZA Jr., '53


AVe


52


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


ot books and things


ALMOST NOBODY paid much attention to National Book Week.
That can be interpreted as a compliment or a sign of the times.
At least it shouldn’t be something
particularly new to a college student, this interest for books. Books
are to the mind what a ham sandwich is to the digestive juices; they
are taken for granted, like breakfast. No one questions the fact
that a standard education is spent
one-half in classrooms and textbooks
and the other half in reading for
further profit and pleasure. The
most the teacher can do is whet our
curiosities and cultural appetites,
give us the right perspective in
charting the seas of wisdom. We
are left on our own to grow up intellectually, develop a mature appreciation for Life, enrich ourselves
with experiences to fortify us in
the dangerous headwaters of reality and the war of ideas.
Embalmed in the pages of books
are the wealth of thought of centuries: they are everybody’s for the
asking, the choicest flowering of the
human spirit in Socrates and Aristotle, in blind Homer talking of
the flaming wastelands of Asia Minor, in the tubercular Keats envisioning a world of hope in spite of
so much ugliness and stupidity, in
the epileptic Dostoevsky, a towering
brave Titan, writing of the suffering of humanity, the daspair and terror, the bleakness and the ultimate
beauty of suffering. Reading these
authors makes one think that there
is such a thing as a soul in a time


of de-humanization, when flesh is
glorified above spirit, matter over
mind. Everybody talks of birth control, Communism, the Korean front,
the Atomic Bomb; men may quarrel over a girl, politics, even God.
But who would pick up a fist-fight
over a beautiful painting, a beautiful short story? For beauty, truth,
and goodness are universal verities
which break the borders of racial
differences, geography, even time.
Someone has put it more beautifully:
Left to themselves, men tend to
love beautiful things, regardless of
what nation, race, or period has
created them. They will not spurn
Goethe’s Faust... because they happen to loathe Germans; they will
not despise Shakespeare because
they have met an Englishman or
two they couldn’t tolerate....
In this matter, who hates Tolstoy
writing about the peasants breaking the ancient clods, because he
was a Russian?
Less and less people who talk in
terms of chromosomes and statistics
are compelled to read a book — because it has really nothing to do
with making a lot of money. There
was a time when the people who
haunted the cafeteria quoted Chesterton with an air of infallibility
and got sufficiently mad at the materialism of the world, the decadent
cubists, the Nazis. More and more
the subject in the eating place revolves now around a debut. It is
heartening, however, to find that
there are still a few who do not


53


think Shakespeare is an outdated
poet or a showpiece dramatist for
stiff-collared ham actors, or Cyrano
a tremendous bore, or bald-pated
Horace a queer fish wrapped in a
toga. All is not lost — yet.
Or are we simply talking through
our hat? Are college students neglecting the reading of such Booksof-the-Centuries, as the dynamic
Confesgions of St. Augustine, in
preference to ephemeral Book-ofthe-Month best sellers crammed with
violence and booming frigates?
Lately, the Campion Literary Guild,
distinguished for its traditional annual book exhibits of great Catholic literature, is baginning to scratch
its wizened head: Is it accomplishing the aims of the Guild, namely,
to spread an appreciation of good
literature? Is an Annual Book Exhibit paying dividends? Or is it
altogether a waste of time and effort? In one of the Guild’s meetings of keymen, somebody mentioned that it was even difficult to get
members excited enough to review a
recent good book in four weeks"
time. On the other hand, the librarian reports that there are still
habitues who clamor for a Seven
Storey Mountain, a War and Peace,
and a battered volume of Chester
ton’s poems and essays. But unless
it be a book by a sensational or
talked-about author, most readers
don’t bother to look up the books in
the choice list prepared by the Guild,
including such worthwhile reading
as Conrad, Churchill, Waugh, Cather, Moliere.
To one hopeful observer, it would
seem that these students who drift
are not getting all their money’s
worth by using an up-to-date school
library that can boast of having the
complete works of Dickens, Stevenson, Conrad, et al, and the best in


the moderns, Cleanth Brooks, Sinclair Lewis, Eliot, Henry James,
Mauriac, F. Scott Fitzgerald. Last
semester, when the QUARTERLY
was neck-deep in a controversy for
having mentioned the names of
Faulkner and Hemingway, a great
many were not sure what the fireworks were all about. Nobody cared
to investigate certain facts about
modern literature, art, poetry, style,
and technique, in a library that can
supply the answers by reading Mauriac'a God and Mammon, Lloyd
Frankenburg’s Pleasure Dome, the
modern short story anthologies,
Eliot's Complete Essays. Let'a be
honest. Those who would say they
do not have the time are either kidding themselves or don’t know how
to read a good novel or a good poem
when they see one. If it be so,
then National Book Week is a need,
if only to remind people everywhere
that books are not dull, that there
are books for everyone’s taste, whether for profit or entertainment; or
if only to destroy the impression that
a book is a bore. An evening spent
reading Belloc’s On or Graham
Greene's The Power and the Glory
can be just as interesting as watching a Hitchcock movie, if not more
so.
Of all the activities we have, the
Campion Literary Guild has the burden of guiding the intellectual interest for the best books among students. It is now preparing literary
discussion programs to stimulate
people to read the authors under
discussion, e.g. C. S. Lewis. It can
conduct informal, easy round-table
talks similar to the Invitation to
Learning programs once aired over
Voice of America. If the Guild has
another Exhibit this year, we hope
it will put an adequate number of
representative Catholic writers in


54


the philosophy and fiction departments above all. The fiction and
poetry sections need more significant
titles of such Catholic writers as
Waugh, Merton, Powers, O'Faolain,
O'Connor, Greene, Mauriac, Chesterton, Bloy, and Bernanos.


Incidentally, if you are thinking
of giving a Christmas gift to a beloved one, there are several reprints
of Fulton J. Sheen’s books and
Father Keller’s You Can Change the
World in downtown bookstores.


footnote
TWO ARTICLES (most probably written by the same author) appearing in the national weekly, This Week, and in the newly born Varsitarian
Quarterly (vivat!) caught our interest lately. Well-written. After reading
them, though, we begin to wonder. What is campus writing? What is a
college literary organ? Its raison d'etre?
A college literary organ, we take it, is a magazine containing works
written by the students themselves. Otherwise we call it something else,
exempli gratia, Faculty Literary Organ. A college literary organ has for
its (chief) purpose, using the words of the critic himself, to serve as "standard breaking grounds for campus talent in fiction and the essays".
Incidentally, the Ateneo Quarterly, written by students of college proper, was bracketed with UP’s Literary Apprentice, FEU’s Cross-roads, Silliman U’s Sands and Coral, and some others. Ateneo campus writers to
their pleasant surprise suddenly found themselves, by the logic of that classification, hobnobbing in greatness with such literary professionals as NVM
Gonzalez, Oscar de Zuniga, r. v. asis, Manuel Viray, Edith and Edilberto
Tiempo, et cetera.
So far, except for a short story and a poem by Law students, the Ateneo
Quarterly has published only articles written by the students of the Arts
and Sciences. We have not got around to publishing the poems and short
stories of our graduates and professors yet. Any attempt to have the magna
opera of the Faculty and Alumni printed in the Quarterly will necessitate
either the creation of a new magazine apart from the college literary organ, or a mass exodus of the editors. For we believe that such an action
would destroy the very purpose of a college literary organ....
Ateneo bards are busy tuning up their rusty lyres these days. Reason:
the new poetry magazine, Front. No doubt you have noticed that this issue
of the Quarterly is flowering with song. Almost eighty-percent of the
poems are being re-printed from Front, with the permission of the Front
editors of course. One rainy afternoon, we had the pleasure of getting
acquainted, over literary cokes and at art exhibits downtown, with this species
of humanity, called poets, who gave being to Front. (An cccentric lot they
are. But as Homer says, in order to be a writer, one must somehow be
a crackpot.) Some things they cannot tolerate, viz.: 1) pseudo-poets (sic)
on college campuses who think that Horace, Catullus, Shakespeare, Byron,


55


Keats and company are a bunch of old fools, and 2) “campus Medievalists,
Romanticists, Victorians" who hate everything modern in poetry like the
devil. Wine, pardon, coke flowed freely, so did the conversation, but the
art exhibits disgusted us.
Alas," lamented one of the bards, rending his
vest, "just like modern Filipino poetry. Sex, sex, sex, sexi” He was so
disgusted the last time we heard from him he was seriously contemplating
giving up the fine arts altogether and going fishing instead....
We hear that Harry B. Furay, Jesuit, poet and friend, has been doing
yeoman work channeling the exuberance of these young poets into saner
streams. Drunk with words, he complains. He too has helped us very
much. We therefore take this occasion to thank him for 1) giving us so
many pages this issue, 2) cheering us up when our spirits are low, and 3)
keeping, by his talks on Christian humility and humor, us Quarterly editors
from eating one another when our temperaments clash like swords. (Father Furay, by the way, is the Quarterly’s moderator. Or he is supposed
to be, at least.)
Speaking of Christian humility and humor, if only nations, whose
tempers are running short these days, had some more of these virtues...
at any rate, men can always wish. Let us make it a Christmas wish then.
—The EDITORS


the staff


editor-in-chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . Gregorio C. Brillantes, Litt. B. '52
22
senior editors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Leonidas Benesa, A.B. '5
Eduardo Lachica, Litt. B. '52
Emmanuel S. Torres, A.B. '53
staff contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . Jaime Dy-Liacco, Litt. B. '52
Ricardo Henson, Litt. B. '52
Antonio G. Manuud, A.B. '52
Robert D. Wilson, A.B. '52
Gabino Mendoza, A.B. '53
Ricardo Nepomuceno, A.B. '53


Pablo Silva, A.B. '53
Guillermo V. Soliven, A.B. '53
Vivencio Peralta, Litt. B. '54
Meliton Salazar, A.B. '54
circulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Manuel M. Garcia, Litt. B. '52, Mgr.
Eladio Aldecoa, A.B. '52
Nemesio Dacanay, A.B. '52
Oscar Pacquing, Litt. B. '52


56


A

N


*
N
1
Il
4

4







AD MAJOREM DEI GLORIAM


tne ateneo quarterly
COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES
ATENEO DE MANILA


editor-in-chief:


Gregorio C. Brillantes, Litt. B. '52


senior editors:


Lconidas V. Benesa, A.B. '52
Eduardo Lachica, Litt. B. '52
Emmanuel S. Torres, A.B. '53


contributors:


Jaime Dy-Liacco, Litt. B. '52
Ricardo Henson, Litt. B. '52
Antonio G. Manuud, A.B. '52
Robert D. Wilson, A.B. '52
Gabino Mendoza, A.B. '53
Ricardo Nepomuceno, A.B. '53
Pablo Silva, A.B. '53
Guillermo V. Soliven, A.B. '53
Vivencio Peralta, Litt. B. '54
Meliton Salazar, A.B. '54


circulation staff:


Manuel M. Garcia, Litt. B. '52, Mgr.
Eladio Aldecoa, A.B. '52
Nemesio Dacanay, A.B. '52
Oscar Pacquing, Litt. B. '52


contents
march, 1952
volume three, number four
prose
GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES
"all the sad young men...”
MELITON V. SALAZAR
the man with the hee
14
the priest
RAMON G. C. BARCELONA
17
GABINO MENDOZA JR.
the uncomprehending darkness 22
ROBERT WILSON
the boy who searched for gold 29
EDUARDO H. G. SEVILLA
deception
33
maria
VIVENCIO PERALTA JR.
37
PABLO SILVA
40
maestro over matter
ROQUE FERNANDO, JI.
tomorrow, the world
43
RAMON G. C. BARCELONA
portrait of a businessman
44
poetry
restfulness
LEONIDAS V. BENESA
13
GERVASIO DIAZ
19
transition
fragments: the deserts of God 20
LEONIDAS BENESA
EMMANUEL TORRES
the exile
27
27
ERNESTO ROCELES
green valley
FRANZ ARCENAS
credo
28
september
GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES
28
MELITON V. SALAZAR
32
art critic
42
JAIME E. DY-LIACCO
sea-crossing
EDUARDO D. LACHICA
soliloquy
42
THE ATENEO QUARTELY is published four times annually by the College of Arts
and Selences, Ateneo de Maniia. Its editorial offices are at the Atenco de Manila.
Padre Faura Street. Manila, Philippines; its publishing office at M. Colcol & Co..
878 Rizal Avenue, Manila. This publication was entered in the Post Office of Manila
as second class maillng matter on September 10, 1940.


2


ROOrORX


CALVARY


IT WAS a hot, thundering afternoon 20 centuries ago. A horde
of screaming, blood-thirsty men followed Him Who was called
Jesus of Nazareth up the blazing road to the Mountain of the
Skull. He carried a wooden cross: the soldiers mocked Him.
At last, on the final mountain, they nailed His hands and
feet to the wooden cross. Amid shouts and jeers, they raised the
cross, carelessly, and hanged Christ, Our Lord, between earth
and sky.
In Lent, we commemorate this great sacrifice of Love.
We remember the spikes hammered through the hands of
Christ, Our Lord; we remember the crown of thorns; the spear
that tore His Body; the Blood that fell on the parched, cracked
earth of Golgotha. We remember the Sacrifice that opened Heaven for all mankind; the Death that resurrected Life over the
world.
We remember Calvary, with sorrow, and penance, and humility. We remember, too, with hope and joy, for Christ rose
from the tomb, in shining glory, brighter than all His suns. And
we try to make this remembrance the ultimate, beating heart of
cur lives.
It was a hot, thundering afternoon 20 centuries ago, when
life began for us, when Christ died at three o’clock, hanging from
a cross between earth and sky....
—G.C.B.


THE DIALECTICS OF LENT


THERE IS no doubt about it, but the world has hit rock-bottom.
The rockbottom of pure materialism. It was this materialism
that ate away the fiber of the famed Roman empire of Virgil,
and reduced the glory of Homer’s Athens to the dung-hill. It
is this same materialism that has been crushing empires, governments, all kinds of human society to the dust, for centuries. The
same that is rushing modern man to his destruction, unless—
Thesis: Antithesis: Synthesis....


3


Humanity cries for the synthesis of peace. But Thesis to Synthesis is illogical. The gap between must be bridged. We must
have the Antithesis.
Not a few are advocating another world war as the Antithesis. Yet, history bears witness that world wars cannot be
the solution. For as long as self-interest, the essential note of
materialism, reigns in men’s hearts, the thesis stands. The crisis
remains.
The real antithesis of materialism is Christian supernaturalism. The beautiful, vital supernaturalism streaming from the
wellsprings of Christ’s Mystical Body. We want peace. We can
get it—at a price. For behind the very concept of the Mystical
Body looms the supplementary concept, the terrible yet beautiful
concept of the Cross. The seed must be buried in the ground
before it grows. The beauty, the glory of the Resurrection was
made real only after the Passion and Death of Our Lord.
Not until we have peace of soul can we have peace in the
world.
Lent is here. The season of the Passion is here. The spirit
of this season is self-denial and sacrifice. This is the bloody
price of peace. For writers, who are responsible to God for most
of the ills of our modern world, this means writing wholesome
literature, or at least writing less obscene books. (No sane-minded
person would doubt that Boccacio and his ilk in modern dress have
contributed not a little to the present crisis.) It takes men to
make this sacrifice. It takes heroism. There seems to be no
other choice.
-L. V. B.


THE SUMMING UP


ART, ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE, is a moral activity. Literature, in this light, shows men not merely as they are, but rather as
they “ought" to be: literature reenacts life with the inherent purpose of interpreting and criticizing life on a moral basis. Not merely the actions of men, therefore, are the subject-matter of creative
writing; but the actions of men under the aspect of whether they
are morally good or evil. This concept of art as fundamentally
moral is the central idea that dominates the critical principles
of Catholic reading and writing: it has been so, for centuries, even
before Cardinal Newman claimed, in his now classic discourse,
that thinking man in the West will always be Aristotelian.
A large body of contemporary fiction seems to be one long
protest, cloaked in diverse forms, against this Catholic and Aris

4


totelian concept of art. Books like Sinclair Lewis’ Cass Timberlane or Steinbeck’s Wayward Bus are, indeed, from the stand-point
of prose technique, remarkable portrayals of contemporary life;
but in these books, there is no clear perception of man’s ultimate
end and purposes; a slice of social or marital life is photographed,
as it were, with accurate clarity, yet without the faintest glimmer
of what man “ought" to be. The straw-men of modern fiction
move through a Thomas Wolfe-ish limbo of broken images: the
creations of Norman Mailers and James Joneses belong to some dimension of place and time controlled irrevocably by sub-human
forces, where they grope and fumble helplessly toward a destiny
which lies waiting in a vague implication of “destruction." Undeniably hostile to, or stubbornly ignorant of, the West’s traditional Catholic and Aristotelian concept of art, are also the dimea-dozen writers who do not recognize sin for what it is, an offense against God, ugly and horrifying: bolstered by the 20th
century motion-picture and the cheap pocket-book, they proclaim, in tones of glittering seductiveness, that adultery is love
that cannot be denied fulfillment; that brutality is admirable male
virility; that dishonesty is courageous cleverness. Thus, the
photographic technique of the “realistic” school, the clinical obsession of writers with characters stripped of moral choice, the
refusal to recognize sin for what it is, have built a literature
as pagan as a Congo temple: man, if he is not brute animal, is
an amoral shadow, powerless in his despair and forever lost.
But against this babble of confused voices, the Aristotelian
and Catholic tradition has not died out, is still growing. The
affirmative belief in man as he ought to be has steadily strengthened in contemporary writing, since the years when Huxley and
Hemingway published their novels. Books such as Marquand’s
So Little Time and John Hersey's A Bell for Adano combine a
sensible realism with the awareness of the life that ought to
be. By contrast and wistful overtones, man is shown as he
ought to be, as he might have been had he only struggled some
more, and fought some more. Hersey’s books, in particular,
glow with a genuine love for mankind: a score of up-and-coming
novelists share in his deep affection. The most powerful and
significant books being written in this tradition, however, are
those which, in the words of Sister Mariella Gable, O.S.B., critic and anthologist, “hit the center of Catholic fiction. These
are the books of Evelyn Waugh and Graham Greene, of Bernanos and Mauriac and Paul Claudel: Brideshead Revisited, The
Heart of the Matter, The Power and the Glory, Star of Satan.
The theme of sin, of moral good and evil, is presented with such
breathless artistry and impact; the metaphysical conflict in man’s
soul is mirrored and interpreted in its truest actuality: the resulting
drama is infinitely more real and intense than the raw fleshand-blood concoctions of the Farrells and the Hemingways. This
Is the noblest aspect of literature: the treatment of man more


fully, in his relation to God: the beautiful realization of the preciousness of the human soul in the eyes of God.
Great literature is being written in the Catholic and Aristotelian tradition. It is great literature because it portrays
man more fully, man as a moral creature. The works of the
greatest writers — Dante, Milton, Shakespeare, Racine — are
fundamentally religious, treating of man as a moral being created
by God and responsible to Him. Today the tradition is being
carried on by Waugh and Greene and other Catholic writers of
superb talent: modern literature is moving forward into a new
realism that seeks above all else to restore the dignity of the
human spirit. A bright sun of vision and aspiration rises over
the dark wastes of contemporary writing: the literature that
it inspires will live and grow and outlast the blind heresies of
our time, for man knows, in his heart, that he seeks and is
lonely for God.
-G.C.B.


GREGORIO C. BKILLANTES, '52


Short Stories



an the sad young men...


for L. P.


1, restaurant in quiapo, 12:30 a.m.



AAk/





FUDROS
n A00





4


*
* Y


2PP


Scbrlak


AL AND PEPE entered the restaurant and took the first table nearest
the door. It was past midnight. The
only customer besides the two young
men was a soldier drinking beer.
The Chinese proprictor yawned behind the greasy counter. The waitress, a small, thin girl with large
child-eyes, took their order: two
beers and peanuts. A light rain
fell on the street outside.
Al was squat and dark. His squarish face was raw with pimples.
Pepe was younger than Al: he was
nineteen. His crew cut and soft
features made him look even younger. The two young men had gone


to the last show at the Boulevard
Theater They sat smoking, waiting
for their beers.
The waitress brought their beers.
Pepe noticed how pale she was. Her
thin hands showed bony as they
clutched the frosted bottles.
“Not much of a movie, Al said.
“We should’ve gone to the Times,"
Pepe said.
They poured the amber liquid into their glasses, slowly. Between
gulps, they smoked and munched the
peanuts. The soldier paid for his
drinks and shuffled out of the restaurant. The two young men
watched him cross the street, unhurriedly, in the rain.
"Al,” Pepe said.
“Yuh?” Al said.
"You going to that dance?'
“What dance?"
“The class-dance, next Saturday,"
Pepe said.
"Sure, I am going. Al said.
"Who's your date?
“Mely, Al said. "Who’re you
bringing?
“Nobody,” Pepe said.
"Why don’t you invite Trining?”
"Fred’s sister?”
"Yuh. Why don’t you?”
“I don’t know,” Pepe said. "I
guess I’ll go stag."
'Aaah, you oughta bring a girl."
"I don’t know" Al said.
They drank their beer. Across
the wide, rain-cold street, an empty
bus waited patiently for passengers.
The young men could hear the conductor calling out, "Pasay, Taft, Pasay. A gust of wind blew through
the rain.
"Al,” Pepe said.
Al finished his beer and lighted
a fresh cigarette.
"Al, you've known a lot of girls,
Al?”


Al smiled. "Enough to keep one
going," he said.
“There was a girl...
“You love-sick ass, Al said.
“There was a girl I used to know,
Pepe said.
“That’s good, Al said. "A girl I
used to know What happened?
Ran away with your best friend?'
“There was a girl,” Pepe said.
“We used to talk for hours. She
lived in Baclaran, near the sea. Their
porch faced the sea.
Al called the waitress and ordered
another beer. Pepe said he had had
enough. Al emptied the bottle into his glass.
“Tell me more, Al said, smiling
good-naturedly at Pepe.
“Her name was Angela,” Pepe
said. "She was a slim, quiet girl.
We talked of a lot of things. What
we wanted to be, the past and the
future. She was a wonderful girl.
Al."
“Loved her?” Al said.
“Yes,” Pepe said. "She was beautiful. She said wonderful things.
I remember the way she talked. The
words coming slowly and sincerely."
"An unusual girl, huh?"
“I think she wanted to be a nun.
Pepe said.
“That’s why you left her, huh?
“One day when I went to her
place,” Pepe said, “the house was
boarded up, the sign For Rent
tacked up in front. I don’t know
where she is now."
"A very sad ending," Al said,
making a face. “You oughta tell the
plot to Ben. The guy likes stories
with tragic endings.
"Angela,” Pepe said. “The most
wonderful girl I’ve ever known."
"You sound drunk already. Might
as well have another beer."


8


"Ill never know another girl like
her,” Pepe said.
“You come to the dance Saturday,
Al said.
“I don’t know,” Pepe said.
“Our class-dances have the most
beautiful girls in the whole world,"
Al said. "You bring Trining. Who
knows, maybe she wants to be a nun
too, huh?'
“It’s twelve-thirty,” Pepe said,


rising abruptly. "Finish your beer
and let’s go."
Al drank the last of his beer and
paid the waitress. She smiled briefly at them. The two young men
zippered their jackets and walked out
into the fine rain. There was hardly any traffic on the street. They
hailed a jcepney for their boardinghouse in Paco. Along the way, it
started to rain hard. The wind blew
sprays of rain against their faces.


2, like song in a dark room


BEN saw Lydia talking to a group
of young men. She had bright, alert eyes, an expressive face. She
was vibrantly happy, young and tall
in a blue dress. Tonight, she was
eighteen.
Lydia noticed him coming, and she
smiled for him. She met him halfway across the flood-lighted lawn.
"Happy Birthday," Ben said, giving
his gift, a box of stationery.
"Thank you, Ben, thank you," Lydia said. "It’s so good of you to
come."
“You’re very happy,” Ben said.
“And so excited," Lydia said. "So
many people, and everything just
grand and wonderful.” She talked
breathlessly, her eyes shining.
Lydia excused herself to grect the
incoming guests. Ben joined his
friends, Mike, Raul, and Caloy. The
lawn was beginning to fill up with
people. It was a clear night, cool,
with stars. Lydia flitted from guest
to guest, excited and pretty in the
bright glow of the lights.
The orchestra broke into a waltz.
Couples got up from the tables set
on the lawn, and danced on the wide
drive-way. A curly-haired young
man danced with Lydia.


The orchestra had played almost
a dozen pieces before Ben could
dance with Lydia. She was tall, for
a girl, and she danced lightly,
smoothly.
“How does it feel to be cighteen?"
“It’s a heady feeling," Lydia said.
"like — like —"
"Like being eighteen," Ben said.
“Oh Ben."
“I wish you all the happiness in
the world."
“I wish you the same,” Lydia said.
They talked of inconsequential
things, of Doy showing off before
the girls, of Tito’s latest joke. He
laughed with her, and was happy.
“Ben," she said suddenly, "tell me
something.” Her voice was serious.
now, and her eyes searched his, intensely.
"Ben," she said, "why do you
write?”
He looked away, beyond her crown
of hair, to the white mansion rising sheer from the lawn. Now he
knew it was not easy to explain to
this girl, cighteen, the long nights.
the sharp awareness of time passing.
the images that haunted him. It
was, not easy, with the music and
the laughter of the party bright a

9


round him.
"It’s a hobby,” he said.
“Just like bowling, or stamps?
“Yes,” he said. "Something to
pass the time with.
“But it’s more than that, she
said, querulously.
He thought of his hunger for the
right words and of loneliness like
song in a dark room.
"It’s like playing the piano, he
said. “You come to love the music.
You play, don’t you?"
"A little, she said. She paused,
then, “You like fast music?'
"Not so much,” he said. “Give me
a slow tune anytime."
"Me, I like them fast. What’s your
favorite color?"


“Blue," he said. “Blue, the blue
of your dress.
"I like blue, she said. Also green
and pink. Green grass and pink
clouds. But I like blue most of all.
Are you enjoying yourself?”
“Yes, sure, he said.
He brought her to her seat, thanked her. He went to his friends
table at the far end of the lawn.
He sat down with them, and watched
the dancing. He half-listened to
Mike describing the extravagant
charms of some mestiza. Lydia was
dancing with the tall, curly-haired
young man, talking and laughing
with him. He wished he could tell
her of the long nights and the loneliness that was like song in a dark
room.


3. teresa


THEY ATE at a panciteria, went
to a movie, and later in the afternoon, to the Luneta. They sat on
a bench in the park and talked in
whispers. He told her again he
loved her, that he'd marry her after graduation, and he asked her
again if she'd love him too. She
said she didn’t know, she wasn’t
sure whether she loved him, but was
trying her best to find out if she
did, he was so good and kind and
thoughtful. Her name was Teresa.
She was frail and beautiful and wore
her hair long.
From the park they went to the
beach. The sun was setting. They
sat on the sea-wall. He told her
she must love him too, otherwise
the world meant nothing to him, he
was nobody, nothing, if she didn’t
care for him. “Give me time, Ric,
she said, "please don’t hurry me,
give me time to think please, I like


you a lot, Ric. 1 don’t know if I
love you, give me time. He asked
her if there was someone else she
loved, and she said "No, no, almost
angrily, “there's no one else, and


10


he felt contrite and humble and he
said again he loved her, and his
voice was sad with the longing of
the search for love.
Then it was evening in the city,
and he walked her to her house in
Ermita. They walked in silence, and
he thought of the years, and he was
afraid of the emptiness and the disillusion, and his heart beat heavily
for her to love him.
“Good night," she said, before the
gate, "I like you Ric, thanks for
everything.” But she did not move
away, she stood there, before him,


looking at him, frail and lovely, and
his love rushed through him and he
went to her slowly, and kissed her.
She was soft and yielding, pressing
against him in his arms. Suddenly
she broke away, stared at him as
though he were a repulsive stranger,
started to utter something, choked.
and then ran through the gate into
the house. He was stunned and bewildered and hurt. Teresa, his lips
formed the word, soundlessly, knowing with a pang of loss and regret
that somehow he had destroyed
something noble and beautiful.


4. reunion


NICK OPENED the door, and
switched on the light. Eddie and
Max followed Nick into the narrow
low-ceilinged room. Pushed against
the wall was an army cot: above it
hung a Sacred Heart calendar. A table littered with books and paper
stood in a corner. There was only
one chair in the room.
“Here we are, guys,” Nick announced grandly. “Relax, feel at
home. All drinks on the house. He
placed the bottle of rum on the table. "III get the cokes and the
glasses. Sit down, the place’s yours.
He went out of the room.
Eddie and Max sat down on the
cot. They examined the room, the
unscrubbed floor, the cigarette-butts,
the rain-stained walls. Eddie looked
over the books on the table: Turgenev, Greene, Steinbeck. Nick returned with the cokes and the glasses.
“Now for a bout with Bacchus,
Nick said. "Sure you can handle
him, Eddie?”
“We’ll drink the sonamagun under
the table,” Eddie said.


“That’s the spirit, guy,” Nick said.
“This is a special occasion. Haven’t
seen you bums for two — yes two
years.” He cleared a space on the
table, sweeping the books and the
scraps of paper against the wall.
He sat on the chair, and started
mixing the drinks.
“Where you working now Nick?'
Max asked.
“Bouncer for a night-club.
"Not with that build, Max laughed.
"An advertising agency,” Nick
said. "I think up fancy slogans and
stuff like that and get paid for it.
In between, I write stories that
don’t sell, go to the races, visit society matrons, and pray for the salvation of the Class of '52.
"Father Dolan shouldn’t be too
disappointed," Eddie said.
“That was a class, Nick said. "A
class of geniuses.” He handed Max
and Eddie their drinks. "Some were
lazy, just fooled around. But deep
down they were geniuses. Even Manolo and Vic. All of us.
"Let’s drink to that, Eddie said.


11


“To Class of 52 and Father Dolan,
Max said.
They drank and smoked. The cigarette-smoke curled upward to the
ceiling, lingered there before drifting out through the window. The
warm drink stirred memory, brought
the young men to a common past.
“Remember that Prom, Nick?'
Eddie said.
“Yuh,” Nick said. "Everybody
proud and cocky with his best girl.
Say, how’s Perla?” he asked Max.
“Married," Max said. "Town-mate,
childhood sweetheart."
"A shame, Nick said, "turning
down a fine guy like you."
"Max’s too good for any girl, Eddie said.
“Let’s drink to that, Nick said,
lifting his glass. “To Max, the answer to a spinster’s prayer." They
touched glasses, laughing.
"Still taking law Max?” Nick
askod.
“Yup," Max said. “This is what
we call a bar-review course.
“Ho-ho-ha-ha. And you, Eddie?
"Still with the Herald,” Eddie
said. "I turn out sports copy by
the ream. I should be writing
poetry.
“To Eddie, the frustrated poet,
Nick said, raising his glass.
"Frustrated, my eye!" Max said.
“I saw you last weck. Eddie, with
a girl, downtown."
"Our society editor, Eddie said.
"To Eddie, poet and lover,” Nick
said. They drank. "How's Nanding’s
Ford?” Nick asked. "The thing still
running?"
"He sold it after graduation and
went south somewhere, Eddie said.
“The bum, Max said.
“Used to tell me he wanted to buy
an island and just sleep all day under the coconut trees, Eddie said.
“The bum," Max said.
“I miss that old jalopy,” Nick


said. "Remember that time the
thing broke down and we had to
push it all the way to the Dean’s office?
"We got Post that day," Max said.
“And George fainted from the
heat,” Eddie said.
"He was play-acting, the bum,"
Max said.
"How he loved to argue in class,"
Eddie said.
“He'll be a Congressman someday,
Max said.
“He could act, that George,” Nick
said. “That play. Even the Dean
was rolling in the aisles.
“Remember that time we crammed
for the exams?” Max said. "He
wanted to buy a case of beer, the
bum."
Nick went out to gat more cokes.
They began a new round of drinks.
The cigarette-smoke thickened in the
room. They toasted themselves,
their old professors, the girls they
knew, their classmates, those who
were making good, even those who
were doing badly.
“Roque still teaching?” Nick asked.
“Yup," Max said. “Joe’s in the
seminary."
"Since when?"
"A year now," Max said.


12


"He taught for a while in the province,” Eddie said.
"To
“That’s great, Nick said.
Joe, hero of the Class of '52.”
“Tony'll join him this summer,"
Eddie said.
“To Joe and Tony, Nick said,
"may there be more guys like them.
They finished the bottle. Max and
Eddie rose to leave. “C’mon guys,
let’s drink some more,” Nick said.
'It’s late, Eddie, said.
“Thanks for the drinks, Nick,
Max said. He swayed a little.
"Forget it, Nick said. "Sure you
guys can find your way home?”
"Im not drunk, Max said. "Im
just half dead."
“Come around again, Nick said.
They shook hands.
“Thanks, Nick. We’ll come around."
“Come around again, and we'll
drink to the good old days."
“Sure, Nick.


"So long, Nick.
“Bye, Eddie, Max.
After Max and Eddie had gone,
Nick switched off the light and lay
in the darkness. It was almost midnight. Footsteps went up the hall.
A door opened, closed. He felt warm
and dizzy from the drink. His head
rocked like a heavy wooden box
floating on a slow river He took
off his wet shirt without getting up
from the cot. The juke-box in the
cafe down the street played jazz.
Why don’t they play something sweet
and soft? He was lonely for his college-days, the pride and the purposefulness and the school-spirit. He tried
to picture the face of Father Dolan,
but all he got was a white, headless
cassock. It occurred to him, like rain
falling, that he hadn’t prayed for a
long time. Contrition and sorrow
drummed in his brain. “I’ll see Father Dolan tomorrow" he said aloud
in the dark.


L.EONIDAS V BENESA, 52
restfulness
I love the quiet greenness of trees
Where the eye sees
And is not tired of seeing;
Where the heart mired, being
In grief,
Finds rdlicf
In watching a lone leaf
Fluttering by
From the leafy sky.


MELITON V. SALAZAR, '54


the man with the hoe


A YOUNG FRIEND of mine, who is
a much better man than I — his interest in the social order has leaped
the fence of mere passive indignation into the field of action — remarked with unrepressed enthusiasm
only the other day that he would
make Edwin Markham’s “The Man
With the Hoe” his "war cry.”
“It will be a fearful banner to
wave," my friend went on, "but it
will be a powerful standard."
He went off into a long eulogy
of the poem: how direct and brutal
the indictment against society, how
vivid and terrifying the concrete
picture of a universal "Man with the
Hoe,” how apt and how true the
savage prophecy, "How will it be
with kingdoms and with kings, when
whirlwinds of rebellion shake all
shores?'
“It fires me," my friend burst out.
"Doen't it fire you?"
I shuddered.
As I said before, my friend is a
much better man than I. He has
set out, on his own, to fight the injustice he sees in our social system.
He has not permitted himself the luxury of the most familiar excuse of
our generation: "Let us study first;
there will be ample time for the
fighting.” Then, too, he has acquired
more familiarity with social disorder through experience than I ever
will by reading books and attending
long-winded conferences on the inadequacy of present labor laws, the
justice of unionism, the black need
for living wages (elaborately rein

forced with india-ink statistical
charts and graphs). That is why I
did not, to use a vulgarism, "blow my
top.” That is why I nodded meckly
and agreed with everything he said,
although deep inside me I was calling him a fool. If he wanted to
wave Markham in the air, well and
good. If it helped him in any way.
I could not disillusion him. He probably had the best intentions; he
probably had read a high, noble
sentiment into the poem, something
Markham never wrote there. It had
become a battle-cry for him. Good.
We were both on the same side. Any
kind of a battle-cry would help.
But while he talked, quoting the
terrible, ringing lines, I could not
help shuddering again, and feeling
cold little streaks run up and down
my back. "A thing that grieves not,
and that never hopes, stolid and stunned, a brother to the ox...
Grieves not! Never hopes! Brother
to the ox!
Dear God, how have these lines
survived in a society of fundamentally decent men?
No, they do not grieve; they are
too hungry to grieve. For them even
tears have become a luxury. But
deep in their hearts — has Edwin
Markham ever looked into the eyes
he distorts so well? Has he not read
grief there? Grief is a human passion: it cannot be lost. They do not
grieve who are sub-human, or superhuman. Our workingman is neither
of these, although he is treated as
though he were the first and work

14


ed as though he were the second.
No, they do not hope, either. There
is no use working for them. The
haggard, sun-baked lowland tenant
never hopes. He does not dream of
a farm of his own, and fields of
rice and sugar-cane. He cannot hope
for redress and for the chance to
walk upon this rich earth as truly
a man as the landlord or the college-graduate. No, he is “the brother
to the ox, and is incapable of being
anything but that.
Long, long ago, I too was thrilled
by those lines. But little by little
the meaning they held jumped up
out of the poem, until the full form
of the genie Edwin Markham had
created stood out: a monster, an
ogre, a demon, a fiend! It represents
now all the mistakes, all the prejudices, the hatred, the scorn, the hypocrisy that man has been able to


haul up from the depths of his fallen nature. They could very well
have been written by the degenerate
aristocracy of crumbling Rome; by
the bigots of Elizabethan England;
by the foppish courtiers of Louis
XIV: by the Puritans of New England during the infant days of the
American nation; by Jim Crow: by
Adolf Hitler; by all the villains
and scavengers of history; by the
very dregs of humanity. They could
have been written by the penny hacendero, or by the pale hauteur of
his watery daughters. They have
embodied so well the empty condescension, the damning pity, the insufferable mercy of these. Yes, pity
him, poor beast. Poor brother to the
ox!
There are two types of scoundrels:
the one who is ruthlessly so and the
one who is slyly so. I prefer the


15


first.
The man who underpays, maltreats and overworks his employees
is, to be sure, one who belongs
down under.” He pretends he is
being just and will be properly indignant if you do not agree with
him. If driven to the wall, he will
end up by admitting everything and
laughing in your face and telling you
to go you-know-where. But that is
only when he is goaded. Otherwise
he will keep silent and go on overworking and maltreating and underpaying his men, "minding his business," as he is fond of saying, and
hoping that other people will mind
theirs. That type you can meet in
the open and fight in the open.
There is another type. The second type.
He is the man who maltreats, underpays and overworks his men just
as efficiently as anybody else. There
is a difference between him and
everybody else, though. He will not
only refuse to admit being unjust,
he will take great pains to tell you
how generous he has actually been.
He will have great and moving expressions of love and pity for "oun
unfortunate brothers.” He will, for
example, enchant you with the story
of how one or two of his tenants
children are going to night school,
of how his wife sent an aspirin tablet to one of the farm women gravely ill with typhoid, of how he lets
his farmhands go to the movies once
or twice a year... they are great
acts of charity, because, you know
they don’t really deserve them...
they don’t know what is good for
them... the tenants of other plantations don’t get as much....
It is at this point that one begins
to think of maggots and worms and
repulsive, creeping things; things we
step on and turn away from in disgust.


There is only one thing I am fervently grateful for: that the withered aristocrats are too stupid to be
poets nowadays; that even if they
did become poets, with poetry being
what it is these days, nobody would
understand them.
There is only one answer to “The
Man with the Hoe and that is:
"It’s a damn lie!"
In the Philippines and, I am sure,
in every country of the world, some
of the most sincere, the most honest,
and the most naturally intelligent
men and women are found among
those whom Markham damns so
thoroughly in his poem. The same
French peasant who "inspired" him
was the first one to break through
the stalemated feudalism of his time
and to erect in Europe the earliest
foundations of modern democracy.
In modern society, where the manyheaded form of decadence has raised itself once more, deterioration has
always begun from the top. The
root, burrowed safely into the earth,
has always been the only living organism left, when the tree has rotted. It is from these roots that new
shoots have sprung, to branch into
new life and give civilization a new
chapter and history a new page.
There will be no beginning; no beginning of fairness, no beginning of
justice, no beginning of the true social order, no beginning of a lasting
world peace until men learn to think
of Markham and his Man-with-theHoe as nothing but a big joke. “The
Man with the Hoe” is as much of a
human being as “The Man with the
Portfolio. He may be less educated.
but again, he may also be less crooked. But there is no "monstrous thing,
distorted and soul-quencht...
There is only one hypocrite, the
man who pretends, the man with the
big words and the inward smile.


16


RAMON G. C. BARCELONA


A Story


the priest


INTROIBO AD ALTARE DEI...
He had barely begun the Mass when
the soldiers burst into the house.
“You are under arrest,” the Lieutenant said. The Lieutenant was a
lean, angular man with hair plastered flat to his skull.
In the truck, he sat on the steel
floor between the soldiers. He had
long since discarded his soutane.
he was dressed in faded denims. He
had become thin from the constant
unrelenting pursuit, the nights spent
in the open fields, the hiding from
house to house.
“You are a fool, the Lieutenant


said, "believing in a fairy tale.
He checked an impulse to refute
the Lieutenant. He smiled quietly,
with his secret, immovable knowledge. He prayed for humility.
That night, the soldiers strapped
him to a chair in the Lieutenant’s
room. He was considered dangerous, a fanatic.
The Lieutenant asked him to renounce his priesthood, publicly, and
in writing.
“You are asking for the impossible,” he said.
The Lieutenant slapped him hard
across the face.


17


“You are an enemy of the people,
the Lieutenant said.
The Lieutenant knew he could not
move the man. But he enjoyed hitting the man’s face with his bare
fists until the man’s face was raw
with wounds.
“Take him away," the Licutenant
said when he had tired himself slamming his fists against the man’s
face.
The soldiers carried out the unconscious priest and threw him into
a cell.
—o0o—
He sat on the floor of the cell,
his back against the wall. He sat
in an attitude of intolerable tiredness: his hands hung limply by his
sides, like wet rags.
I am going to die: the thought
moved across his mind, slowly, and
he stood at the far end, waiting
dispassionately to receive it.
Flies buzzed and descended on the
open wounds of his face, but he was
too weak to drive them away. His
body felt weak and boneless: since
when had he eaten?
The sun rose: he did not stir:
outside, on the courtyard, he heard
the soldiers drilling.
The sunlight through the barred
window fell on his face: his eyes
shone like electric bulbs left burning
in the daylight.
Dizziness like a sharp pain bored
into his lacerated brain. He lay
on the damp, sunless floor Suddenly he was afraid. Not he himself,
but his body, was afraid to die.
Fragments of prayers flew like
birds over the desolate sea of his
fear.
Then, all at once, peacefulness returned to him, gentle as the lapping
of waves.
After a while, he struggled to the
window, and clung to the bars. He


looked at the distant mountains beyond the town. Was Lent over? He
wondered if the people across the
bay had heard of what had befallen
him. Would the Bishop send another
priest?
The dizziness returned, overwhelming him, and he fell to the floor.
Heavy boots scraped up the corridor, halted before his cell. It was
the Lieutenant.
“Perhaps you have changed your
mind?” the Licutenant said.
He did not answer. A prisoner
farther down the corridor began to
sing in an idiotic falsetto.
“Speak up!" the Lieutenant said.
A guard commanded the prisoner
singing in an idiotic falsetto to stop,
or else. A rifle-butt clanged against steel: there was silence.
Are you ready to heed the order
of the people?"
"No,” he said.
The Lieutenant whispered a bitter oath, and stamped away.
Outside on the courtyard the soldiers drilled.
It was now unbearably warm in
the cell. The heat drummed on the
galvanized-iron roof.
Was Lent over? He did not know
if April had ended. The churchbells of the town had long ago ceased
to ring. A vision of the old processions came to him, the faithful
bearing candles, following the image
of the Nazarene.
Loneliness lay on the floor with
him.
He slept. He dreamed of bombed
churches, and children erying in the
ruins.
—o0o—
The soldiers dragged him to his
feet.
It was night. They half-carried
him out of the building.
Memory moved within him like an


18


old man, remembering nothing. His
body had died after the first few
days in the cell.
At last he saw the freshly-dug
grave in the light of the storm lamp
held by one of the soldiers. Now
his mind, not his body, which had
died days ago, cowered in fear.
He began to pray for courage. His
body, which had died, trembled. The
soldiers laughed and made jokes at
his body trembling.
"Forgive my fear,” he prayed.
"Forgive the fear in my mind and
in my body.” He could not understand why he was afraid.
Nobody spoke. His prayer rose
through the night and the silence.
It flowed across his mind, like dawnlight touching darkness.
The click of a pistol startled him.
“Kneel, here!" one of the soldiers
said.
His body, which had died but yet
was somehow alive, responded. His


knees sank into the loose earth piled
beside the grave.
"Forgive me,” he prayed. The
light in his mind began to brighten,
until the scalding bullet ignited the
luminance into an unending flame
His body, now truly dead, collapsed
into the grave. The soldiers piled
earth over it, then levelled the ground.
They lighted cigarettes and returned
to the prison, talking in loud voices.
-OOoThree men emerged from the dark
trees that grew a short distance from
the grave.
They knelt by the grave. The
tallest of the three said a prayer
in Latin. He sprinkled the grave
from a small bottle. After a while,
the three men rose and disappeared
into the shadows.
A late full moon appeared like a
white wheel over the trees. It shone
over the land like eternity.


AUA
GERVASIO DIAZ, '53
transition


There is a tide that sweeps,
Ever-sweeping, changing:
Realms,
Once pride of kings,
Are empty and broken now:
Not even birds of prey look
Upon the desolation.
All things must change:
A change bitter or sweet.
Change over change over
Change.


LEONIDAS V. BENESA, '52


fragments: the deserts of God
I.
The Lord be in my mind always; may my
heart be His tent from morning to sleeping,
My thoughts perch like young birds in
my mind’s branches, and fly winged with
virtues from my lips.
May they nest in men’s hearts, and cheer
the meadows of their minds with their chirpings.
Yes, hearken to my invitation,
come live in my soul, O my God, and
be the Headwater of all my actions,
So that though I be revelling midst merrymaking
and maiden-laughter, my soul shall be resting
in the cool valleys of prayer.
When I shall be drinking deep of the wine on
banquet tables, shall be fasting on locusts
and honey my soul on the dry
deserts of meditation.
Though in the foul dungeons of pleasure and
temptation my body be chained, my soul shall
be walking in the heights, breathing the
clean pure air of ascetic mountains.
Be in my mind always, O God of freedom, may my
heart be Your tent from morning to sleeping.
II.


Glory to God for the rough rockbeauty of chalk cliffs,
but far greater glory to Him for the miracle of leafgrowth!
From fertile wombsoil He brings forth green herbs:
He decks them with bloom in the fatherhood of sunwarmth,
and in the sacrament of rain, ripened wealth.
But praise Him more for birds, beasts, and fishes,
for the creatures of earth, sea, sky
thrilling with lifebreath:
Life bursts from eggshells at His warm word:
trembles the air presently with their singing wing-might.
But most of all, praised be God for His masterpieces,
glory be to God for laughing youths and maidens!


20


For all creatures shall perish with the paschal breath
of grassblooms, but men’s souls shall outlive the daystar;
with the glory of angels He has jeweled them forever,
With sober thoughts He waters them
that they may grow straight and strong-limbed with virtue
in His sight, leafy with merit in His garden forever.
Glory be to God for the miracle of manbreath,
to Him be praise forever and ever.
Ia.
Yes, the way of true wisdom is rocks and boulders,
skirting the jagged margins of steep cliffs.
And yet I must follow the promptings of
the prismed star-rise; the sharp glare of gold
shall not splinter my vision.
My speech shall not grow wild flowers in
the hearts of moneylenders, nor my feet
leave bloodprints on the way of the wicked.
Neither shall I seek the proud gurgling waters
of the worldly,
But I shall drink deep of the clear brooks of
fresh learning: in the sober streams of Solomon’s
wisdom I shall be washed clean.
So be beautifully dumb, my intellect, be dumb
and beautiful as a sword on the whetstone,
for the Lord is the whetstone that sharpens.
But foremost, O Lord, smite me prostrate with awe
for the Laws of man, beast, leaf, rock:
Preserve my childlike ignorance for the mystery
of things. Let me not forfeit the gift to
look Godward and wonder.
IV.
At the end of the road gleams the golden vision:
to slake my thirst He waits for me by cool wells.
Sickle in hand, lo waits the quiet Reaper,
He shall gather at last the harvest to His barn:
For I am a hunter lost in the forests of dark danger.
Yet He finds me weeping unharmed beneath
the silent monastic trees.
For my spirit is sick after the violence of oceans,
and longs for the rockbound stillwaters of His safety.
Shivering as a prodigal bird in the rain,
my soul returns to the furnace of His breast
Again. In the greenchurches of His trees,
laughing in the new O warm with wing-thunder dawnlight
My now-found spirit shall catch fire in the young morning
bursting with the unfading gold of deathless summers.


21


GABINO MENDOZA Jr., '53


A Play


the
uncomprenending
3
darkness
SCENE: The curtain is still down; all lights are out.
VOICE: In the beginning was the Word
And the Word was with God
And the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made by Him
And without Him was made nothing
That was made.
In Him was life
And the life was the light of men
And the light shineth in the darkness
And the darkness did not comprehend it.
Faint hollow drum beat marking tired time in the background. This beating
goes monotonously on throughout almost the whole play. Curtain up. A
dark stage. Dim light gradually pours in until we can discern faintly a
canyon of the city. Grotesque buildings sluggishly pour upwards. Then
a long procession is seen crossing upstage — tall men, small men, fat men,
thin, emaciated men, young men, old men, all of them wearing a hopelessly
angry, driven mask. They move like automatons, with sudden jerks, with
movements angular and awkward. Modern Man is journeying through life.
Then one of the robot-like men stumbles and falls on his face. Quickly
those behind him rush to take his place, with the eagerness of dogs pouncing on a bone which another has dropped.
The Fallen One stands up, bitter puzzlement in his eyes. He rubs his
knees and half-walks, half-staggers downstage. Then he looks back at the
jong procession and for a long moment stares at it with his soul, with his
very being in his eyes.
The Fallen One: (At first monotonously as if he were still moving to the
tired beat of the drum, but slowly he gets more and more passionatle, till
at length his voice fills the theater with the universal plaint of the groping
universe.)
We have walked o'er crags and morasses,
We have tramped through waterless wastes.
From the depths of our sorrow,
From our nadir of pain
We cried and we prayed — in vain.
Suffering, sorrow, pain, death
Life must go on.


22


Suffering, sorrow, pain, death —
Life must go on.
Why? Thou Power above, why?
The Procession: (Intones wearily, as if under some strange compulsion)
Suffering, sorrow, pain, death -— life must go on. Suffering, sorrow,
pain, death — life must go on.
The Fallen One: (Rebelliously) What for? What awful power drives us
from What Was?
What fearful power sucks us to Will Be?
The Procession: (Intones wearily, as if under some strange compulsion)
Suffering, sorrow, pain, death — life must go on.
The sound of slippers with brazen soles. Enter a Greek, with the lifted
brow of a messiah, acting for all the world like a minor god, pompously.
Empedocles: Man, why do you weep?
The Fallen One: Who are you?
Empedocles: (Incredulously) Do you not know me? I am Empedocles, the
Greek. Why do you weep?
The Fallen One: Sorrow have I known
That drenches the body with tortured sweat.
The pain of parting, the suffering of shame
Have shadowed me all my life;
And each foot-print I’ve left
On the desert’s parched sand
Has been filled in an instant
By the dread feet of death.
But thought of all this would vanish
And all my tears would cease
If only I know, if only you'd tell me
What I’m here for,
Why life was given to me.


Empedocles: It was given to you for no reason at all. Man has no end,
life no meaning. I have already been, in the past, a boy and a girl,
a shrub and a bird, and a fish which lives in the sea. Man lives to
die and dies to live again — all at the unthinking whim of Love and
Hate.
The Fallen One: (In a voice like a question mark.) Love? Hate?
Both have I known
Both to my sorrow.
I loved holily...
Empedocles: (Curtly, resenting the interruption) I do not speak of love
that is moonlight and roses — such things, I spurn. I speak of the
Love that binds the world, and the Hate that will tear it apart. For
you see, four roots of all are there — earth, air, water and fire. Man
comes to be, life commences, when Love molds earth and air, fire, water
to make this thing called Man. Man dies, life ceases, when Hate pushes
earth and air, fire and water from one another, destroying the handiwork of Love. Man has no end, life no meaning. Man must live because he must live.
The Procession: (Intones wearily as if under some strange compulsion) Man
has no end, life no meaning. He must live because he must live.
The Fallen One: No! Life must have some meaning.
I must live for something.
Else, why suffer, why sorrow?
Why feel the grip of pain
And freeze with the fear of death?
(Enter another Greek, as Empedocles exits noisily, his slippers with brazen
soles making a mockingly hollow sound. The new-comer is of a more poetic
bent, his eyes seem to be perpetually unfocused.)
Democritus: Suffer and sorrow because you must. Endure pain and death
because you must.
The Fallen One: And who are you?
Democritus: I am Necessity’s child — You may call me Democritus.
The Fallen One: Can you tell me why I live?
Can you say why the Power above
Lit the light that burns in me?
God would not make me
And make me for naught.
Democritus: God? Say Nature, rather. And why should not nature work,
not for the sake of something nor because it is better so, but just as
the sky rains, not to make the corn grow, but of necessity? What is
drawn up must cool and what has been cooled must become water and
descend, the result of all this, corn grows. And so, if a man’s crop
is spoiled on the threshing floor, the rain did not fall for the sake of
this — in order that the crop might be spoiled, but the result just
followed. Why then should it not be the same with the parts in nature that should come up of necessity? Why then should it not be
the same with men’s lives that they should come up of necessity, be
endured of necessity, be ended of necessity?


24


The Fallen Gne: But why? What is this necessity?
Why must the redness of the rose turn brown?
Why must the glory of a child’s bright smile
Be plucked and crushed in the dust
By fingers streaked with gold’s sick rust?
Why must my life be drained of joy
And Fear my flick’ring bliss destroy?
Why was I born? Why must I live?
Why must I suffer? Why must I die?
Democritus: Because...
Suddenly Democritus bows his head, and exits quietly.
The Fallen One: Then must I walk in darkness
Smothering my light of mind?
Then must I seek for something
And know not what I seek?
This cannot be the work of my all-wise God,
This cannot be the gift of my merciful God.
This cannot be the gift of my merciful God,
This giving of sight in a lightless world,
This giving of hearing in a soundless world,
This giving of life in a purposeless world.
The stage brightens till all is clearly seen. The dull beating of the drum
ceases. The procession upstage stops moving. Everything on the stage
suddenly seems awkwardly petrified. Then a thunderous intimate voice
which seems to fill every corner of the theater speaks with passionate conviction, with confident suthority.
Voice: The God who made you is Intellect supreme, Will supreme. And
will the Mind of God act and have not what It acts for? And will the
Will of God desire your being and desire it for no purpose? Where
have you seen puny man with puny mind act and act for no cause?
Where have you seen finite man with finite will desire and yet desire for no reason? Nowhere. And never shall you find such mind,
such will. For as long as man acts with sane intellect and healthy will,
he will act for an end, desire for a reason. If finite man acts so, so
wills, will God the Infinite do less? Will God the infinite make you,
and make you for no end? Will God the Infinite desire your existence
and desire it for no cause? Then bid your soul be quieted, for there
is meaning in your life.
The drum beats again — as tired as before. The long procession moves,
as painfully as before. The Fallen One wakes as from a trance.
The Fallen One: This end, what is it? (hopefully)
Enter a melancholy man, his clothes still damp with the water of the Seine.
Comte: The pleasure of Humanity, the felicity of all men — that is man’s
end. For man.....
Enter quickly, a sickly man with insane eyes — he interrupts Comte.
Nietzche: Not all men, Comte, No! not all men. Are the meek and poor
in spirit always to be allowed to have their say and thus continue to
torture the ears of him who remembers with a shudder that mankind’s


25


fate, the attainment of mankind’s end is the success of its highest
types? There is only one way — new gods or resuscitated old gods can
no longer be of any avail. Our only hope lies in new men. He who
belongs to me, he who belongs to the quest for man’s end must be strong
of bone and light of foot. For man’s end is the blond beast, "“the superman."
The Fallen One: But....
The two philosophers move out, paying him no heed; Comte melancholily
whispering the name “Clothilde", Nietzche slowly, painfully.
The Fallen One: Man my end?
Must I live for this fragile clay?
Must I writhe and squirm
'Neath Earth’s hard hand
So that some far day
A “blond beast" may rise
From worlds of pain?
Must I stand neath this rain
Of sorrow and disaster
Not murmuring and long-suffering
For this flesh, the food of worms?
There must be something greater
That drags me through
These pain-drenched rocks
Of burning, arid life.
I must live for something else.
Again the stage lights up. The drums stop beating. The procession upstage is still. Then the same thunderous intimate voice speaks as before.
The Voice: Then live for God. You are a man, a man whose intellect is
parched for Truth alone, a man whose will thirsts only for Good. All
your life you crave Truth and thirst for Good and never are satisfied.
Earthly Truth and earthly Good run dry. They end, and man’s soul
wants no end. Only the Infinite God, the bottomless Well of Good,
the deathless Spring of Truth will sate man’s will, man’s mind, will
fill to overflowing that which makes man, man. God is your end.
The Procession: (With ringing vigor and hope.) God is your end.
(In a triumphant shout) God is your end!
The Fallen One: The infinite God is my End;
My God of the flowers and the thundering hills
My God that laughs with His laughing rills
My God of the night and the whip-poor-wills.
Now my feet are full of dancing
And my lips are filled with song
Now my mind is brimming over
With the thought of Him
And my soul is flowing over
With the joy of Him.


26


The Fallen One jumps in the air for joy. He does a wild, barbaric dance
of exultation and leaps and cavorts like a life-crazed kid, like a holy wind,
then vanishes in the wings. The tired drums beat once again. The procession moves on, mechanically as before, tired as before, gone once more
the momentary vigor and the hope.


EMMANUEL TORRES, '53


Though I stand, a stranger, on this silent coast,
Mutinous while the sea spends its lusts over
The oxen boulders rocked in light, I am not
Apart from your tearful breast. These wheeling
Gulls whitening as foam in flight will speak
The voice of one remembering when you hear
Their pitiful sweet cries. Stars remotely
Burning are my testaments written in time
Over the diapason scrolls of eternity.
And if you should come, should come to this white shore,
Footprints none to find, but behind leaving I
Give this broken glass mirroring the eternal dome.
Then looking at this fragment, say softly, say:
“Why this poor stranger, this exile found Home!”


ERNESTO ROCELES, '53


The mist spread on the Marikina dale.


Like a fragile gossamer veil
Unthreading, lifts up to bare
An answer to a poet’s prayer.


27


FRANZ ARCENAS, 54


credo


On lonely desert sands great Kheops raised
A pyramid that his name might be praised.
The lonic Bard on deathleas parchment laid
A glorious tale that nevermore will fade.
Magellan felt the ocean’s magic lure:
He sailed and trailed a wake that will endure.
But I, mere lover, aspire not to their glory:
Why should I care for statued fame or story
Past?
For if upon your heart I could carve my name
Now,
Far greater glory my heart would claim.


GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, '52


Let us run and throw ourselves on the grass, you said.
Standing poised as starsong on the hill,
Run and rise again, for the morning is a blue silence
Cascading across the flower valley.
You ran trailing bells of laughter,
You ran like a tender wind, no
You ran like a joyful rain
Showering poems in the tinkling air.
Our hearts rose and soared, on white wings,
Gracefully,
In the musical sky before us...
In September your Betrothed came,
A Prince tall and laughing on a white horse.
From my room I watched you ride away at sunrise
To the shining castle of His Jealousy...
(Is morning there a blue silence
Cascading across a flower valley?)
I remember you straight as starsong on a hill.


28


ROBERT WILSON, '52


A Story


the boy
wno searched
for goio


THERE WAS A BOY who dreamed
of prospecting for gold, who ran
wild with fancies of mountains flaming with thunder who scaled the
wall of the old schoolhouse to see
where the rainbow ended.
Dreams played mischief with his
brown, serious eyes. Every house
was a hill, an apartment a cliff: the
narrow streets were streams, the
wide ones were honest-to-goodness
rivers warm with the promise of
gold. The night was a blackboard
framed by the room’s open window
on which he sketched the taut beauty of rampant rivers, of gleaming
waters polishing to a speckled gleam
the yellow stones that would be his
gold.
This boy had a friend who was always copying his homework. The
friend shared his imaginings, his
dreams of finding gold. Together
they played the game of searching
for gold on the imagined sea-shore
of a canal, beneath a branchless tree,
under the floorboards of a forgotten
house.


like the idea.) changed to a furious trek across a cliff cracking
under the searing gaze of the
sun....


The boy did not find gold: he remained poor: the salty dryness of
fish was like tough meat cut up,
turned over a fire, chewed. The
unpainted accesoria was a cabin
flung against the slope of a nameless mountain. The asphalt-searing
walk to school (he could not ride in
his friend’s car because, as the
chauffeur said, “The old man don't


The city put on its streetlights
even before dark. The two friends
sat on the curb, talking.
“But Lito, the boy said, "you
can find smooth stones like that on
the beaches, millions and millions
of them.
The friend rubbed the stone he
was holding in his hand.


"And gold is rough when you feel
it."
“What we want it for, then?
Smooth stones are hard to find around here. Same as gold. What
we want gold for?”
“Because it’s gold. Real gold,"
the boy said, repeating the voices in
his dream.
"
“You won’t ever find it, I bet, Lito said.
“I will, too, the boy persisted,
repeating the voices in the dream.
“Crazy!" said Lito.
"No.
“Yes, crazy!"
—o0o—
In strides quick and effortless, a
tall young man approached Alice,
asked for a dance.
“Hello, Lito, she said.
Her slim feminine hands reached
out and he pulled her up, strongly.
They glided to the sala with its
dancing people, swaying balloons,
scattered confetti.
Alice danced smoothly Her
cheek pressed against his.
“How is your girl friend?"
"Who?"
“Betsy, of course.
“We broke up last week.
“Why?” She tried to show concern.
“She’s a wet-blanket,” he said.
“You don’t miss her?"
“Not at all. Not when I dance
with you.
"Lito!" she whispered lightly.
“You’re very beautiful tonight,"
he said.
A sudden wind buffeted the balloons, blew ravels of cloud across
the stars. Then quickly it died,
mumbling with the distant rumor of
fleeing lightning; and crying, slowly at first, the thick beads of rain
fell on the roof, the overwhelming
sadness of pent-up clouds drenching
the anonymous house with its many
dancing people.
—oOo—


A rainbow gilded the billowy
clouds. Tree-leaves were wet, branches were damp-brown. Beyond the
concrete porch the lawn was green
and fresh with rain-drops.
On the railing at the end of the
porch, a boy and a girl sat, their
feet dangling out over the lawn. The
girl was beautiful like morning sunshine: clear and warm.
“It rained hard, didn’t it?" she
said.
“Yes,” he grinned, "I took a bath
in it. Was it cold!"
“I wanted to play in the rain myself, but mother wouldn’t let me.
wish I were a boy."
“You’re alright as you are,” he
said.
She smiled. "I didn’t expect you
to come, she said, "with that rain.
"I told you I would."
“Yes, but the rain...
“A hurricane weuldn’t have stopped me."
“How flattering. You should bathe
more often in the rain...
He laughed, stopped halfway. "I
meant it. I wouldn’t have said that
to any other girl," he said.
“Why not? There are many girls
worth visiting, in spite of hurricanes."
“No,” he continued evenly, "no, I
don't think so. That I know now
When I was a kid I figured all
girls grew up to be like my mother.
She was wonderful. So I never
worried about girls. Then all I
thought of was...
"I know: gold. A plain commerciante, that’s what you are.
"You know I wasn’t thinking of
money," he said, hurt.
“I was just teasing," she said.
“Tell me about the gold you used to
search for. I never tire of those
stories.
“Stop it, he complained.
“Stop what?” she giggled.


30


“You’re changing the subject.
Let’s talk about you.
“Me? nothing exciting ever happens to me.
“You are exciting.
“If I didn’t know you better...
“No, no, no. I mean you are so
wonderful. Wonderful in an ordinary, important sort of way. Like
my mother.
“That’s the nicest thing anyone
ever said to me.
“There's something different about
you.
"What?"
"You want to know? You won’t
get sore?”
"No, why?”
“Well, you may misunderstand.
But really it’s nothing wrong."
“I believe you. Tell me.
“Well," he paused, "when I was a
kid I was happy when my mother
took me in her arms, when I was
hurt or lonely. Now with you, I
want you to be in my arms, and
make you happy, and I’ll be happy
also.
“I suspect that bath in the rain
made you sick,” she said nervously.
“No." he protested, whispering
fiercely, "no.
“There are cokes in the icebox. I’ll
get them.
"Wait," he groped for her hand.
It was cold.
“No Don’t tell me now" she
pleaded, full of the fear and the
happiness of the moment between
them.


“I love you,” he said.
"Do you know what you are saying?
“Yes, it means, it means...” The
wordless thoughts faltered: his heart
would beat to the rhythm of her little laughter: his moods would be
sweetened by the naughty innocence
of her eyes: his loneliness would
find solace in the sincerity of her
voice...
“You only feel this way now. It
will pass.
"No, you know it’s not just a
feeling.. I need you. You know
I need you.
"How?”
"Like when I was small I necded
my mother. Something like that.
“Why me?'
“Because you arc... because you
are you.
“You will change your mind.
There are many girls...
“But no one like you, no one that
is you."
She turned, facing the lawn: his
heart swelled within him.
“I love you," he said. "Will you
love me, too?"
"Do not ask me now.”
"When?"
“Later. Much later. You will
wait long. Will you wait?
“Yes, I will wait.
"Why?” She was smiling, smiling.
“Because you are gold. Real gold,"
he said. He remembered the boy who
searched for gold in the mountains
of many dreams.


AUA


MELITON V. SALAZAR ,'54


art critic


"What did you paint, — did you paint the sky?'
Said we, the frankly crude.
"Is that a star, twinkling on high?
"Or could it be — perhaps — a fly?
“How odd! It’s labeled 'Teardrops Dry.””
The artist made his cold reply:
“I painted my eye."
“Now this, I’m sure, this is a goat!”
Oh, ignorance is bliss!
"I almost thought it was something afloat,
“If so, then it would be a boat!
“It isn’t, though by its glossy coat...
The painter actually seemed to gloat,
'A castle and a moat."
“I guess you prefer your zeppelin round,"
Said we, unblushingly.
“Well! here’s one that seems to have run aground
“On a sticky, technicolored mound!
"Frankly, your works are too profound."
The Van Gogh halted us and frowned:
“Soul of the Drowned."
And this should be titled, of course."
His patience was wearing thin.
“Sure, here is a lady who’s tearing her hair,
“She’s missing an eye, though, she hasn’t a pair,
“Funny, the way she tries to stare...
“Bergman, he rasped with a glare,
“Queen of the fair!"
"Now, here is a big one; it’s titled “Cheer."
The Raphael was turning mauve.
“Can you make it out—? Perhaps I’m too near—
“Why yes! A Datu impaled on a spear,
“Enjoying a bottle of San Miguel Beer...
“Now you—!" the artist sounded queer,
“Getoutahere!"


32


EDUARDO H. G. SEVILLA, '54


deception: past, present,
and future


MANY PEOPLE notice that between
the periods of Judas Maccabeus and
the Egyptians, there is no recorded
history. It is not generally known,
but that unrecorded period was the
time of the Great Revolution. Some
smart women cornered the cosmetic
market, and by widespread advertisement, created a need for it among
all the women of the world. However, there was one difficulty; the
men were all for their mothers-inlaw using these cosmetics, but they
did not want their wives and daughters to paint themselves, saying that
cosmetics made women exceedingly
ugly. Naturally, the mothers-inlaw, being insulted, called a conference, in the course of which they
resolved to do one thing — change
the world. This they did in two
steps. The first was easy: they persuaded all women to use cosmetics;
however, they encountered difficulty with the second step, which was
to make men like the use of cosmetics. When requests and pleas would
not work, they took drastic measures.
Having lowered an Ironed Curtain
(you see, the Russians are merely
repeating history) all over the world
to keep out snoopy historians, they
proceeded to torture their husbands


and sons into submission. The torture in this great revolution went
on for thousands and thousands of
years before the brave men of the
world yielded. And historians, to
cover up for their inability to report
the era, excuse themselves by saying that “primitive man did not leave
any records of his existence" and all
that sort of nonsense.
The Egyptian men (the weaklings)
were the first to yield, so the Ironed
Curtain was first lifted there. In
1923, when the tomb of King Tutankhamen (I guess the first guy
was called Tankhamen,! the second,
Tutankhamen, the third, Threetankhamen; funny, these Egyptians),
who ruled about 1350 B.C., was
opened, many small jars were found
containing cosmeties which still possessed an elusive fragrance (the kind
we elude). Also found among the
tombs of Egyptian women were little cosmetic pots in which were carried a supply of the coveted mixture,
kohl,2 used for darkening the eyes.
It seems that black eyes were the
fashion then. The inventor of this
mixture was walking down an Egyptian street one day when a friend
saw her. Noticing the little pot the
iventor was carrying, the friend


1. He must have been a swimmer!
2. Any chemist will tell you the ingredients. I know but I won’t tell!


33


asked, "What is that called?” The
inventor thought that the friend was
using a statement instead of the interrogative sentence she actually
used. Thus, when she went home, she
labelled the mixture kohi3 not knowing how to spell “called."
By this time, the men were beginning to get used to cosmetics; in
fact, they were beginning to like
them. Too much, so it seems. In
1930, an archaclogical expedition
from Princeton University found in
a Corinthian tomb dating back to
possibly 600 B.C. a vanity box,
which upon being opened, disclosed
cubes of lead carbonate, an explosive.
This dangerous preparation is believed to have been used as a facepowderi by ancient Greek women.
The courageous Spartan gentlemen
must have gotten a big bang kissing
them.
The Romans were not exempt from
the use of cosmetics. Roman women painted their faces with white
lead and chalk, used fucus, a kind
of rouge, and employed supplementary eyebrows5 bought in shops, besides importing and applying Egyptian kohls to their eyelids and lashes. Blond wigs were the fashion. A
paste made up of barley flour and
butter was used for correcting skin
cruptions,' and pumice stone for
whitening the teeth. Juvenal was
not kidding when he said:


“You have your hair curled, Gella
(no relation to APGM), at a haireyebrows are brought to you every
morning. At night you remove your
teeth as you do your dress. Your
charms are enclosed in a hundred
different pots, and your face does
not go to bed with you.”
During the Middle Ages the rage
for cosmetics continued. Many of the
Knights returning from the Crusades
brought back with them the rare perfumes, oils, and other cosmetics
prized by the East. The women put
these on and left their Knights in a
daze. In Gaul, young women were
not allowed to drink wine because it
was believed to be injurious to their
fair schoolgirl complexions.
During the Renaissance, in both
France and Italy, women spent
hours, and even the entire day, to
beautify themselveso for the evening
amusements.? Catherine de Medicilo
introduced paint into France, and all
the fashionable women actually coated their faces with white lead and
vermilion. Queer concoctions made
up of strange mixtures were believed
to produce magic results. The wings
and claws of pigeons, pulverized and
mixed with fresh eggs, lilies, ground
mother-of-pearl, and camphor, the
whole distilled with musk, was one
of the favorite beautifiers of the
day. Everything was used — bean
water, vine water, rosemary, and oil


3. See note 2.
4. Greek gentlemen, when talking to girls wearing this explosive, had to
face some powder. Hence the name.
5. Roman women could literally "raise their eyebrows!”
6. So we meet again. Small world, isn’t it?
7. That is why pancake was neither invented nor eaten by Romans.
8. They still do.
9. i.c. Jam Sessions.
10. Pronounced with a sneeze!
34


of tale — on the face, on the arms.
However, canal water was not considered ethical. Plain ordinary water, with soap, was naturally taboo.
dresser’s in Subura Street, and your
In England, during Elizabeth’s
reign, the use of cosmetics became
increasingly popular. Professional
make-up men appeared, and prac

ticed their tonsorial tortures widely.
Among the well-used recipes for
beauty complexion was: “Take a hot
bath, sufficiently hot to induce excessive perspiration, then wash the
face with wine to make it fair and
ruddy.” Mary, Queen of Scots, is
said to have bathed in wine. During
the rule of Charles II milk-baths
came to be regarded as an indispensable aid to beauty. In Italy, the
craze was over face-painting. Venetian women soaked raw veal in hot
milk for several hours, and then applied the whole mess to their faces
at night.11
In 1760, French women developed
a liking for rouge and powder such
that “their woolly white hair and
fiery red faces" were said to have
resembled "skinned sheep” — and
vice versa. By 1770, the women of
England were infected with this
same strange craving. To such ridiculous extremes was this carried
that a bill was introduced in the British Parliament stating: "All women
of whatsoever rank or degree...
that shall seduce or betray into matrimony any of His Majesty’s subjects, by the scents, paints, cosmetic washes, artificial teeth, false hair,
Spanish wool, iron stays, hoop, highheeled shoes, bolstered hip,12 shall
incur the penalty of the law in force
against witcheraft and like demeanors, and the marriage upon conviction shall stand null and void."
Then the camera was invented.
Women all over the world took one
collective look at pictures of themselves and fainted dead away. In one
agonizing moment they realized what
they had been looking like all their
lives. (Didn’t they ever think of


11. They not only ate their supper, but wore it too.
12. Good heavens! What will they think of next!


35


mirrors? — Ed.) In France, the menfolk, seeing their women faint, decided that it was from oppression by
the rich; so they started the French
Revolution. It is said that the storming of the Bastille was nothing more
than a bargain sale for a new conservative type of make-up.
After the French Revolution, for
no evident reason, the use of cosmetics practically disappeared. The
men of the world started worrying -
this looked too much like the calm
before the storm. When the storm
did break out, it blew across the
breadth of the earth a huge tidal
wave. As soon as this tidal wave
hit the polar regions, it was immediately frozen solid. Hence the permanent wave. From that time on,
beauticians13 have been smuggling
chunks of this wave into the different countries and have cashed in tremendous profits selling them to unsuspecting women.14
In the 20th Century, development
of cosmetics has taken great strides.
First the hair curler electrified women into patronizing beauty shops.


Then all sorts of beauty aids came
into general use. Women began to
vie with hogs and carabaos for mud
packs. There was, for a time, an
upward trend in hair styles. After
centuries of wearing their hair (true
or false) long, women decided to
shorten their haid-do’s, first with
the feather cut, then with the topknot. Just as I was eagerly awaiting
the time when fashion would call for
hairless women, hair styles went
down again. Sayang, we were on the
verge of seeing such monstrosities
as "pigtail a la Akong."15
Today, cosmetic science (no, not
cosmology) faces a promising future.
With such things as atom bombs, hydrogen bombs, supersonic planes,
atomic submarines, and corny Atcneansi6 already existing, one can
easily imagine what is in the offing.17
I wonder. (So do you.)
(If there are any skeptics among
QUARTERLY readers, I would like
to clarify one point: most of the
items presented in this article are
historical facts. Consult1e the author
if there is any doubt on the matter.)


13. Maybe that is why Admiral Byrd has been making so many trips to
the polar regions. He may want his beard to have a permanent wave,
but his chin is not susceptible to it.
14. This is top secret. Don’t ever tell this to any girl.
15. Character in "Kwentong Kutsero.” As if you didn’t know.
16. Look who is talking now!
17. Now that you have read this article with so many footnotes, it will
no longer be a mystery to you that among recent inventions in the field
of cosmetics, there is such a concoction as foot powder!
18. The more the merrier!


AVA


36


VIVENCIO PERALTA Jr., 54


A Story


Mlarrd


SHE STOOD in the middle of the
bridge, the notebook in her hand.
her young, agile body bent over the
iron rails. The thought occurred to
her almost unconsciously, as she
watched the liquid reflection of the
city lights on the river.
I think, she said to herself, I
think it’s wonderful.
She straightened up and resumed
her walk, hurrying a little, as if
under the perpendicular shadows of
the tall buildings she felt little comfort, or seant protection; and a
sharp corner seemed to her filled
with all sorts of imaginable monsters.
He stepped out of the unlighted
alley, suddenly, almost colliding with
her. He stopped and looked at her
for several moments before he was
able to speak.
“Excuse me,” he said, smiling apologetically.
“I thought you — you were a...
She thought he was some monster,
but she did not say it.
“Call me Julio, he introduced
himself with a half gesture. His
voice did not sound like a monster’s
evidently, for now she gave a little smile and said a little shyly:
"Im Maria.
She hesitated a moment before she
turned and walked away. She had
not gone very far when suddenly he
called out:
Maria!"
She glanced back and seeing him
wave at her, she waved back, but she


did not wait for him. She had unconsciously dropped the notebook; she
left him alone on the sidewalk to
gaze at her retreating figure.
In her room she found herself repeating his name, as if she did not
want to forget. She tried to picture the way he smiled at her when
he said in that clear, low voice of
his, Call me Julio, as if it mattered
very little to be called by that name.
She was not able to see his face
very well, but she felt she knew
every rugged line of his face. She
took a piece of paper and poised
her pencil in her hand, making preliminary strokes in the air. And
then unhesitatingly she drew a rough
sketch of a face — a man’s face,
smiling at her from a background
of night and of black, well-groomed
hair.
“Monster-man, she laughed lightly. She knew his name, his voice.
Now she also knew what he looked
like. She held the sketch at arm’s
length. There was no doubt about
it. The face was Julio’s.
She did not discover her loss until
the next morning. She knew there
was nothing important in the notebook she had lost, but somehow she
felt she ought to walk through the
same street that evening. She craned
her neck above the throng and looked
about for a certain face with a certain smile and with a clear, low
voice She wondered what he must
have thought of her when she waved
back to him yesterday. Well, how


37


was she to know he had only wanted
to give the notebook which she had
dropped?
But the man was nowhere to be
seen. Surely he has not decided to
keep it! After going up the street
once more, she turned away and
walked slowly towards the bridge
where she had watched the bright
electric signs mirrored on the rippling waters of the river the night
before. The same thought occurred
to her mind: I think, she said to
herself, I think it’s wonderful.
“Hello," she heard someone say
behind her.
It was a man’s voice. It was the
monster-man’s voice — Julio’s voice!
She could not mistake it for any
one’s in this world.
91
“What are you doing here: he
asked.
Without turning
her head, she
asked in return, "Where is my notebook?"
"What notebook?” surprised.
“You were... You are Julio, are
you not?
“Of course not! My name is Rosendo. Maria remembered her
sketch. It did not look like him.
"I’m sorry,” she apologized. “But
your voice — I thought you were
Julio."
"Who is this Julio?” he queried.
His voice, so much like Julio’s sounded more than just curious. He
seemed to ask in words unuttered,
“Does he mean a lot to you?'
“Julio is my sweetheart.” The declaration frightened her a little, but
she was at the same time oddly
pleased by it.
"I’ve known him ever since I
can remember We were their nextdoor neighbor. Oh, we had the
loveliest times together We went
to school together, played together,


grew up together. Neighbors, playmates, good friends, then — then...
“I see,” he smiled. He understood.
“Then?
"His parents sent him here to study and I had the loneliest time of
my life. Of course, he wrote me
for a while, but I had to ask him
to stop it. My father thought I
was still too young to do such things.
I tried to forgct him, but I couldn’t.
His name was ever in my thoughts...
Oh, I think, oh, yes, I still have a
picture of him. She showed him
the sketch. “I drew it myself," she
explained.
"Didn’t you ever meet him again?
The man beside her was looking at
the drawing with great interest.
“I knew I would see him again,
for I never lose hope When I was
able to come here, I was so happy,
because I was sure we would find
each other again after — after so
long. I didn’t know it was this
big, this city. I didn’t know there
were so — so many people. When
I found this out, I — couldn’t help
crying. I felt lost, I felt I had really lost him forever But the funny part of it all was that I didn’t
even have to do a thing to meet him.
We came across each other one evening on that street just across this
bridge. It was heaven to know he
has not changed. We had the happiest times recalling the things we
did in the past — our childhood
games, our classmates, our little
quarrels that were soon made up
with smiles and laughter...
She paused to glance at the man
ncar her He did not seem to have
been listening. He was looking far
into the night and he was also remembering. Finally he spoke up:
“Lovely tale," he said, "but very
different from mine. You see, I
have also a childhood sweetheart, I


38


mean, I used to have. We grew up
together, also went to school together... fact is, we started to love
each other from knee-high up.
Everything was fine between us,
until... until... He could not go
on.
"What did she do?'
“Oh, she just changed her mind
about me, that’s all."
“How cruel!"
“It doesn’t matter. Not to her.
It does to me, though, for I love
her still. As long as I have this,
the memory of her will not fade
from my heart.” It was not a picture, nor a locket, nor a ring, nor
a little silk handkerchief which he
took from his breast pocket. It was
only a pocket-sized notebook which
is so familiar to all of us and
which must be even more so to Maria, because it was her own.
“Why, that — that’s my..” she
choked and she blushed, while the
man at her side laughed good-naturedly.
"Forgive me, Maria. It was all
in fun. I thought you were also
joking," he explained.
“You tricked me!” she wailed.
“You — you monster! I knew you
were the one the moment I saw you!"
“I certainly don’t look like a monster here,” he replied, holding the
sketch before her.
“Give that to me!” She tried to
snatch the piece of paper, but he


held it
way and before she knew
it she was in his strong, brawny
arms.
“Let go! Let go of me!” she yelled.
She bumped her tiny hands into his
face. Laughing heartily, the man
released her from his grasp.
She started to run, sobbing, and
then she slipped and fell.
She felt no pain when she landed,
but she was too weak to get up, nor
even to offer any protest when she
felt herself being lifted up.
“Maria! Maria! Are you hurt?
Maria, answer me!” It was Julio,
frantic. In her tears, the woman
smiled, feeling an inexplicable thrill
to be in his arms.
“No. P...put me down. I’m...all
right.
“Are you sure you’re all right?”
"Y ,yes,” she whispered, "buthut I feel so terribly ashamed."
She could not look him in the face.
"Forgive me, brokenly, "for making
up that — that story."
“I won’t," he replied, "because
I liked it.”
“Why, you — you monster!" she
cried, but now she was smiling, too.
Hand in hand, they walked slowly
down the bridge and as she took one
last look at the mirrored lights in
the water, a different kind of
thought flashed into her mind:
“I think,” she said to herself, "I
think he's wonderful."


AWA


9


PABLO SILVA Jr., '53


maestro over matter


THE WORLD-RENOWNED violin
virtuoso, Paolo Silvotsky, was going
into the grand finale of his "piece
de resistance” for the evening, Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto in E Minor. He stood on the brightly-lighted stage of the great m u s i c
hall, and behind him, spread out in
fanlike fashion, was the 100-man
philharmonic symphony orchestra,
with the eminent conductor, Romuloff Larabitchsky, on the podium.
Now the virtuoso tore into a difficult scherzo with fiery brilliance,
thence stormed through an angry
cadenza passage with never a slip,
while the audience watched and listened spellbound. With a deafening
rumble of kettledrums and a dramatic slash of the bow, the performance came to a triumphant finale.
The overflowing cosmopolitan audience rose to its feet as one man
and broke into thunderous applause,
cheering wildly, “Bravo! bravo!” To
Silvotsky, the applause was indeed
like intoxicating wine. He bowed deeply and deliberated several times, with
cool, unruffled dignity, his eyes
half-closed, a faint smile on his lips.
This was all such child’s play....
“Encore, encore!” roared the crowd.
“Encore, encore...
I awoke. I shook my head dazedly
and looked around. The first rays
of the sun were seeping into my bedroom. My small brother butted his
head in. "Were you dreaming you
were a sailor? You were hollering
something about an anchor just now.


Whatsamatter, were you drowning?”
he guffawed.
He could not have been farther
from the truth, I thought sleepily to
myself as I peered at the clock beside my bed. It was six-thirty. Time
to get up. But I felt so sleepy and
my bed felt so nice and soft. And
I had been enjoying my dream, too,
before it had faded out into stale
reality. So back to sleep again...
Once more I glanced at the clock.
Six-thirty. Time to get up. Oh, well,
I mused, I might just as well give
up the ghost of Silvotsky and start
hustling. But on second thought I
decided the issue must be argued out
coldly, logically. So the clock says
six-thirty. Well? Shall I let the
clock, a mere machine, tell me, a human being, what to do? Shall I succumb to the dictates of a man-made
object? Has the world finally evolved
into the Machine Age, finally reached the stage where machines have
taken over power from man, conquered man, and placed man under
their utter domination? Shall Matter finally triumph over Mind? Never! I was immensely pleased with
such magnificent, clear-cut argumentation on my own part. I was now
justifiably excused in going back to
sleep. With that gratifying victory
of Mind over Matter still lingering
in my sub-conscious, I contentedly
closed my eyes and gradually slipped
back into dreamland...
The great violinist, Paolo Silvotsky, was now on his eighth encore,


40


playing with still the same inexhaustible energy that he had shown at
the beginning of the evening’s gala
performance; and still the people
were clamoring for more! This time
he was interpreting Paganini’s
Caprice, allegro molto vivace. In the
heated fervor of his playing, he took
no notice of the fact that he had been
standing on the stage for more than
three hours now. For this moment,
he was, as it were, a god, within
this vast hall, before this great audience, this audience which he held
completely in his grasp, in great
nwe; for they were watching Paolo
Silvotsky, he who was without question the greatest violinist in the
world.


Then, suddenly, as his nimble fingers plunked on the strings and his
bow flew across the string, — Ping!
— Ping! — one of the strings snapped. The audience groaned. But Silvotsky was not in the least dismayed. Here was a real opportunity to
perform a truly grand gesture which
would display to the utmost the unequalled depth of his virtuosity. The
great man recalled in a flash that
when the immortal Paganini experienced the same mishap, that
fiendish violinist snapped two more
strings with his hand, and played
on only one string. But now he, the
great Silvotsky would show the
world! He would outdo even Paganini himself. He would play on no
strings!
With a disdainful toss of his head,
the great man plucked viciously at
the strings of his violin and snapped first one, then the second, then
the third, till finally all four strings
were gone. Now was the moment!
With a magnificent, dramatic flourish the great Silvotsky lifted his
bow placed it across his violin, and
drew it downwards swiftly.
But horror of horrors — not a
sound came out of the instrument.
The audience gasped and waited with
bated breath This is impossible,
thought Silvotsky frantically, I am
greater than Paganini; I must be
able to play with no strings!
Then, more horrors — he heard
another snap. Impossible! There arc
only four strings in a violin. That
was the fifth snap! Something began to sag below. Then the great
man felt it inside his coat and he
knew. His suspenders!
"Shades of Paganini! My trousers
are falling down! Help!...
“Wake up, sleepy-head!” My brother, was pulling down my pajama
trousers and I was pulling them up.


41


I pushed myself up and looked at
the clock. Eight o’clock. I was late
for class. Did I say magnificent
argumentation? Did I say triumph


of Mind over Matter? It does not
matter. Paolo Silvotsky, greatest violinist in the history of the world,
was late for class.


AUA


JAIME E. DY-LIACCO, '52
sea-crossing
My life is a heart-shaped banca
Riding the open sea:
Reaching for the throbbing horizon
Of a happy life for me.
The winds are hungry wolf-packs
Snapping at my sail;
Wild waves are jealous monsters
Haunting every trail;
The clouds dripping, drowning,
Drenching my fires within;
In the nights’ frozen cavern
Lurks every green-eyed sin.
But courage is a blood-red lion!
My banca is swift and strong!
I will reach the throbbing horizon
Bright with living song!
-O
EDUARDO D. LACHICA, '52
soliloquy over cotter’s a.b.c. of
scholastic philosophy
To deny or not to deny, that is the question,
Whether 'tis better for my peace of mind to suffer
The adversaries and objections of outrageous Jesuits
Or to gather all the fifty theses
And by igniting end them? — To cram, to fret
No more — but by a matchstick end
The heartaches and thousand natural shocks
That a Litt. B. is heir to — 'tis a conflagration
Devoutly to be wished.


42


ROQUE FERNANDO Jr., '52


the worio
tomorrow,


AT LAST it has come, graduation,
after four long years in the miniature world of the Ateneo. Yes, I
am now a man, a man in the fullest
sense of the word. Years ago, years
which seem like yesterday, I was a
mere boy. I went to parties, read
the newspapers, saw the movies, in
fact did almost everything a man
does. But then I was only trying
to be important, to be somebody.
My deepest thanks to my parents
for sending me here. Now I am
somebody, somebody because I am
myself. This sheltered world has
given me all the opportunities and
situations which I will someday find
outside. The real world, with all its
dreams, hopes, and complications,
was in some way reproduced for me.
My native talents and abilities were
built up, slowly and with the greatest of difficulty. When the workout
was through, when I was ushered out
with the best of formality and advice, the doors of the miniature
world slowly closed behind me. And I
was left alone... alone to find my
way through life’s maze to my own
home. And the way is long and hard
and dark.
Between now and the journey’s end
is a long stretch of time. The wise
and thoughtful traveler provides
supplies for his long journey. Although he does not exclude the possibility of being picked up on the
way by some generous souls, still
he thinks and plans for his own unaided self. With my body developed
for endurance, my intellect sharpened to discern the good from the bad,
my heart emptied of lowly desires to


ever reach out for the heart of my
eternal Host, I begin my walk.
I am not surprised with the
change. But I admit the great difference. I am prepared for it, in
fact all the years have been one long
period of preparation. I can adjust
myself, ewen willing to adapt the
world to suit myself. But there
exists that big something which the
spoken and the written words were
trying hard to tell me, while I was
in school. I can feel it now, touch
it. It is everywhere, facing me,
eluding me, mocking me. I am alone
against it, the Big Thing. I
have to fight it, conquer it. But my
heart and my mind should be greater than it... the world.
Before I embark on my one-man
crusade, I have to examine myself.
Am I still the lord of my own world?
Will I not change during the next
five or ten years? Others did change,
many of them. And the query remains unanswered.
And all these years I am steadily
climbing the long, professional ladder. Suppose I reach the top: will
that make me happy? Can I still
smile like a child, think like children
do? What if something happens?
Sickness, war, a catastrophe. Will
the ladder not fall, and I with it?
I cannot remain suspended in the
air, even for an instant. I cannot
deceive myself forever. I will fall...
I did fall and I was hurt. But instead of causing me pain, it gave me
relief: instead of sorrow joy. In
this state of mind I saw the sun
rising in the east — the same sun
that used to wake me up when I was


43


young. Now my heart is young again.
I am calling back the echoes of my
childhood days. And they keep coming back like songs from heavenly
harmonies. I am myself again...
somebody.
I hear the church bells ring again,
and I answer them. I hear the Agnus
Dei, and I bow my head and raise
my heart. I hear the eternal music
of Consecration, and Communion.
And this time I walk on my knees
to surrender. Long has He waited
for this. He receives me, not like a
victor receiving the vanquished, but
like a father welcoming home a long,
lost son.
The world indeed is a maze. I was


lost. Now I am back again. I am on
the avenue to the stars.
—o0o—
I am awake, yes, wide awake. But
my mind has drifted to faraway
places, to proven hypotheses, to actualized possibilities. My mind has
returned... I am experienced. I am
going to resume my journey
through the world and its complications. I know the world. I will not
get lost again.
Am I afraid? Why should I be?
I profited from my experience. To
the east, to the green hills beyond, I
look. At night I gaze at the signs
pointing to my one and only Home.
I stare at the stars....


AVA
RAMON G. C. BARCELONA, '52


portrait of a successful
businessman


Silverio had an unusually large head:
his uncle said he’d grow up to be smart
and intelligent. Silverio excelled in
arithmetic as a school-boy, and sold
his Christmas toys to his friends and enemies.
He went to college, graduated with a
commerce degree, and for many years
worked for his uncle, until, at 40,
he became President and Manager of
his uncle’s shirt factory. He developed
a paunch and a double chin, smoked a cigar
and was made committee-chairman in
many civic organizations. He bought stocks
in The Luzon Mining Company, The Republic
Maritime Corporation, The Philippine Lumber, Inc.
The Pacific Steel, Inc., and other corporations.
At 50 Silverio died suddenly of coronary thrombosis
and his wife and three children now live
in the three-story house he built
for them in the suburbs.


14


MEN OF THE ATENEO


FRANCIS SWEENEY, S. J.


They were the gay cadets, the Sunday soldiers,
Gold-braid gallants, fierce in tarbucket and sabre,
Marching in the sunshine on fiestas.
They were the pride of Manila,"
Men of Democracy’s last free fortress,
Men of the West Point of the Islands,
Men of the Ateneo.
These were the blessings that hovered over their banners:
Loyola’s spirit, cavalry-strength of the Church,
Don Diego the Greater, Apostle and Knight of the West,
And Mary, Mother of the Spanish Artillery,
Queen of the Alcazar.
THey were the men, two thousand of them, remember,
Who marched when the peril came,
(Two hundred of them under age, who should have stayed with
their mothers),
The small men with the faces of children,
And hearts of leopards under their shirts.
Remember Bataan, and who were first in the fighting,
Remember the Sunday soldiers,
And the red blood fresh on the bayonets,
Think of the battle shocks of Corregidor
And the Aves shouted over the guns.
Keep them, Mother of the Republic,
Cover them with your mantle!
Bless their resolve and ours, O Queen of the Ateneo,
Lady of Victory.


—Reprinted from BAROQUE MOMENT,
a book of poems by Fr. Francis Sweeney, S-J.


A MAGAZINE OF THE A


Olhe ALarO
VOLUME ONE 2 NUMBER ONE


THE STAFF
Editor-in-Chief .........SIXTO K. ROXAS, A.B. '50
Managing Editor ............MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51
Essay Editor ...... . . . . . . . . . .RODOLFO OLIVARES, A.B. '51
Poetry Editor ..... ..........ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B. '51
Short Story Editor . . . . . . . . . . . FERNANDO DAVID, A.B. '52
Drama Editor . ... . . . . . ...... FLORENCIO TAMESIS, A.B. '50
Book Reviews .. .............ANTONIO P. G. MANUUD, A.B. '52
Campus Editor ..............ENRIQUE ESQUIVEL, JR., A.B. '51
Sports Editor
.ROBERT WILSON, A.B. '52
Humor ... . .... . . ............JOSE TUASON, JR., LITT.B. '51
Art Editor .. . .. . . . . . ........NORBERTO MARCHADESCH, JR. A.B. '51
Associate Editors . .. . . . . . ....MARIO C. REYES, A.B. '50
FRANCISCO BORJA, A.B. '51
HECTOR HOFILENA, A.B. '51
HECTOR QUESADA, A.B. '51
GREGORIO BRILLANTES, LITT.B. '52
ERNESTO GOROSPE, A.B. '53
EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B. '53
Business Manager .......... .JUANITO ORDOVEZA, A.B. '50
Circulation Manager .........MANUEL ROXAS, JR., A.B. '52


2


“  


ND GENERAL LITERATURE


OAP  E
AUGUST * 1949


THE CONTENTS
EDITORIALS
Page
The Kremlin, Bishop Madriaga and You . . . . . . . . . . . ... M. C. R.
On a Note of Triumph .. ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. V. S. 5


ESSAYS
On Dreamers and Dreams
A Return to Fundamentals
Don Pedro ................
Stay On the Ground ......
Ateneo Turns Co-ed ......
A New Cry for the Youth


SHORT STORIES
Love . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Gregorio C. Brillantes 9
Bus Ride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Fernando S. David 20
The Steeper the Mountain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Torres 30


POEMS
Invitation .......
Song ....... . . . ..
Of Poets ........
Unreasoned Hymn
Broken Lyre .....
The Magic Music


FEATURES


The Drama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Florencio Tamesis 14
The Campus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . Enrique Esquivel, Jr. 17
BOOKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Mario C. Reyes 25
Hector Quesada


Fernando S. David 6
5
Antonio P. Manuud
Emmanuel Torres 28
... Hector Quesada 29
Onofre Pagsanghan 29
... Maximo Soliven 29


... Francisco Borja 7
... Hector Quesada 11
.. Edvigio Castillet 13
.. . . . Jeremias Jose 16
Manuel Roxas, Jr. 19
Rodolfo P. Olivares 23


AUGUST, 1949


3


THE KREMLIN, BISHOP MADRIAGA AND YOU


I—HE Kremlin is not angry with Bishop Madriaga of Lingayen. Much
less has it known the bishop and his recent ban in his diocese on
Acertain immoral dances. But it has certainly breathed fire and
infernal fury on Pope Pius XII for his ban on Communism among
some thirty million Catholics in Soviet-dominated Hungary, Poland,
Czechoslovakia and Rumania. For, as the Kremlin sees, the Pope’s excommunication decree against 'Catholic Communists’ means God or Stalin
in Eastern Europe—Catholicism or atheistic Communism for
that region. The whole of Europe is stirred! And the KremNo
“Catholic
lin has reason to vent its spleen, for, as the papers reported,
Communists” “the probable refusal of the majority of these Catholics to
support Communism will greatly complicate the task of the
Kremlin in seeking to consolidate Soviet domination of Eastern Europe..”


The Kremlin realizes what sterling stuff these Slavie Catholics are made
of. From many indications, the Pope’s ban will prove the mettle of these Catholics not for Communism’s but for Catholicism’s glory. “The possibility is
foreseen," the reports continue, “that dramatic consequences may follow the
diversion of Catholic workers away from Communism in some
Martyrdom of the satellite states as a result of the Pope’s edict.” Suffering and martyrdom may follow the Pope’s decree. Indeed,
and
they have even preceded it! Archbishop Stepinac, Cardinal
Fortitude
Mindszenty, and a host of other staunch Catholics are Catholicism’s defiant reply to Moscow. The torture-tested life of the infant
Church is being reenacted. The period of martyrdom and fortitude is rising
on the European horizon, because Catholics will not be dictated to, because
Catholics are Catholics in the truest sense of the word.


We shift the scene to our beloved Philippines, to this Catholic Philippines and to Bishop Madriaga. Bishop Madriaga is not another Archbishop
Stepinac, he is not another victim of the present apocalyptic scourge in
Europe—and yet—who knows?—he may yet be, just as you or any of us
may be. Stalin may be thousands of miles from Philippine shores but certainly the devil is not! He is right here in our midst as busy
Filipino
as Comrade Ivan. And China, recently turned Communist,
“Catholicism" is just next door. The Iron Curtain is apt to fall on any
country. And is our country ready? Martyrdom is a very
special gift of God. It is only for the brave. It is only for them that love
much. It is only for those that are as Catholic as Archbishop Stepinac, or
Cardinal Mindszenty or those fearless Slavic Catholics. But how Catholic
are we Filipinos? How much in name? in deed? Bishop Madriaga, with
his recent ban on certain immoral modern dances, has uncovered the “Catholicism' of many so-called Catholics. A local Sunday magazine has printed
this “Catholicism' of some Filipinos expressed in their resentful smart opposition to the bishop’s ban. The “Catholicism’ of countless others has re

4


“  "


mained unprinted but not unexpressed. It is a “Catholicsm’ reared in a pagan
way of life, a “Catholicism’ that concenters not on Christ but on the ego, a
“Catholicism' that is anything but Catholic. Is this the Filipino Catholics reply
to a Catholic bishop’s decree?
If the Kremlin finally decides to be angry with Bishop Madriaga of
Lingayen and the Catholic people of the Philippines, it may not find the
Filipinos as stubborn as the Slavic Catholics (God forbid!) in the
defense of their Faith. Soviet Russia may discover this kind of
With
Filipino “Catholicism' vastly different from that across the oceans
God’s
—to her own satisfaction and our undoing. May we discover it
Grace
first before the chains of godless Communism are heard clanging
on our shores. With God’s grace, may we be as prudent, as vigilant, as Catholic, as Bishop Madriaga.


M. C. R.


ON A NOTE OF TRIUMPH


IHE other week we heard over the radio how a Catholic Priest in
Czechoslovakia had been arraigned for “high treason" because he
would not give the Sacraments to a woman who refused to renounce
Communism. It has become, it seems, “high treason" to refuse
to administer the Sacraments. We wonder what the Communist
in his relentless war against the Church will think of next.
For, truly, the war that he wages against Religion is ruthless
Call
and unceasing and the list of Communist “victories" over the
It
“Treason"? Church is grim and impressive. In October of 1946, Archbishop Aloysius Stepinatz was sentenced to sixteen years' imprisonment on charges of “collaborating with the Axis powers" in Yugoslavia. In February, 1949, Joseph Cardinal Mindszenty was convicted of
“treason" in Hungary and sentenced to life imprisonment. In Czechoslovakia, Archbishop Josef Beran has been placed under arrest—which can only
mean a trumped-up trial and, after that, imprisonment or execution. We
must not forget that from the start the Communist has struck at the
Church, often with seeming success. For the Communist would take away
Christ from men and in His place institute a system of materialism which
openly, flagrantly, denies the life of the spirit and the dignity of the human
person. To accomplish this he brings the priests of God into his torture
chambers and then drags them, babbling incoherent and drugged confessions,
into his Courts of Injustice.
And yet, the Communist 1s not winning this battle. The Communist
evidently wants to plunge us into war and turn the world into a holocaust
of hate. To this end he utilizes intrigue and brutality and
The Sword force. But we are fighting him with weapons he does not unof the
derstand and will never understand. We are fighting hate
Spirit
with love. We are not using violence; we are feeding the hungry, giving water to the thirsty, clothing the poor. We are
praying instead of cursing. We are pitting the truth fearlessly against his
accusations and his lies. Against weapons such as these the Communist
is bewildered and his attacks are turning into hysteria.
Red Communism thrives on treason but in our ranks the traitors are
few. For the Faith that made men face the lions of the Colosseum is the
same militant Faith for which the Catholics of Red-conThe
trolled Europe today undergo their hour of trial. And this
Unanswerable time the martyrs do not shed their blood on the sands of
Answer
the Roman arena, but they die in Hungary and in Yugoslavia and in Czechoslovakia and in Poland and in Bulgaria


AUGUST..1949


5


and all over the Communist world. As Joseph Breig in "America” magazine
so aptly put it: “Martyrs are the unanswerable answer to all falsehood."
In the ages of Roman persecution, the Caesars herded the martyrs into
their amphitheaters and made of them a spectacle for the blood-lust of the
mob. Today a new persecution rears its head and drags the martyrs of
our time into the amphitheaters of a new, pagan, godless age. With the
eyes of the world upon the spectacle the minions of this new persecution
raise up once more the mangled offerings to the wrath of their impotent
deities. They intend to hold these martyrs up in their disgrace and suffering as symbols of the defeat of God and Religion. Instead they
raise them up as symbols of triumph. They unwittingly make them standards around which all who are noble and good can rally. And the cry of
the oppressed and the martyred once again rings like a clarionA New call to the reaches of the earth calling for a new Crusade of men
Crusade —men who would be fighters of Christ’s fight—men who realize
that the torch must be wrested from the hands of the godless if
we are to safeguard the things that are of God. The call that has gone forth
is for a crusading zeal no less quixotic than that of La Mancha, a valor no
less imperious than that of Richard, the Lion-hearted, a selflessness no less
mad, no less glorious than that of Christ in His great Sacrifice on the final
hill of Calvary. And this call is being enthusiastically, gallantly answered.


M. S.


P&-


INVITATION
by Fernando David, A.B. '52.


The breathing sea is always waiting,
Can you not hear the white wave sighing
With the strand and gulls gliding lightsome:
Come, come, come.
To where there's fast fresh living,
For hearts in adventure stout to endure,
To where there's peace abiding,
For souls whom solitude can lure.
To where the shades light endless
On limpid cones and foamy tethers,
To where sprites humming bow low
On the slant of all free zephyrs.
In sunshine and sky, water and wind,
Earth-begrimed man, bathe your mind,
Here dwells beauty your soul to ransom,
Come, come, come.


6


“  "


On Dreamers and Dreams


By
FRANCISCO BORJA
A. B. '51


AS I was saying, if act is considered entitatively, I conA
cede, but if formally, I deny
 the minor. Now repeat what
The unI said, Mr.¬
suspecting victim is jolted from the
realm of imagination in which he
has been roaming and springs to his
feet with a blank look at the profes"Ah-h-h, I’m sorry I didn’t
sor.
hear, Father. I wasn’t paying attention.” And at once a flood of laughter fills the room. Here is a typical
classroom sequence which could happen anywhere. Such incidents go to
brighten the routine of the classroom
by providing occasion for a hearty
laugh. We are told that laughing
is biologically good, for a healthy
guffaw is supposed to change the
stale air in the lungs. But we are
disgressing. The previous subject
was our unfortunate colleague caught
“day-dreaming", a phenomenon which
is by no means uncommon especially
when the climate and other factors
combine to induce this state. The
"lover of wisdom" is apt to be lulled
at times into a situation which can
be embarassing if he is taken unawares. Of course there are day
dreams and day-dreams but we believe there is a kind which can produce salutary effects. And there are
different degrees too, for one may be
an occasional dreamer or a constant
dreamer. But lest we be misunderstood, we state here and now that we
are not in favor of classroom "daydreaming.” We shall merely attempt
to discuss this phenomenon as objectively as we can.
While listening to a lecture in
philosophy, one may suddenly stumble on a new method of solving an
intricate problem in mathematics;


while listening to a lecture in poetry
on the nature of the beautiful, one
may be swept into humming an enchanting melody played at a concert
the previous night, so that, for the
time being, professor, desks and
classmates disappear while waves of
music engulf the mind, and the
“dreamer" is lost in it. Unless he
is brought back to reality by the
stern voice of the professor or by
his classmates, he is liable to linger
on indefinitely in this semi-ethereal
state. Or perhaps Laurence Olivier’s
portrayal of "Hamlet" so captivated
his imagination that he can not help
but muse about his incomparable acting, flawless diction, and so on, till
he finds himself imagining he is
playing "Hamlet. At any rate it
can not be denied that there is a
certain pleasure in this type of "daydreaming," and that, in so far as it
relieves the mind of tension and affords relaxation from cares, even if
only for a brief space, it is good. In
our times when life is all hustle and
bustle, when, as Wordsworth aptly
put it, “The world is too much with
us, getting and spending we lay
waste our powers,” it is salutary once
in a while to indulge in it. At least
for a while we forget the vicissitudes
of life.
But there is another kind of
dreaming that has brought more
concrete advantages to mankind, the
dreaming of the saint, the poet, the
artist, the inventor, the scientist. It
is said that the world little dreams
of the power of prayer, but can we
not also say that the world little
dreams of the power of dreams?
Perhaps even philosophers dream,
though some will, of course, disagree.


AUGUST, 1949


7


Saint Thomas must have dreamed of
a unified system of philosophy before
he began constructing it. If architects and engineers did not dream,
would we have fine buildings and
machines? If Beethoven did not
dream and compose, would we ever
enjoy his immortal music? Stephen Foster had to “dream of
Jeanie with the light brown hair
floating like a vapor on the soft summer air" in order to write the hauntingly beautiful song tenderly dedicated to his wife Jane. Yes indeed,
people dream, and we might go on
citing innumerable instances. We
need not mention the thousands of
young men and women at this very
moment who dream of someday becoming priests and nuns, of other
millions who dream of raising fine
families, and, let us not forget, the
poets, who without dreaming could
never have written the ennobling
poems we read and enjoy today.
Even politicians dream of power that
can be used either for good or for
evil.


Dreams are responsible for much
good in the world, but unfortunately
they have also caused untold misery.
The effects of the mad dreams of
Napoleon, Hitler and Stalin, to mention but a few, tell their own story
in blood and suffering.... Dreams
have shaped the course of history
and will continue to shape it till the
end of time. As long as men dream,
the world will change either for better or for worse. So by all means
let us dream, but only the right
dreams. Although almost everyone
has at one time or other dreamed of
attaining the unattainable, still it is
possible to dream reasonably. A
great poet has immortalized the power of dreams:
We are the music-makers,
And we are the dreamers of
dreams,
Wandering by lone sea-breakers,
And sitting by desolate streams;
World-losers and world-forsakers,
On whom the pale moon gleams.
Yet we are the movers and shakers
Of the world for ever it seems.


8


“  "


Tony and Nenita were both young.
For them the world still offered..


Love
by G. C. Brillantes, Litt. B. '52


N the Luneta, Jose Rizal

llooked serenely across the
—Bay, towards the blue mountains of Bataan, into the
sunset.
People hurried on the sidewalks
of the Escolta, clutching at their
packages with a fierce possiveness,
and in a barongbarong in San Nicolas, a baby cried hungrily.
In a classy restaurant on the
Avenida, a fat man with a double
chin and beady eyes said to a woman across a ketchup-splattered
table-cloth, “I netted a good threethousand at the Depot today," and
the woman, whose name was Carmen, said, "Darling," and the fat
man said, "How would you like a
new diamond ring?” and Carmen
said, staring idiot-like into the eyes
*
of the fat man, "Ho-nee —
On Azcarraga, the boy-conductor
of a battered jeepney cried lustily,
"Hoy, Soria... may lugal pa... hoy,
Soria," although there was a gnaw.
ing emptiness in the pit of his
stomach.
A man who clerked for the Santos
and Santos Law Firm leaned on the
railing of the Santa Cruz bridge,
coughed in painful spasms, and
looked down at the muddy, silent
waters of the Pasig...
-o0o—
The city seemed so far away.
They stood on the concrete seawall, holding hands, the wind in her
hair (Oh, smell of mornings when
sampaguitas are in bloom!) very
much in love with life and the world


and with each other. In the sunlight of late afternoon, against a
backdrop of sea and sky, he was a
bronze god and she a white goddess,
and he knew only that, tall and lovely, she stood beside him, her hand
warm in his, her nearness forming
a hollowness like an ache in his
breast. Wordlessly, they watched
the day end in the west in a cauldron of molten-gold clouds, they
watched the waves racing shoreward to dash themselves into frothing fragments on the rocks below.
He said to himself, “This girl,
here, beside me, is the most beautiful
girl in the whole world. All my life
I have loved her. All my life I
have waited for her.” But aloud, he
said to her, softly, "Nenita, I love
you."
She smiled, and he saw a dimple
ripple on her cheek. (You dimple
beautifully, Nenita. You are far
too beautiful to be true, Nenita.)
"Fool," she said, smiling.
“The first time I saw you, I loved
you,” he said, heavily. “Remember
that dance? Remember?"
“I don’t remember,” she said.
“I couldn’t sleep that night. I—"
"I’m sorry I kept you from a good
night’s sleep, she said. There was
quiet laughter in her eyes.
They laughed together and the melodious sound of their laughter
warmed their hearts. It was the
clear, buoyant laughter of youth in
summertime, everywhere. (Ah,
youth, when all is wonderful and
magnificent, and bitterness and


AUGUST, 1949


9


loneliness are but voices heard in a
dream.)
“Let’s go down there,” he said.
“We can sit on that rock.
*
"Let’s,” she said. The sea wind
lifted a strand of her hair and flung
it playfully against her face.
He helped her down the cemented
steps that led down to the rocks.
She balanced herself on a rock and
tossed back her wind-swept hair and
said, “The sea, it’s wonderful.”
He said nothing. He spread his
handkerchief for her on the rock.
“I like sunsets,” she said. “They
make me sort of want to write a
poem. Something like that.” Then,
Don't you like sunsets, Tony? They
are so— so beautiful."
“You are more beautiful,” he said.
(You are breathlessly beautiful, Nenita. You are more beautiful than
a thousand sunsets, a thousand
roseate dawns, a thousand greatstarred nights.)
“Say, Tony Villar, you can flatter!" she said, mock-glowering at
him.
"No.”"
“Really.”
He caught her hand and pressed
it. He looked into her eyes, and
everything was there: the dream,
the music, the poetry, the waiting
and the longing. Then she looked
away and turned her gaze out to
sea. (The smell of sea wind and
the swish-swish of the waves and the
faint, disproportionate shouts of
children playing.)
"Tony —
“Yes?”
“See that ship. The one with the
blue funnel?"
“I see it,” he said. "It’s a luxury
liner, I guess.
“Stupid," she said in mock-anger,
crinkling her nose. "Ian’t that our
ship? Aren’t we sailing tonight?
“Oh, I catch on," he said. "And
where shall we go?"
“Everywhere,” she said. "San
Francisco, New York, London, everywhere."


"Paris, Rome.”
“Shanghai," she said.
“Ah-ah,” he said. “There's a war
up there.”
“All right," she said. "Forget the
Chinese.
"After a pause: “We’ll have a
lovely time, won’t we, Tony?”
“Sure,” he said.
“Sure.”
The Bataan mountains had swallowed the last of the sun, and the
west was red and orange with the
afterglow. For one long moment,
they sat there on the rock, close to
each other, not wanting to speak.
Shadows formed into silhouettes of
undulating shade on the water.
"Tony —"
“Madame?'
"We must go now.”
“You're the boss.
"It’s Papa, you know. Promptness and all that stuff."
They crossed the Boulevard, he
steering her through the river of
traffic. The headlights of the cars
were still undefined in the young
twilight. They turned into an acacialined street that branched off the
main thoroughfare, their laughter
like butterflies of sunlight playing
on the grass.
When they reached her gate, she
said, almost in a whisper, "Good
night.” She amiled with a tenderness that seemed to glow in the halfdarkness.
“Good night,” he said. He watched her, tall and lovely and eighteen,
half-run up the concrete driveway
into the house.
He was suddenly aware of the
coolness of the evening and the smell
of green growing things and on
Avenida Rizal, the million-footed
manswarm hurried, hurried, and a
man who clerked for the Santos and
Santos Law Firm leaned on the railing of the Santa Cruz bridge, coughed painfully once, twice, and looked
down at the dark, hungry waters of
the Pasig.


10


“  "


A Return lo Fundamentais


by Hector Quesada, A.B. '51.


ITHIN the last decade the
lworld has been concerned
more than ever about her
rather perilously wayward
mode of existence. Doctors, philosophers, scientists, the learned and
the not-too-learned have written volumes about the ailments of modern
life and their cure. As many have
brilliantly concluded, something is
amiss with the world. But what is
it? And what can be done?
Some of modern man’s illness
seems to have come from an overabundance of leisure in which to indulge in introspection. When man
had to till the soil to live, he was
wearied by his labor but happy. He
never read about Freud’s theory on
the libido, and seldom, if ever, experienced such peculiarities as an
Oedipus complex. His needs were
few and his pastimes simple. In
our world of today, we have arrived,
it seems, at a truly Chestertonian
paradox, for man goes about hurriedly even in his leisure. It is not
rarely that one reads of young boys
and girls being dashed to pieces at
speeds of one hundred miles per
hour during their leisure time. A
man of a century ago could hardly
attain one tenth that speed, even
supposing he preferred to spend his
leisure hours in such a fashion.
But, it is objected, would you have
us remain in the ignorance of the
past? Perhaps, I should reply, if
that is the best way to be perfectly
happy, why not? When ignorance
is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise. But
the truth is that these strong and
solid citizens of bygone days were
not ignorant; they were very well
AUGUST, 1949


aware of the essential truths that
so many of our so called learned
men are ignorant of. They had
(what Chesterton most frequently
emphasizes) the knowledge of fundamentals.
The erudite author of “Man, the
Unknown,” Dr. Alexis Carrel, referred to this needed knowledge when
he argued for a better knowledge of
man. We have, he states, attained
an enormous control over inert matter and have surrounded ourselves
with the hostile inventions of our
intelligence against which we are
unprotected. The industrial civilizations which have attained the greatest development are precisely those
that have become weaker and are
making a most rapid return to barbarism. When we look around us
twelve years after Dr. Carrel wrote
his book, we exclaimed, "How truly
prophetic!"
Henry Link, the psychologist, in
his book, “The Return of Religion,"
proceeds in a manner merely utilitarian. He urges the practice of religion because he has observed that
it has greatly helped in producing
charming personalities, and on the
whole, better men. Raised by conventionally religious parents, but
casting aside in adult life what he
had been taught, he became a professed skeptic. Later, however, during his career as a psychologist,
after having diagnosed thousands of
mental patients, he became acutely
aware of the need of religion. As
a member of an unemployment relief
committee in New York, he reported
that, in the findings of the committee, the individuals who lived according to religious principles had
11


significantly better personalities than
those who did not.
To the more philosophically inclined, Richard Weaver’s rather eloquent diagnosis of man’s present ills
in “Ideas Have Consequence”" is most
interesting. The evil that has come
upon the world today is the result,
he maintains, of the denial of univ
ersals, characterestic of the philosophy of nominalism as propounded by
William of Occam back in the fourteenth century. The denial of the
universals, he explains, carries with
it the denial of everything transcendental and therefore of all fixed
truth.
Such analyses show the weakness
of many types of modern education
where man is trained as an economic unit and not as moral being.
When training is aimed exclusively
at specialization in a certain narrow field, broad minds give way to
precise and narrow intellects, producing the infamous "small, sharp
mind." Man is made an efficient
little gear in a galaxy of machines,
so that beyond his tiny universe he
knows practically nothing. He sees
the world through an extremely
small window and cannot generalize,
or, if he does, he falls into gross error.
The alarming decay of western
civilization may be traced to this
lack of aims and ideas. A half lite
rate Communist is able to rattle off
his contradictions about a Utopia
for the workingman and an outline
of the Politburo’s five year plan.
But what plans and ideals has western capitalism that can compare to
the glorious pipe-dreams of Lenin?
A recent work, “There Is Freedom for the Brave," by Paul Mac

Guire, has been acclaimed as a brief
answer to the ravings of Communist
ideology. The author argues that
while Communism is founded upon
historical materialism, western communities are built upon a natural
moral law. He urges that every individual should become a being with
a keen sense of responsibility and
claims that, with such moral communities throughout the world, Communism will necessarily fall.
The trend of thought today is toward a return to fundamental values
and toward a clearing and a recasting of man’s basic concepts. But
the question arises, what are these
fundamental concepts and how can
they be determined? It may be argued that for the Hindu, Buddhist,
Protestant and Catholic there are
different sets of fundamental values.
It is true that there are differences,
but the most basic fundamental
values are accepted by all men alike
and are as rooted in our nature as
the elementary dictates of conscience itself. These values are accepted by all the peoples of the earth
except those twisted and corrupted
by the cancer of Communism which
is totally opposed to the basic needs
of man. Communism breeds only in
places where there is discontent born
of unjust social conditions and
fanned and fostered by Communism’s
minions. In those in whom Communism triumphs, morality tends to
lose its meaning and moral forces
to disappear.
Yet our western civilization will
survive, but only in those who, engraving on their minds the spiritual
concepts on which it is based, make
them the pattern of their lives.


“  
12


Don ledro


by ED. DE RIVERA CASTILLET
Litt. B. '53


ON PEDRO is the street I
Iflive in but why it was so
called is beyond me. With
its rolling Spanish syllables
the name reminds me of pitching
galleons and colonial conquistadores.


This little street in the center of
the town of Makati in the province
of Rizal runs only to a length of
about three hundred yards. Its fifteen feet of width just allows two
approaching jeeps to pass each other.
Don Pedro is popularly known as a
‘calle" but “callejon, the Spanish
word for narrow street, would fit it
more exactly.


Opposite my home at number seven
Don Pedro, and over towards the
west, lives Aling Felisa with her
five children, three of whom are
studying at the public school. Aling
Felisa is a vendor of malagkit rice
cakes. For the last two months, her
husband has been out of a job, so
Aling Felisa has been working slavishly until as late as eleven o’clock
at night to keep the family budget
on the level.


Aling Felisa’s house is an old
barong-barong built during the first
days of the liberation. Its walls
and roof are made of burnt galvanized iron sheets and the floorings
are of bamboo splits nailed closely
together.
I first met Aling Felisa the day I
went to her home to recruit her
children for the catechetical classes
on Sunday at the parish church.
She is a loquacious woman who
makes you feel at ease whenever you
converse with her.
She talked freely of the good old
days before the war when her husband worked for a mining company.
The family had everything their


capricious hearts wished for. Fate,
however, was bitterly hard on them.
Their house was totally destroyed
during the liberation and they could
not put up a house as imposing as
the one they previously had. To
add misfortune to misery, Aling Felisa’s husband became jobless when
the American firm for which he
worked closed shop due to adverse
business conditions.
I remember one early morning
when I had risen at four to study
my lessons. Few souls were astir
and only the roar of a lone jeep
passing by broke the heavy stillness.
From my study room, I noticed Aling
Felisa under her house industriously
fanning a hearth with a winnow
held firmly in both hands. She was
slowly cooking a pan of rice cakes
over a low fire of glowing charcoal.
The deft way Aling Felisa handled
the winnow and coaxed her clear,
hot fire plainly told of her long experience.
An hour later, while I was still
engrossed in my study of English
verse, I heard Aling Felisa’s voice
across the street crying, "Bibingka,
bili na kayo ng bibingka. I peeped
out and I saw scores of customers
hurrying to where busy Aling Felisa
was selling her delicious hot cakes.
By this time, Don Pedro was
alive with activity. Jeeps whizzed
merrily by filled with passengers
hurrying to market or to the office.
The iceman parked his truck at the
corner and started to sell his product. The Chinaman opened his store
on 'the next block. Cats and dogs
moved about freely from the homes
in the neighborhood.
Life along Don Pedro Street, resuming its normal pace, fell into
step with another day.


AUGUST,.1949


13


T
Laurence Oliviers’s "HAMLEI.


What most people fail to realize is that the man who wrote "Hamlet"—William
Shakespeare—was first and foremost a playwright, a popular, practical
playwright who wrote for money, entertainment and only incidentally for
posterity.
“Hamlet" to this day remains one of the most searching psychological
studies of man. Shakespeare with his profound knowledge of life has probed
the recesses of the human soul and has still maintained an atmosphere far
removed from the morbid. The greatest strength and beauty of his drama
lie in its appeal to thought through an understanding of human nature.
“Hamlet" like many of Shakespeare’s other great dramas, is meaningless
without a Christian background. It is fortunate, for our appreciation of
Shakespeare among many other things, that there is in this country a Catholic
heritage that enables us to distinguish spiritual, abstract, moral values—otherwise, the transforming of the death of the king, Claudius, into righteous execution and not mere cold-blooded murder, and the denial of Church burial to
Ophelia because of her “doubtful death," and the consequent shock to her
brother would make no sense at all.
The spiritual ideals of the poet are more evident after a cursory examination of the general standards of our modern plays and movies. Today Christ
is seldom, if ever, permitted to enter a picture. The dollar motif, sex, and freedom to satisfy every caprice are made the standard variations of our modern
cinema themes. Consequently, man’s acts are examined without true knowledge of his purpose in life and on the other hand, man’s true freedom, as
distinguished from the license of the libertine, is considered without any
relation to his spiritual nature.
This is, however, in no way a demand that the lives of Saints be dramatized. Heaven knows this is asking too much from our so-called modern
world, though the undeniable fact remains that there is more drama in a holy
life. But it is important to recognize, as Seamus Fleming, a noted American
critic warns, that, of necessity, any play ignoring the real nature and destiny
of man is a pointless and worthless work.
In his production Laurence Olivier has succeeded in presenting something
more than just "escape entertainment" for the moviegoer. Its artistry is so
fine that Olivier’s "Hamlet" can be thoroughly enjoyed and appreciated even
without a previous introduction to Shakespeare. If for this reason alone,
Laurence Olivier’s success is remarkable.
We are aware of the difficulties attending a production of any of Shakespeare’s plays, much more the tragedy of the "melancholy Dane.” We are aware
of the omissions of some of its sub-plots (Fortinbras, Rosencrantz and Guil

O most people possessed of a standard education, “The Tragedy of
of Hamlet" is familiar as a play run through quickly in high-school
and reviewed but briefly in college—and has since then remained,
in the opinion of many, where it properly belongs—in the study.


14


“  "


denstern), and the reversal in order (there are a few) of some of its scenes.
These omissions and reversals in order are objectionable only to the most
rabid of Shakespearean scholars who may feel cheated out of the full richness
of Shakespeare’s genius. Such questions may well be discussed and settled
elsewhere. For the moment we are concerned with the effect the film has on
the general public.
As a movie it continues to exercise its potent appeal to the world. Exploiting fully the modern cinema techniques of setting, design and overall
production not available to the stage, Olivier’s "Hamlet” has intensified passion, both tender and violent for those who seek emotion, has presented exciting
sword-play for those who demand action, has fully developed human traits
for those in search of character portrayal, and has held the interest of the
audience in much the same manner that Burbage did, time and again, in his
unroofed theater at the Globe centuries ago.
We might well omit comment on the individual performances of its actors
since this is one presentation where really “The play is the thing.” It is only
after one has left the movie-house that he realizes that those characters seen
on the screen were but hired actors. The acting is that good, but perhaps it is
precisely because of this that we must have our say about the actors.
The acting itself leaves little to be desired. Even the minor characters—
guards, ladies-in-waiting and the court—act as Shakespeare must have intended—as mere miniatures in profile. In our opinion, three particularly stand out.
Laurence Olivier, of course, as Hamlet gives a brilliant performance, so that
now, having seen the movie, we find inconceivable a "Hamlet" other than
Olivier, with the possible exception of John Barrymore who, as his critics
and friends declare, so sensitively and delicately played Hamlet that they believed and feared he actually lived the part. Next comes Jean Simmons as the
"fair Ophelia.” Called upon to interpret one of Shakespeare’s most difficult
mad-speeches, Miss Simmons has brought out Shakespeare’s madness-to-meaning mid-sentence switches by a matchless inflection of her lines. Eilleen Herlie
as the Queen gives a wholesome effect to the play as a whole, though the
sleeping chamber scene with her son Hamlet stands out as most memorable
for the sustained facial expression of her emotions. Queen Gertrude though
greatly ennobled in character by this movie version, gives an effect that is
nevertheless satisfactory to the audience in general and to the Shakespearean
scholar in particular.
FLORENCIO TAMESIS, A.B. '50


Pa¬


SONG
By Antonio P. Gella Manuud, A.B. '52.


Awake to be loved, my soul, awake—
Your Lover calls and in silence waits.
Look to the dawn, the dark forsake.
For Seraphs call from Heaven's gates.
Did you give Him a cross of pain to bear
Who with mercy bled and died for your sake?
Did you give Him a crown of thorns to wear?
O my soul, to His love awake! Awake!


AUGUST, 1949


15


Stay On The Grouna
by Jeremias Jose, Litt. B. '52


R. FORD, if he were alive
today, would certainly yell
N
his head off in disgust at
the way Filipinos nowadays
and particularly now-anights, manuever his beautiful invention, the car.
We know a car at present is a far
cry from that first turned out by
Mr. Ford. Everything in it has improved immensely, but greater thanks
are in order because skull patching
and bone joining equipment has kept
pace with the auto’s advances. Today the wheels turn much faster and,
logically, the faster they turn, the
faster they can hurt. (Are we still
all following?)
Why beat about the bush anv
longer? I am referring particularly
to college “professional" drivers who
pilot their ground craft about our
fair city to their respective alma
mater's.
Hey, compare, yesterday on the
boulevard, did you see "Alan Ladd"
driving the family car? He certainly was racing with the wind. (For
his sake, if not for the citizens"
sake, I was glad the policeman on
the motor-cycle was busy writing out
the city’s invitation for that other
speed maniac.) Did you see those
sleeves rolled over Alan’s big muscles


and that open shirt exposing his
huge chest. (Cough, cough......)
Sure, he has plenty of undershirts,
but understand, pal, 'Alan Ladd' is
always ready for action. Just let
action show its head!
Of course, there is also Mr. Ladies"
man. He is the hero who knows so
many of the ladies but fortunately
not vice versa. This type of pest belongs to another species. Look at
him behind the wheel and you’ll have
trouble recognizing him from any
angle, especially from the front.
You won’t know whether its a rising
sun or a swallow’s tail or his own
or his friend’s face that peers at you
through all those stickers on his jeep
shield. Apparently he wants to put
across the idea that he knows at
least one person in every college.
Finally, we have Mr. Observer who
should have been a botanist. He is
that person who cannot let any interesting scene pass by his gaze without a third look and a vacant comment or a feeble-minded whistle.
But why should I go on mentioning the strange practices of some of
our drivers? After all, some day
these exhibits with come down to
earth— when six feet of it is piled
on top of them.


“  "
16


EDUCATION A LA JESUITE


OR what does the Ateneo de
Manila and any other Ateneo really stand? What is
it that distinguishes the
type of education here imparted?"
These were the questions that prefaced the sermon of Fr. James J.
MCGinley, S.J., on the feast of St.
Ignatius of Loyola last July 31. The
congregation was attentive and interested, for in addition to the usual
Sunday Mass go-ers there were present representatives from the different religious orders in Manila and
a number of distinguished alumni.
Very Reverend Leo A. Cullum, S.J.,
Superior of the Jesuit Philippine
Mission, celebrated the solemn high
Mass at which the Most Reverend
Egidio Vagnozzi, Apostolic Delegate
to the Philippines, and the Most
Reverend Alejandro Olalia, Bishop of
Zela, were present in the sanctuary.
Father Cullum was assisted by Fathers Raymond Gough, S.J., and
James Meany, S.J., who were deacon and sub-deacon respectively.
The martial hymn "Fundador" sung
by the San Jose choir concluded the
Mass.


THE START OF A
NEW YEAR
Last July 5 at the orientation
program held in the gymnasium, the
Ateneo saw the largest Freshman
Bachelor of Arts class in her entire
history. The fifty-three new students had to be divided into two sections. It is through the liberal
training of which Father McGinley
spoke that the Ateneo hopes to accomplish the development of the
full man, intellectually, physically,
morally and spiritually. Also preAUGUST, 1949


sent at the orientation lectures were
sixty Bachelor of Literature and
fifty-five Pre-Law students.
A Catholic school customarily begins its school year with an invocation of the Holy Spirit, the Illuminator of all minds and hearts. Last
June 23, the entire High School
crowded into every spare inch of the
quonset chapel to attend the Mass
of the Holy Ghost which was offered
by the Most Reverend Thomas McDonnell, visiting auxiliary Bishop of
New York, assisted by Father William Masterson, Rector of the Ateneo. After a light breakfast, the
boys trooped to the gymnasium to
listen to three eminent personages:
Bishop Thomas MeDonnell, Father
Robert T. Gannon, S.J former president of Fordham University, and
Monsignor John Scally, assistant
director of the Society for the Propagation of the Faith. On July 9
the college department also inaugurated the school term of 1949-1950
with a Mass invoking the aid of the
Holy Spirit. Shortly afterwards the
undergraduates' reading of honors
was held in the gymnasium. In the
College of Arts and Sciences, six
students received gold medals and
fifteen the silver awards. These
honor students represented roughly
seven per cent of the college population.
A week later the wheels of the
extra-curricular activities were set
in motion. The moderator of each
activity outlined in brief the purpose
of his respective activity. To give
the student audience a better idea
of the importance the Atenco attaches to these extra-curricular activities, Fr. Meany reread the different special citations awarded to de

17


serving students at the last college
commencement exercises.
T
ARRIVAL OF THE HOLY
FATHER'S DELEGATE
It was raining on the early afternoon of July 27 when the new Apostolic Delegate to the Philippines, the
Most Reverend Dr. Egidio Vagnozzi
arrived. As the guard of honor, the
Ateneo R.O.T.C. cadets together with
those from Letran dutifully stood at
their positions despite the heavy
drizzle which crinkled their crisp,
smartly pressed uniforms. As His
Excellency arrived at the Presidential Landing from Pier 13 by motor
car, the cadets snapped to attention
and did not relax their position until the Apostolic Delegate had reviewed them and blessed them.
ATENEO GLEE CLUB
Attired in immaculate white coats
and flashy ties, the thirty active
members of the Ateneo Glee Club
rendered a successful performance
during the program tendered in
honor of the newly consecrated bishop, Monsignor Alejandro Olalia, at
Saint Theresa’s College auditorium
last July 26. Some twenty insufficient hours of practice and much
able direction from Father Paul
Hugendobler, S.J., were responsible
for the Glee Club’s laudable debut.
They sang five songs: “Vivat Pastor Bonus,” “Sub Tuum Praesi" “Ave Maria,
"Faith of Our
dium,
Fathers” and the ever popular
“Stout Hearted Men.” Stout-hearted
men indeed were the members of the
ACIL who proved their stoutness of
heart and firmness of grit by sacrificing a thrilling basketball game
and going, despite the heavy downpour, to Santa Mesa to teach catechism.
SODALITY ELECTIONS
The members of the Saint Ignatius Sodality re-elected all their
former officers, a fact which testifies to the efficiency and popularity
of those chosen. The Sodality has
aimed to make the Mass the center
of the students’ life and to promote
the practice of daily Communion, a
18


task assigned in particular to the
Eucharistic Section. To fulfill its
particular objective to propagate the
reading of good Catholic literature,
the Campion Literary Guild has
started the "Nickel Campaign.
The drive consists in a weekly contribution of five centavos from each
class member, which is exchanged
for Catholic pamphlets on various
topics of current interest.
HIGH SCHOOL RETREAT
For three whole days commencing
on the afternoon of July 26, the
High School compound was shrouded
in silence, prayer and meditation.
The sophomores and juniors had
Father George Hoch for their retreat master, while the seniors had
Father Raymond Gough. The theme
of the fourth year retreat was "Lord
That I May See,” which was the
persistent appeal to Christ of the
blind man at the gate of Jericho.
Several spiritual talks each day gave
the initial impetus to prayerful
thinking. At the conclusion of the
Spiritual Exercises when the boys
emerged from the chapel after receiving the Papal Benediction, they
were more alive, more enthusiastic,
more happy with sanctifying grace.
NEW GYM
Athletics has also a key-place in a
liberal education. Those who are
sports minded may rejoice at the
news that the gym at Loyola
Heights, the new Ateneo site, is halfcompleted and may be ready for use
by mid-October. The sites for the
Grade School and the High School
have been graded and the covered
courts roofed.


At the twilight of the first quarter of the school term, we catch a
glimpse of the different forces that
act coordinately to mould the complete man. The students may not
be always conscious of their influence, but they are there, none the
less. That is the reason why they
are so effective.
—Enrique L. Esquivel, Jr.,
A.B. '51
“  "


Ateneo lurns Co-ed


by Manuel Roxas, A.B. '52


URING the past summer vancation I had several interested persons, with eyebrows
llifted at a suspicious angle,
ask me what I thought was a rather
starting question: Is there any
truth in what I hear about the Ateneo turning co-educational? From
what I knew of the Ateneo and the
Jesuits I answered that the very idea
contained in that shocking query
was preposterous. Why, I thought
to myself, it’s unthinkable that the
Ateneo will ever adopt a system
totally alien to her history. Right
then I banished the impossible idea
from my mind.


But yesterday that unthinkable,
preposterous idea was broached once
more to me and to a few unfortunate others. It was assigned us as a
topic for an overnight essay. Forced
to write on it, I allowed the thought
to seep through my mind, so that
by the time I sat down with pencil
and paper in my hands, I had pondered it rather thoroughly. Now,
after reflection, the prospect of the
Atenco turning co-ed simply fascinates my imagination.
Suppose for a moment that this
idea were to materialize. Can you
imagine the revolution in our solemn intellectual circles? Picture to


yourselves what conceited rascals you
and I will then turn out to be, eh?
For feminine charms do awaken
some degree of conceit. Each day
we shall all be striving to look just
a little neater, brighter, handsomer;
not a speck of dust will mar the
sparkle of our shoes, not a line
or lock of hair will be awry. Every
man of us will become a Georgie
Porgie or perhaps, a dashing Romeo
or a daring Don Juan from sons of
Loyola that we used to be. And
think, my friends, think what unprecedented improvements will come
about in the classroom. For one
thing, the announcements of holidays will lose their charm and will
no longer be met with howls of acclaim. The professor will have
colorful, fresh, flower-like faces to
look upon. What a relief to him
after the former drab, sullen, masculine countenances he was so wont
to despair over! And the students
-ah! mayhap the fleeting flash of
a lovely smile will start jacking up
Victor’s poor grades in Spanish or
the defiant twinkle of a dimpled
face may awaken backsliders to a
life and vigor the like of which will
never have been seen before by the
Fathers of the Ateneo.
Yes, this impossible idea is simply
vast in its possibilities.


AUGUST, 1949


19


Jorge nover knew such things could
happen on a...


Dus Ride


by Fernando S. David, A.B. '52.


ORGE told me he would never
forget the incident. He was
laughing deeply as he relat
ed it, and I was laughing too,
AS
E
but inside I knew that he
meant what he said. It was not only
because many times afterwards he
would tell the same story, poking fun,
grinning wide with honest humor,
whether we were in a classroom or
a library, ambling along the Escolta or gulping down coke at stag
parties. Mainly it was because I
had been for five years a classmate
of Tolentino, whose face and heart
I knew like my own desk or my
pen. And also Tolentino was that
kind of fellow whose memory accompanies one through all the years of
life.
Jorge was different. In fourth
year he had belonged to another section. He never knew Tolentino as I
did, never perceived the core of his
ways and whims. To Jorge, he was
nothing but a brilliant student, an
outstanding, energetic scholar whom
teachers claimed had a capacity for
greatness, who had graduated at
the head of two hundred students...
a valedictorian unanimously chosen
by faculty and student body alike.
He never thought of Tolentino as one
with an eternal grin coiled around
his lips to display his white teeth
or who wore thick, brown-rimmed
spectacles with plain glass lenses.
Well, this was what happened.
That day, I forget how far back,
Jorge was hurrying home after a
schoolday replete with written logic
and Latin tests (the worst combination ever conceived by educators)
and a gruelling recitation on a page
he had quite overlooked. Waiting for
20


a bus, he fingered the only money
he possessed — a twenty-centavo
piece.
“Just enough, he whispered to
himself, "just ten for this ride, ten
for the other. I won’t walk. Too
tired. And much homework too."
He waved at a big bus. He wanted
to be sure of sitting down. The
thought of himself, semi-crouched,
with one hand desperately clinging
to a handbar, trying to be still on
a lurching jeepney seemed to pull
down his knees with the ache of it.
Boarding the bus, he espied a pretty
uniformed girl who, he was certain
was one of his sister’s classmates.
Jorge brightened at the prospect of
enjoying really delightful conversation. When about to sit down and
while racking his mind for just that
word to begin with, Jorge was tapped
with such force as to make him emit
a cough. Instantly he pictured the
girl’s wrathful brother. But instead
a sonorous voice, distinctly but not
infallibly accented, floated through
the air.
“He-ere, Jorge! He-ere si' down
beside me, Jorge, ol' boy!
Jorge told me that he was happy
to meet Tolentino there. Not only
was a man-to-man talk with a friend
assured him during the half-hour
ride through unpaved streets and
traffic jams, but also the answer to
the question long in his mind.. how
our valedictorian was getting along
in his new school. With lttle effort Jorge forgot the uniformed girl
and dumped himself beside Tolentino.
The big bus, Jorge noticed, was
crowded with people, all sorts of
them... laborers hugging tools and
“  "


tin lunch-boxes; teachers weary of
the day’s class hours; office workers
absorbed in the evening paper;
students hurrying home or perhaps
to some movie.
“Jorge! How ar’ you doing at
school? How’s the old campus?
How’s Tom and Tito and Tony?
How’s everybody?” Jorge vowed the
tone was an orator’s, smoothly reiterating, with each 'how’ increasing in pitch and volume.
“Everything’s fine, Tolentino. How
about you? Your new school... I
mean. How do you find it?”
“Jorge, you may be unaware of the
fact, but right now I’m studying in
the most wonderful college in these
sprawling isles of ours. What buildings! What top-flight professors!
All Ph.D.’s It’s super, Jorge. Wonder-rfull!
The rolling on the "r' made Jorge
squirm a little. Already he noticed
the men in front of them had shot
back curious glances.
“Jorge, you’ve got to congratulate
me. Indeedy!'
Jorge nodded weakly.
"Not only for my school though.”
"For what else?” purred Jorge
warily.
“We-ell,” Tolentino wavered. The
word resounded clearly throughout
the bus. "We-ell, see this!”
It seemed the command was addressed more to the other passengers
than to Jorge, but my friend could
not be sure, since his mind then was
hazy in cloudy embarrassment. For
several men (and women) near them
were no longer giving them passing
glances. Now they were staring
steadfastly. And one thing that
Jorge definitely abhorred, hated to
the extent of madness, was to be


stared at like some curiosity from
Tibet.
Triumphantly, into Jorge’s uneasy
hands, Tolentino thrust a college
paper. To his hesitant gaze, a staffbox was pointed out. A scanning
finger moved, then stopped. A name
was pin-pointed and proclaimed.
"NEWS EDITOR: Rosendo Tolentino Cruz Talino.
Jorge could read. He was a college man, studying A.B. at that.
And et Tolentino had simply to
read it aloud for him.
“There, Jorge. News Editor! What
do you think o' that? Great huh?'
Jorge smiled a weak, approving
But, he told me, their cosmile.
passengers gaped at them more
curiously.
“By the way, Jorge, you have seen
the current movie at the Ideal,
have’nt you?”
“Nope.
“Jorge, you’re missing a momentous experience. Boy! see it. Deep,
realistic plot. And the climax... holy
smokes! The whole story builds up
as a triangle tapers towards its apex.
The dialogue. Photography. Both
superb! Ah, I remember. The ballerina-heroine said this once. Listen.
'I was completely disgusted with myself. Suddenly I had forgotten how
to dance, mixed up my steps. I
threw my dancing shoes away. I
never touched them, afraid to try
again, until... I saw a child who had
no legs. It will make your hair
shiver in awe, Jorge. Brilliant passages. Classical gems, one may say."
Jorge would have seen the movie
three times if only to quell the ceaseless flow of words. He only said
meekly that he had much homework
to do, but would try to see it anyhow He dared not even look at
Tolentino as he spoke.
“Ah, Jorge, do your homework.
Always bear in mind the tantum
quantum rule. Jorge, primae res primae! As Latin would hev' it.”
By this time, as Jorge told me,
even the driver was glancing back
to see who was the Englishman he
had chanced to take aboard. And
Jorge really was worried about his
health, for soon high-sounding al

AUGUST, 4949


21


leluias spiced with gaudetes filled the
bus. The driver looked on. There
was a show, a traveling minstrel.
CiceTolentino plunged headlong.
ronian rhetoric. Then he switched
to Caesarian commands and of
course he did not omit the 'Veni,
vidi, vici' part. A wine poem of
Catullus ended the program.
Jorge sighed inwardly.
Tolentino regained his breath. Instantly a shrieking imitation of Danny Kaye tuned all passengers’ heads.
Even the uniformed girl.
Jorge was listening no more. He
was drawing deeper and deeper into
his seat and it was miraculous how
a wooden seat could yield to the efforts of a distressed person. Trying to sink into the floor, he gazed at
his shoes. Jorge had never been used
to the stage. He never could look into
men’s eyes for so long. He felt his
whole being opened and he desired
none of his life to be pried apart
and scrutinized. That was his Godgiven privilege. He fingered the
twenty-centavo piece in his pocket,
concentrating to remember the designs on its faces.
As he thus brooded, Tolentino
brought out his wallet — genuine
calf leather. Nudging Jorge he
flipped it open and revealed the picture of a smiling dimpled girl.
Jorge’s interest in his surroundings
revived.
“What’s her name?'
“Nen. Nice name, no? She’s my
new girl friend."
Jorge’s heart sank. He had always
admired Tolentino for his adeptness
at capturing a girl’s fancy. But now
he pitied Nen. It was queer.
The wallet was still open before
his face. Beside the picture the
edge of a ten-peso bill peeped out
maliciously. The people behind were
intent on the picture. Seeing them
looking on, Tolentino gracefully
snapped his wallet shut.


22


At last reigned that silence which
comes when men’s minds cannot find
any sensible word to speak. The bus
reached the rotonda.
“Stop 'ere, driver.
Luckily enough the driver understood English. Jorge heaved his
breast, relieved, as Tolentino rose to
go. He helped him gather up the
one-foot thick mass of books which
Tolentino carried to and from school
everyday. Jorge said he looked like
some sort of traveling library.
"So long, Tolentino.
The conductor approached Tolentino. Jorge heaved a still greater
sigh, very imperceptible, very grateful. His companion was fumbling
for the wallet. The ten-peso bill came
The conductor mournfully
out.
wagged his head.
"No change.
Jorge’s sigh turned abruptly into
a spasm. With a smile that would
have melted a cherub... Tolentino
faced Jorge.
“Oh, Jorge. Would you have the
heart to pay for me? Unfortunately
I have no coins on my person. Thanks
a lot, ol' boy. Deeply indebted, Jorge.
S’long.
Jorge was shocked. Jorge was
through. He could only nod weakly,
but he did not remember why he had
to nod at all. For there was nobody before him but the poker-faced
waiting. His friend
conductor .
was already in the street, an Oxfordian orating on the sidewalk a hale
and hearty, "Thanks a lot, ol' pal.
I do say. Thanks!"
Jorge told me the bus passengers
and some people on the street and
the uniformed girl stared at Tolentino incredulously. But he told me
too that there was admiration in their
eyes. Even in those of the uniformed
girl. Why! there was a genius for
you.
Of course, Jorge had to walk the
rest of the way home.


“  "


A New Cry for the Youth
By
RODOLFO PASIMIO OLIVARES
A.B., '51


UCH has been said and writMIten about the spirit of adventure and sacrifice. Yes,
we have read of the spirit
that founded the strongest
and wealthiest nation that is America; that planted the Union Jack on
the deserts of Africa, on the turbaned land of India; that raised the
Cross where idols had crumbled;
that drove our handful of pioneers
to Mal-lig and Koronadal. Until now,
that spirit is still linked with men
upon whose valor and martyrdom
history revolves. This generation
seems almost blind to the idea that
the only way to enduring success is
the hard way. We prefer to follow
only that which at the first stroke
and without much trouble assures us
of comfort and prestige. We rarely
attempt the hard way because we say
we are born for higher thingsthings that carry with them the mark
of social glamour and distinction and
give us the promise of it. We are
wanting in the real spirit of youth.
America was once a new born
country first feeling the glory of being free. The Stars and Stripes
claimed dominion over but a few
northern and eastern states. There
were only far-flung cities and towns
scattered along the eastern scaboard,
scintillating like star-dust in the
night. But America was ever-growing; the cry for adventure and expansion rang down through the corridors of the country.
Young men
fresh from home and school, callow
in the ways of life but with a grim
determination to make their fortunes
and extend their country’s borders,
took a full glimpse of the West and
envisioned a new and mightier America. The cry was now “Go West,
young men, go West!” Hostile In

dians were driven inch by inch from
their homeground. It was a war of
guns against tomahawks. Covered
wagons jolted heavily along the trails
to the new and rich land of the
prairies. It was the East itself going to the West and boom towns
sprang up like mushrooms. They
were the pioneers at work; they were
the fortune-seekers tearing down the
mountain sides for gold with picks
and shovels. This was America in
action. This was American manhood on the march.
For the Filipino youth of today,
the cry is “Go South!” Over to the
south many hundred miles, beyond
the chain of islands in the Visayas
looms Mindanao. There youth, is
your land of promise—it calls you, it
needs you. Focus your eyes on that
boundless, gleaming shore-line;
countless strangers have seen it before you, but only a few have dreamed of making that land beyond it
their own. Look at those stately
coconut trees reaching up to the heavens, while their wide-spreading
arms drop down to earth from where
they come. Beyond those trees, youth,
you find range upon range of mountains whose untapped bowels are
swollen with minerals. Beneath those
mountains are impassable forests
thick with timber of unsurpassed
durability. In most of those forests,
youth, not a native Paul Bunyan can
be seen, nor can an axe be heard
ringing through the trees. They too,
are waiting for you to come.
Take a full view of the surrounding land. Down to the south and a
little to the west is Zamboanga City.
At night, it is a huge diamond by
itself; a solitaire in a belt studded
with hundreds of little sparkling
gems. This, youth, is the beginning


AUGUST, 1949


23


of a growing land of promise. But
wait, do not go yet. Can you hear
the crashing sound of torrents of
water gliding down to strike the
giant boulders below? That is the
famous Maria Cristina falls—widely
known for its beauty and its inestimable power as yet untapped.
Look up there and behold the cool
highlands of Bukidnon with herds of
cattle grazing in their verdant pastures. Below Bukidnon, far out to
the east, you see an immense plain
of abaca rippling to the borders of
Davao. In the distance set in greenness is the deep Agusan River rolling past primeval forests through
the lush Agusan valley and joined
by hundreds of streams flowing
down steep mountain sides.
That, youth, is the picture of a
land of promise. It is a land for the
brave, willing to work on his own
the hard way, confident of his ability and power, and ready to die for
the things he cherishes. You were
born into a distinguished heritage
wrought by men of rare heroism and
of an undying spirit of sacrifice. Try
to visualize a new Mindanao at the
rising of the new sun. Along the
rugged shoreline will sprout new harbors open to any ship flying any flag
and to every stranger of any race
or creed. There you will see little
settlements springing up along mountains and beyond hills, and growing
into huge, progressive cities. The


wild forests will hum the music of
the axe and resound with the heavy
crash of falling timber. The mountains wlll echo as thousands of picks
stab slopes and muddy shovels dig
out the stones and earth. Miles and
miles of praire will ripple with more
abaca and rice: mighty tractors will
crawl over the land and upturn acres
of rolling plain. More cattle of better breeds will graze the uplands of
Bukidnon all gleaming in the glory
of summer greeney. And at night
the whole vast island will be a moonblazing, giant brooch studded with a
galaxy of jeweled cities and gemstrung towns. And when the sun is
up, the entire land will resound with
the busy droning of the machine in
the fields and cities, the ringing of
the axe in the forests, the rumbling
of the Maria Cristina falls, the
happy cries of frolicking children,
the voice of the teacher imparting
the wisdom of the ages to young
minds, the shouts of stevedores at
work, the blasting of mountain sides
revealing the hidden riches of nature
to human eyes, the peal of the
church bells tolling a new day for
God — and the whole of Mindanao
will sing of contentment, peace, and
prosperity. Thus, to everyone of
you, brave youths, is offered a
golden chance to be yourself, to be
able to say to the world—this is
mine. This is the promise of Mindanao.


24


“  


THE SEVEN STOREY MOUNTAIN
By THOMAS MERTON
Harcourt, Brace & Company 1948


HEN a novel like Thomas Merton’s The Seven Storey Mountain becomes a best seller, that is news that slaps full in the face this
W
modern world inebriated with bombs, films, and uncomical comics.
For The Seven Storey Mountain is not a novel of the glamour, the
romance and the divorce that intrigue modern readers; nor is it one that caters
to the reading public with a menu of murder, Freudian welterings and tense
Dillingerian feats—unsavory, nauseating stuff of which many modern "must"
books are made. Yet The Seven Storey Mountain is a best seller and many
disciples of this giddy age will continue to be perplexed over the startling fact.


What made this book, his autobiography, welcome to readers old and
young, of different creeds, states and walks of life? The reason is basic in
the study of man: The Seven Storey Mountain is a human book written for
real, soul-and-body people, and not, as many books today turn out to be, an
entertaining story for body-minus-soul creatures. Unlike many present writers
Thomas Merton has not forgotten that man, as long as he is akin to the angels
by reason of his immortal soul, will move about in restlessness and disquiet,
despite all the ultra-modern contraptions devised for his pleasure, until his
spiritual craving is satisfied in a deathless destiny: God. This inescapable
truth, presented in an exquisitely smooth, unsophisticated, and most down-toearth style has struck a chord in the minds and hearts of Merton’s innumcrable readers and made his book a rare phenomenon in the midst of a hedonistic environment. The fact that America has warmly received this autobiography gives hope to the rest of mankind that that land will one day fully
respond to the yearnings of her spirit—the questing, groping spirit of so many
of her sons and daughters.


Thomas Merton was born in France in 1915 of artistic Protestant parents.
When barely a year old, he was taken by his parents to the New World and
came to reside for a while in New York and Bermuda before his father
brought him back to France in 1925. In the little historic town of St. Antonin
where they settled, he came in contact with the thirteenth century—a veritably
Catholic century—and admired and even loved its old medieval churches. He
took his elementary education at the Lycee Ingres at Montauban which had
become a living testimony to the corruptio optimi pessima in France. Again
his father left France, this time for England, and Merton’s education continued at Ripley Court, Oakham, and Cambridge. In England the "harrowing
of hell” began to take place and continued until his conversion to the Catholic
Faith in 1938. He plunged himself into the Charybdis of materialism and
pseudo-philosophies and prided himself on his mundane accomplishments. He
hated Plato and his Republic, accepted the cogito ergo sum of Decartes, and
AUGUST, 1949
25


discovered the poet William Blake whose religious ideas were to have a favorable influence in his spiritual wanderings. He fell first in love and then into
disappointment with a girl who “could have put a collar on my neck and led
me around from that time forth on the end of a chain"; and later met up
with the fantasia of D. H. Lawrence’s Fantasia of the Unconscious. Next he
dallied with Freud, Jung and Adler whose psychoanalysis would have been
responsible, had he come to "needing a padded cell". The harrowing of hell
pursued him in the United States where he arrived in 1934 for his A.B. and
M.A. studies at Columbia University. New York, with the glittering, garish
life it presented, wheedled him and he embraced it. He played furious jazz,
joined the Young Communist League, paid hero-worship to Chaplin, W. C.
Fields, Harpo Marx and other movie celebrities, and loafed around in 52nd
Street’s expensive nightclubs. He writes: "And so I became the complete
twentieth-century man. I now belonged to the world in which I lived. I became a true citizen of my own disgusting century: the century of poison gas
and atomic bombs. A man living on the doorsill of the Apocalypse, a man with
veins full of poison, living in death.” He was "a mess. Even the sight of my
own face in a mirror was enough to disgust me.”
One day he accidentally, and providentially, came across Etienne Gilson’s
The Spirit of Medieval Philosophy, Jacques Maritain’s Art and Scholasticism,
and a Hindu monk who told him to read St. Augustine’s Confessions and
Kempis’ The Imitation of Christ. Thenceforth God’s grace sped him on. His
reading became more and more Catholic. He sneaked inside a Catholic church
one Sunday in 1938 to witness the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and walked
out into "a new world". Eventually, "with a great price” he joined the
Catholic Church and became a Trappist monk at Gethsemani, Kentucky, now
a new man under a new name: Frater Maria Ludovicus. There he reaped
the fruits of meditation and prayer—the two urgent things which this ever
restless world sorely needs if it is to be saved. In The Seven Storey Mountain
another Francis Thompson was fleeing, and yet paradoxically seeking, the
Hound of Heaven down his mind’s labyrinthine ways. Like Augustine in his
Confessions, Merton’s spiritual odyssey ended up in the Catholic Church, that
“beauty so ancient yet so new”; like Dante in his Purgatorio, he was led by
the kind hand of God step to step up the "seven storey mountain" of the purgation of his errors to the terrestial paradise of truth and love.
The Seven Storey Mountain is not a mere autobiography: it is a crushing
indictment of the pagan way of life the world has adopted and clung to
since the rise of materialistic philosophies in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. As Merton writes: "Nowhere, except perhaps in the analogous society of pagan Rome, has there been such a flowering of cheap and petty and
disgusting lusts and vanities as in the world of capitalism, where there is no
evil that is not fostered and encouraged for the sake of making money. We
live in a society whose whole policy is to excite every nerve in the human body
and keep it at the highest pitch of artificial tension, to strain every human
desire to the limit and to create as many new desires and synthetic passions
as possible, in order to cater to them with the products of our factories and
printing presses and movie studios and all the rest.”
The greatness of the book is traced, too, to Merton’s powerful hymn of
praise and prayer to Our Lady in one of his most beautiful passages: “Mother
of God, how often in the last centuries have you not come down to us, speaking
to us in our mountains and groves and hills, and telling us what was to come
upon us, and we have not heard you. How long shall we continue to be deaf
to your voice, and run our heads into the jaws of the hell that abhors us..
Show us your Christ, Lady, after this exile, yes: but show Him to us also now,
show Him to us here, while we are still wanderers.” Surely the Mother of God
cannot but lavishly bless the man and his work for having lovingly come ad
Jesum per Mariam, to her Son through her.


26


MARIO C. REYES, A.B. '50
“  "


THERE'S FREEDOM
FOR THE BRAVE


by PAUL MCGUIRE


HE crisis unprecedented since the Flood is come. “The winds of change


blow in the gunyahs of the Australian aborigines and up the farthest


readies of the Amazon and Irrawaddy
Social systems and culStrange men a hundred feet above the
tures are in dissolution
swamp of New Guinea are caught in the convulsion of war.” And what is


the solution? Is it the surrender of all individual rights to a “Monstrous
State” admitting no higher law than its own? No, for there exist principles
of eternal justice to which even lawgivers must bow. The ultimate solution
can be attained only when every individual man accepts responsibility for his
own behavior in a community based upon the unchanging law of the Creator.
Thus Mr. MeGuire eloquently argues in his book “There’s Freedom for the


At long intervals, there appears a book which in no small fashion may influence its times. Perhaps this is such a book. It is not that Mr. MeGuire has
proclaimed a startingly new cure for our chaotic universe, for his solution, as
he himself admits, is contained in the teachings of Christ; his merit lies in
the fact that he has presented in rather flowing prose and in one book, a lucid
diagnosis of the universal crisis together with the genesis and application of
the natural moral law which few can take time to study in a classic translation
of Aristotle.
As the editorial of a leading paper pointed out, this may be the basic
book to fling against the Communists as a defense of our democratic way of
life which, as Mr. MCGuire points out, is based on the fact that there exists
a moral law on which all human law must ultimately depend. Karl Marx
bartered God for a totalitarian state, thinking that the state alone could impose peace on humanity. But he was terribly wrong. For the police state
becomes an inner state and factions multiply even among the jailers.
A system built upon such an enormous fraud cannot but ultimately fail.
But this offers us no great consolation, for in its awesome fall we shall
be buried within its self made sepulcher. And let us not attribute, warns Mr.
MeGuire, our condition to purely impersonal forces. "We might attain a tragic
splendor if we recognize with Hamlet . . . that our ruin comes from moral
faults . . . for man is a victim of his own aberrations.” And therein lies the
clue to our moral disaster, the loss of responsibility.
However, we are still free beings, with intellects and wills and order is
not beyond us if "we think of ourselves as moral and responsible beings, free
to make the world we choose . . . for man is an artist and maker, free to
shape his own salvation or to work his own damnation."


HECTOR QUESADA, A.B. '51


AUGUST, 1949


27


OF POETS


by Emmanuel Torres, A.B.) '53.
They are the searchers of the elements,
Who seek the power of the primeval fire,
Communing with the stars in firmaments,
With ocean's heart, and silently aspire
To realms beyond the continents and skies;
Who move their pens about the blinding sun;
And sing of blossoms bursting like bright eyes
From dew-soaked earth; and follow the white run
Beyond the skyline of the sea; while stones
Senseless on the ground, a trembling leaf,
Curved grasablades, trees, in clashing tones
Will speak aloud like waves upon a reef:
They are great poets who behold God’s plan,
And falling to earth's bosom, write of Man.


UNREASONED HYMN
By Hector Quesada, A.B. '51.


When gifted lips that once sang songs divine
Are parched, like gilded goblets dried of wine—
Why must the oriole sing her fluted tune
Into the crisped air of brilliant noon?
Why must rain, like sapphires from the sky
Give voiceless streams their ever haunting sigh?
Perhaps 'tis promise of Eternal Spring,
When hoarsened voices need not strain to sing
The grandest songs of the winged seraphim,
That fill His mansions with celestial hymn.


28


“  "


BROKEN LYRE
By Onofre Pagsanghan, A.B. '51.
I offered you this lyre, oh Lord,
When it was strong and new.
I strummed it's young and vibrant strings,
And songs it sang for you.
Tonight, oh Lord, this starless night,
I take my old, worn lure,
But find its strings are broke and mute,
And lost —its youthful fire.
1 wonder, Lord, will you accept
A gift no longer new?
Will you accept a lyre that broke
Singing songs for you?


THE MAGIC MUSIC
by Maximo Soliven, A.B. '51
I gaze into the face inscrutable of Time
And there find chords sublime
To strike into the pattern of my song.
I wander through the dusky lanes of night
With but the moon's dim light
To guide my groping pilgrimage along.
My hand would pluck the very stars of heaven
And weave the silver moon-mist of the even
Into the thunder of my notes of fire,
And yet, my soul must walk through garish day
And in light-flooded emptiness I find no lay
To move the sleeping music of my lure.
I battle through the great pulsating roar
Of life's vast combat and the crimson gore
Sullies the keen brightness of my blade
And in the battle's press, the danger's height
I catch the splendor of the vision bright,
The magic music for my serenade.


N G
by Andres Bautista, Litt. B. '52.
A changing world we're in,
A dying world.
A strong wind's set to blast
The seats of the mighty and the weak.
A blast that'e cold and bitter
Many a heart may wither before
Its blow; and many more after
It's gone. A storm.
As never blew before.
But it's God's own wind none the less,
A whiter-stronger land will lie
Upon the spoils.


The Steeper The Mountain
by Emmanuel Torres, A.B. '53.


qIHE hut was flimsy structure—a roughly built lean-to
I
—with nipa-thatched roof
and walls of splintered
bamboo, standing desolate
in the heart of the wilderness, at the
mercy of strong winds and the heavy
rains of the October monsoons. It
looked toward the low green hills
that dipped in the direction of the
distant seaport town of San Joaquin
where small roofs were tucked in low
places, hemmed in on all sides by the
Sierras.
A winding trail shone faintly
across the clearing, leading past the
ramshackle hut in the direction of
the mountains behind, toward the
next village beyond them. Wayfarers
—mostly woodcutters and merchants
—took this road to the next town
and, since journey half-way through
was tedious, they would always stop
at Old Maria’s door to rest and
would ask for a cool drink from her
well to slake their thirst. Then they
would thank her, mount their lean
donkeys, and wind uphill, looking at
"Poor Old
one another’s faces.
Maria,” they would say with a hope"Poor
less shrug of the shoulders.
Old Maria. Always talking of her
sons."
Everybody in the town of San Joaquin knew her story. The daughter of
a rich landlord and an only child, she
had been kept like a jewel and surrounded with luxury. But before she
was twenty, her father had died and
Maria Laresca married her father’s
overseer. Her husband had fought
during the insurrection against the
Spaniards in the Revolution of 1896
and had died in battle. Her property
was confiscated, and with two sons
30


to support, Maria looked forward to
the future with uncertainty—her
dreams were shattered, her life embittered. Although she was unused
to hard living, she managed somehow
to eke out a livelihood and raise her
two sons decently. But to her sorrow things turned out badly. Day by
day she watched grow up between her
two sons, Victor and Cristino, a
bitter enmity which centered on their
rivalry for the hand of the town
belle. The enmity worsened; at times
they would fight over trifles. Once
at the town fiesta, in a drunken
rage, they were seen wrestling on
the ground with open knives over a
harmless argument which had goaded
them into fury. The Larescas were
a murderous brood, the people would
nod furtively in whispers, a murderous brood that knew no family ties,
even among brothers. Their tempestuous nature was augmented “Yes, no
doubt,” the people would whisper
again, "by the mad blood which
coursed through the veins of Maria
Laresca’s ancestors.”
Then came the final shock. Her
sons joined Aguinaldo’s forces when
the white-skinned Americans from
across the Pacific came to claim a
nation by some trick of a treaty with
the Spaniards. After a few months,
news by word of mouth circulated in
the town. Her youngest son, Cristino, had betrayed his country by
leading a detachment of soldiers
under his command into the hands
of the Americans. On the other side
her son Victor was fighting among
Aguinaldo’s desperate men, a captain.
It was not long before the townspeople began to shun her. At one
time, her house was publicly stoned
by a group of rabid partisans of the
“  "


Republic. It was then that she exiled
herself to the forest. The strain was
too much for her to bear. "At last,
“the family streak
the people said,
in the blood is showing. What a
pity! What a pity!"
Now in the clearing Old Maria
emerged from the hut. She was not
really old, probably in her thirties,
but her brows were deeply lined, her
eyes haggard and stony, and her
hair silvered so that she looked old
beyond her years. Her tall, muscular
appearance, and her leathery face
showed what strenuous work had
made of her once graceful beauty
Her hands were chapped and
roughened by the constant handling
of the hoe and the axe. She remembered her first days in the
forest when she had to feel trees,
cut the tall cogon grass, and till the
dark soil under the blistering sun
that smote the land in its relentless
heat. All these tasks she performed
with an almost superhuman strength,
for living in jungle had made her
live more like a beast than a human
being. Her eyes grew wild as the
months bore on; the days in that
isolated spot where she chose to exile
herself made her heart progressively
more bitter and oblivious of the
world, that is, except for the snatches
of news the wayfarers would tell
her: Tila Pass had fallen to American hands; Aguinaldo was being
pursued somewhere; and only scattered zones of resistance remained.
But for some days she hadn’t heard
AUGUST, 1949


anything. No one had passed on the
trail for a long time.
That day was another day of work
in the clearing. She worked hard,
feeling the tenseness of her muscles
as they gripped the raised hoe, and
relaxing as it sank in the earth.
Wearied, tired, the woman sat on a
stone. From high in a tree she heard
the lonely cries of a calao. Suddenly, in the unbearable loneliness of
the forest, a thought came clearly
through the tormented workings of
her mind. She remembered her sons
and wondered what had become of
them now. Doubt and grief tortured
her mind like vultures hovering over
their prey until, unable to control
herself, she buried her face on her
clenched fists and broke down hysterically, the tears running down her
eyes as she shook convulsively in her
wailing. And for once the inexorable silence of the jungle and its abominable murmurings and nerve-racking loneliness penetrated her anguished mind.
At first she did not know where
it came from. Then she heard it
again, she was sure of it—it was a
faint call from below. She tried hard
to suppress a sob that choked her
throat, to listen to it again. Where
was it? She sprang up agitatedly as
she heard the call, nearer and louder this time. It came from the direction of the trail below among the
bushes and the entangling mass of
jungle creepers beside the boulders.


31


Her eyes grew large as she heard the
weak voice of a man in distress, a
groan that was spoken as if in agony.
Hurriedly she made for the footpath toward the bushes and the
boulders on the slope of the pleateau;
but the formless mass of the creep
ers and entangled wild vines made
it hard to decide whether the sound
came from the trail or the river on
her right. She waited, holding her
breath. Then the cry—“Qui! Help!
—pierced her ears; it came from her
left, down the boulders. The woman
ran down the winding trail that led
toward the bushes. A hatless man
astride a donkey slouched motionless
with his head leaning on the beast’s
neck, his arms dangling at the sides.
A strange figure it was in a faded,
much-mended calico shirt, and loose,
baggy trousers commonly worn by
merchants and peasants. The man
was undoubtedly starving and exhausted—but where did he come from?
'Could he be dead?” she asked herself. Cautiously she approached the
bedraggled traveler and held him by
the shoulders in order to get
glimpse of his face. Old Maria
blanched, her eyes staring wildly in
amazement and half belief. She
could hear the wild pounding of her
heart and felt her legs go weak suddenly. The man was young, emaciated and young. Slowly his eyes
opened and revealed two dark pools
weakly fixed on his mother as he
muttered hoarsely for water. The
woman felt her throat contract and
her eyes flood with tears as the recognition took place.
Old Maria moved to sit opposite
her son, Tino Laresca, who was eating silently, swallowing his food
with difficulty. She knew words
would be weak at the moment; at
times she would try to say something, but each time she felt as if
she were about to speak, no words
came. A wall of uninterrupted silence rose between mother and son
as formless as a vast gorge between
two distant cliffs. Only the crackle
of the embers in the stove and the
whirring sound of a jungle bird shattered the stillness. Nearby the sound
of the brook between the pebbles intensified the tenseness of the moment.


The man across the table stood
up, and it was then that the mother
disentangled herself from the coils
of her thoughts and felt the pressure of reality grip her. She searched her son’s eyes which were dark,
brooding, and helpless like those of
a terrified animal caught in a snare.
She knew what he intended to say.
Blind terror seized her all at once.
“You’re leaving?” she gasped, her
eyes suddenly stricken in dumb
fright.
“Yes—at once, now”, he replied
without feeling. Tino's eyes turned
to the backdoor that faced the mountains. Old Maria felt her mind blurring, and quickly she flung herself
against the door, trembling, her
mouth working nervously in fear and
helplessness. "No! You won’t go!”
“Mother, you don’t know what you
"You
are doing,” he said gruffly.
can’t shelter a traitor to your country. And I don’t want them to find
me here, do you understand? They
have hunted for me in three towns
these five days. I haven’t had any
sleep. And what if they find me
here? They’ll suspect you also of being a spy for sheltering an enemy
to his country. Can’t you see what
it means? They’ll shoot you for a
spy? And what will happen to me?
He had said all this rapidly, so that
he was gasping for breath. His grim
features were relentless and his eyes
gleamed redly from sleepless nights
of fear. “Mother, where are the
guns of my father?”
She did not move—she tried but
she couldn't. She was gasping,
heavily, cold sweat forming on her
forehead, on her neck. "You—won’t
-leave, Tino, she muttered between
gasps—her heart beating painfully.
Tino moved toward the door. “Mother, you must realize what you are
doing. If I should die, let it be.
What is life to me now? But you,
mother, must live for him—Victor.
This can’t go on forever. One of
us must go.” And then in demanding tones that were cold and deadly,
Tino asked again, "Where are the
guns?
They heard faint sounds from the
river below. They listened again.


32


“  "


Hoofbeats clicked and rattled on the
stones and beat on the adobe-trail.
Motionless, Old Maria and her son
heard the slow, monotonous sounds
on the friable rocks strewn near the
sandbars, heard them suddenly stop.
After a second’s pause, they resumed
as horses ascended the slope toward
the hut.
old Maria’s eyes were stricken
with fear. Her heart chilled and she
felt the muscles of her face stiffen
as her eyes fell under the papag
where the two Mauser rifles layher husband’s arms which he had
used in the Revolution. With one
bound she crept under the bamboo
cot and took them out. They were
shining and oiled clean.
“The bullets, quick!” Tino was
trembling, specter pale.
The mother lifted the lid of her
trunk and, digging frantically
through her clothes, pounced upon
the dull leaden bullets. She took
them out carefully and counted them
—six. Tino slipped two into each
gun and handed his mother the
other two bullets. The mother seized
the second rifle. Tino was too stunned to speak. “Mother, you—
“There is no time for us to waste.
Hurry out the backdoor and head
straight for the mountains. When
you reach the shallow stream, cross
it; beyond that you will be safe.
Go!"
“You're mad!"
muttered
Tino
weakly in dumb amazement.
“So I’m mad, is it? Ha-ha-ha! My
son calls me mad," she broke out.
Go now, little one. Don’t you know
your mother will protect you? Go!
go!"
Tino did not move.
"What is the matter, little one?
Go now! Obey thy mother who is
old, useless and mad, who will die
for thee. She kissed him on the
So!"
cheek.
A crash came from the top of the
plateau’s slope. She peeped through
the window and saw six soldiers on
horseback, wearing the faded uniform of the Republic. They were
dirty and sweat soaked in the noonday sun. They shouted to know if
any one was in the house. Only the


silence of the forest and their own
echo answered them.
Tino looked at his mother; Old
Maria thought she saw tears coming
to his eyes. Then the door opened
and he was gone for the mountains.
“Hoy! Nobody there!” the captain
called out in a raspy voice. Old Maria grew numb under the approaching danger. Fearfully she watched
the captain motion to his men with a
sweep of his arm, drawing his pistol
that shone deadly in the sun. The
soldiers dismounted and slumped on
the hard earth, their rifles poised,
ready to fire. Slowly the captain
approached the shanty, while his
men scattered behind in the stubble.
If she were to fight, the mountain
was a good place to die, she thought.
She ran through the back door, as
the soldiers banged at the front.
Frantically she ran through the
brushes, dodging the low branches
of the trees. Her bare feet plodded
through soft earth and then tho
hard, brown inclining earth; but as
she climbed over a mound, a swinging branch cut across her face like
a bullwhip and she twinged in pain
with a groan. There was no time to
stop. The soldiers had spotted her
before she could take cover behind
a rock. A shot resounded. She
ducked, just in time to dodge the
bullet that hit the rock above, forming an avalanche of dust. Carefully she slipped through a thicket that
led upward to the rocks of the
peaks. Cold sweat formed on her
brow as it trickled down her cheeks
to mingle with the blood that oozed
from the slash.
At this moment the sun burned inexorably over a perfervid sky. The
heat beat mercilessly on the white
stones; it scorched the skin: it numbed the senses. Old Maria felt the
heat drumming on her head as she
peered through the brush. A figure
moved behind a tree. Carefully she
aimed with firm arms, pressed the
trigger, and in a moment, a soldier
slumped screaming on the earth,
struggling with his arms, dead. A
grim shadow hovered across her
hard-set features that knew mercy
for no one but a son who was a
traitor.
She fired a second shot on an ad

AUGUST, 1949


33


vancing figure. It missed, and only
hit the thick bark of a tree, kicking
out a shower of splinters. She got
up and then rushed upward over a
mound where the brush and undergrowth thinned. A volley of gunfire
reverberated. She stumbled over the
hill and rolled down the slope, escaping death a few inches above her
head.
When she moved on, she was tireo
and all her muscles were aching.
Crawling through, the bushes had
bruised her knees on the stones.
Using all her strength, she reached
a mound where huge rocks appeared.
She lay panting and weak in the
shade of a rock and felt her throat
burn dry and the heat thunder in
her brain.
As she stirred again, a bellowing
crash rang from below. She jerked.
It was quick, like the poisonous movement of a viper’s attack. A stabbing
pain struck her, bringing her to fear
and the grimness of reality: a bullet had pierced her left shoulder.
Old Maria saw the blood seep
through her garment, felt the wound
throb painfully. She drew her lips
tight and gritted her teeth until her
jaws hurt. No escape. She slid her
rifle straight ahead, loaded, and
aimed. She saw the captain come
from behind a tree and fired at his
advancing figure; the shot kicked the
dust with a twang. Again she tried
to fire; but she couldn’t. Why? She
could not think. They were moving
in about her, bent for the final fire.
Her fingers moved and tried to pull
the trigger: again the shot hit the
dust. She fell flat on her belly, her
blood reddening the white sand. She
lay powerless, too weak to do any
thing, the sharp edge of pain nudging
continually at each pulsebeat. Her
heart beat wildly against the white
stones, and her head grew suddenly
light, as though all the blood in her
body had rushed suddenly to her feet.
“Why was there silence?” she asked
herself. The mountains writhed under the blazing afternoon sun. Brutality and sordidness were there;
nakedness and cruelty...
Old Maria felt the intense pain of
a bullet sear her flesh like a firebrand as merciless as the scorching
heat of the pelting sun that burned
her skin. Her head reeled in agony
as she gnashed her teeth. In one


last desperate effort, she struggled
painfully to her battered knees. A
shot cracked once more and Old Maria toppled off-balance and rolled
down the steep slope in an avalanche
of dust. She hit the flatness of the
earth heavily; she lay there dying.
When the soldiers had gathered to
see the crumpled, disfigured body of
the old woman, she was already
dead. Her face was masked with
sweat and blood and dirt.
The captain’s heavy boots gave a
crunching sound as he went to sit
on a smooth stone which was shaded
by a tree. The three other soldiers
trailed at their captain’s side. They
were tired and sweated profusely.
'Dead. We got the woman, all
right," a stubby sergeant with a pot
belly grunted hoarsely. “But we
won’t get hold of that traitor, the
dirty coward. He’s safe by now in
the hands of those Americanos, ha,
captain?"
Yes,” the captain retorted bluntly. He had a gaunt handsome face
and sullen eyes. His face was tanned
deeply and his figure tall and
erect. Looking at the figure of the
dead woman twisted in the dust,
he frowned deeply and nodded to the
group. "It’s a pity to kill a good
enemy, more so a woman. These
spies make me sick. They have to
involve women in their stinking business. All right, Tomas, bury her.
She died a Christian.
The three of them, including the
sergeant, went back to the house to
get spades and found only one.
When at last they lifted her prostrate body, they saw the undistinguishable face of Old Maria. Finally
they covered her with dirt and sat
down under a tree beside their brooding captain.
Again the fat sergeant began the
conversation. “This war’s hell. I
hate all wars."
“I want to go home,” Tomas said.
And he began talking about his family, and the rest spoke of their families, until all of them said what
they had wanted to say, and fell into
an embarrassed silence. They looked
at their captain who had been
strangely quiet throughout their conversation.
"How about you, captain?” the
other soldier named Rodrigo asked.
He was a boyish fellow with quiet,


34


“  


serious eyes. “You have a family,
haven’t you?”
Yes."
Then the sergeant spoke up, "It’s
too bad we didn’t go through San
Joaquin last night to catch that traitor. Instead we tried to take a short
cut and trap him on the road toward
the Sierra Madre.”
“It was my fault, sergeant. I


didn’t know the forest was so thick
as to be completely impassable.”
“He’s a clever one, your brother.”
the sergeant said. "What’s his name
again, captain?'
“Tino Laresca. Short for Cristino."
The captain rose to his feet. "“We
must be going,” he said, "so we can
reach San Joaquin by early evening.”


The Car of Tomorrow, not available today but day after
tomorroto.


You'll WALK into the fufure
with a MAXBUBBLEGUMS
Lowdown 8


At last, here is the car that took 53
years to build—and will take many,
many more to deliver.
Here is your dream car... Looks
like a dream... rides like a dream...
It is a dream come right away! Be
first on the list!
At long last, the car you’ve been
waiting for is not here.
Why be satisfied trying to buy an
ordinary car? Be modern! Be ahead
of times! Try buying a MaxBubblegums! We don’t deliver, but we
promise more than any other car not
on the market.
CHECK THE ADVANTAGES:
No back seat drivers


Everybody rides up front
8 Cylinders, seats 8 passengers
8 Spare tires, 8 Duo-Matic forward
speeds and no reverse, uses up
8 Times more gas and oil than any
car existing. And believe it or
not the whole car will last only
8 days—and you can get on our
list again.
Two periscopes; one looks back to
see the installment collector
coming. The other picks out the
collector’s inspector.
MAX BUBBLE GUMS MOTOR CORP.
Youlwalk, Candaba, P.I.
“When better cars are promised
will promise them."


AUGUST, 1940


35


NA

De
A


Y


thgo

uantarla
Uolume ! To. 2
Octoben, 1949
A.


A MAGAZINE OF THE AR


Che ATEPIEO


VOLUME ONE * NUMBER TWO


THE STAFF
Editor-in-Chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . SIXTO K. ROXAS, A.B. '50
Managing Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51
SECTION EDITORS
Rodolfo Olivares, A.B. '51
Antonio P. G. Manuud, A.B. '52
Onofre Pagsanghan, A.B. '51
Enrique Esquivel, Jr., A.B. '71
Robert Wilson, A.B. '52
Fernando David, A.B. '52
Florencio Tamesis, A.B. '50
Jose Tuason, Jr., Litt.B. '5 1
Norberto Marchadesch, Jr., A.B. ' 1
ASSOCIATE EDITORS
Mario C. Reyes, A.B. '50
Hector Quesada, A.B. '71
Francisco Borja, A.B. ' 1
Gregorio Brillantes, Litt.B. '52
Hector Hofilena, A.B. '5 1
Ernesto Gorospe, A.B. '53
Emmanuel Torres, A.B. '53
Basiness Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . JUANITO ORDOVEZA, A.B. '50
Circulation Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . MANUEL ROXAS, JR., A.B. '52


   is a literary magazine, published by the College of Arts and
Sciences of the Atenco de Manila. Its editorial offices are at the Atenco de Manila, Padre
Faura St., Manila, Philippines; its publication office at Carmelo & Bauermann, Inc., 2017
Azcarraga, Manila. Cest, P1.00 per copy; yearly subscription, P4.00, issued every quarter.
Entered in the Post Office of Manila as second-class matter on September 10, 1949.


O


“  "


UD GENERAL LITERATURE


RORE
 OCTOBER, 1949

NA
THE CONTENTS
EDITORIALS
Page


Freedom against Democracy
For Ladies Only? ..........
Of Kings and a King .....
ESSAYS
The Philosophy of a Fool
The Greatest Lover.......
On Writing Letters ..
Totoy, Latin and a Hard Night
The Campus Monarch .......
Bell of Peace ............ . . .
Symphony of Life .........
Christ in our Time ..........
Reunion with Mother .......
Doodling .................
How to Lose Friends .
A Pool of Enchantment ..
Aunt Suzanne .............
SHORT STORY
My Brother Ramon......
VERSE
Reminiscence ..............
Wanderlust ...............
Pictures ........ . . . . . . . . . .
A Silver Morning .......
Silent Serenade .............
A Dying Tree ............ . .
Barren Tree .......... . . . . .
Night Sounds ........... . . .
Youth ......... . . . . . . . . . . .
Be Soft, My Thoughts .
Beauty Unseen.............
Ending and Beginning 
FEATURES
Campus ..................
Drama ............ ...
Books ......... . . . . . . . . ...
Arcna ...............


.......... S. K. R.
....... A. P. G. M.
. .......... M. V. S.
.. . Salvador Gonzalez
. . . . Hector Quesada
. . . . . . . . Jose Tuason
.. . Arturo Tanco, Jr.
.. . Rodolfo Olivares
.. . . Gabino Mendoza
. . . Francisco Borja
. . . Juanito Ordoveza
. . . . . Alfredo Tengco
.. . . Antonio Gaston
. . . . . Pablo Silva, Jr.
. . . . . Percival Olarte
.. . . Antonio Joaquin
. Gregorio Brillantes
. . . Leonidas Bencsa
Onofre Pagsanghan
Carmelo Quintero, Jr.
. . . . . Percival Olarte
Onofre Pagsanghan
. . . Gervasio Diaz, Jr.
Carmelo Quintero, Jr.
... Arturo Tanco, Jr.
. . . . . Percival Olarte
.. . . Percival Olarte
. . . . . Lconidas Benesa
... Antonio Manuud
... Enrique Esquivel
.. Florencio Tamesis
... Fernando David
Carmelo Quintero Jr.
.. . . . Robert Wilson
Manuel Cuenca


4
6
7
13
15
18
24
26
28
30
34
40
42
4)
48
$4
9
12
17
20
25
29
29
32
32
33
35
39
39
21
44
36
49


OCTOBER, 1949


3


FREEDOM AGAINST DEMOCRACY


F vigilance is all the price we have to pay for liberty, then we here in
LEL
Philippines can sit back and rest securely. Our independence may
uahave no other safeguard, but at least we have vigilant citizens. You
doubt this? Just drop so much as a vague rumor that some bigoted
organization is trying to suppress freedom of expression. Then wait and sec
what happens.
Without further question or investigation, the watchdogs of our liberty
will bare their fangs. Someone will sound the alarm. Pandemonium will
break loose. Columnists secing a chance to wax eloquent on our gloWe Are rious heritage of freedom will make apostrophes to the "men who
Vigilant fell in the night that we might be free,” and so forth and so on. Our
intellectual women will let out indignant “oh’s” and "ah’s” tear off
their aprons, abandon their pots and pans, their needles and children to file a
resolution of feminine protest. Even some of our senators will be roused from
their lethargy long enough to dash off an article or two on the subject of democracy and freedom.
No one can accuse the Filipino of neglecting his liberty. As a matter of
fact, if democracy should crumble in this country (as it already shows signs
of decay) it shall not be because our watchdogs have fallen asleep on
For the their job. They have kept their vigil. The trouble is, they have
Wrong watched for the wrong things.
Things
They watch for every apparent check in our liberty and raise a
cry against that—against a court condemning a newspaperman for
publishing obscenitics, against apparent threats to academic freedom, freedom of
expression and so forth. Those are not the things that will destroy democracy.
The thing to watch is freedom itself. For that noble and beautiful treasure
called freedom when left unguarded turns into a base and destructive monster.
Liberty unwatched and unjoined with responsibility quickly transforms itself
into licensc.
The paradox of liberty is that it thrives best in an atmosphere of discipline
and law. It reached its full bloom in the Europe of long ago when men, as
Walter Lippman tells us, learned to regard themselves as inviolable
Freedom because they were rational and free. Frecdom then was freedom
within
within the moral law. Democracy was true democracy animated
Law
by the Christian concept of man.
Then came the explosion that sundered democracy from its re

  "


ligious foundations. Unbridled freedom wrought havoc on the world. Within Christianity two dangerous freedoms were balanced in a delicate equilibrium.
The liberty of choice which could be transformed by abuse into the wildest
license, and the liberty of autonomy by which a man could choose only the
means to his end. This, by itself, could grow into the most cruel tyranny,
when the state made itself the end of man.
The Protestant revolt split this twofold freedom and the unbridled energy
released upon the world is shaking its very foundations. Humanity is rocking
from the extreme of liberalism to the opposite extreme of totalitarianism, from the freedom to do as you please to the freedom to do
The Fatal
what you must—both of which are fatal, both of which will destroy
Split
democracy.
There is the dilemma with which the modern world is faced.
There are still men like Harold J. Laski who think that the way to save the
world from the abuse of the freedom of autonomy is by returning to an abuse
of the freedom of choice. But the deeper thinkers of the age, men like Lippman and Paul MeGuire, see that salvation lies in a restoration of the Christian
equilibrium—the freedom of choice within the moral law. Such a restoration
can be effected only within a Christian culture.
Here in the Philippines a large part of that culture still remains. But it
is slowly deteriorating. Much of Catholicism remains here not as a living faith
but merely as an honored tradition. And like most honored traditions, it is
giving way to the advance of "progress.” We are lovers of liberty—we make
such pretty speeches about it—but it is time we realized that liberty means
nothing without law. It lives only within the confines of rule and reason.
Taken out into the wide limitless air, it dies and corrupts. And its corruption
spreads destruction.
Long ago, when Christianity first came into the world, Roman democracy
was decaying from the same corruption of its liberties. The Roman Empire
was too far gone to save. In spite of Christianity it crumbled, and
Freedom it seemed that all civilization would crumble with it. And indeed
it would have, were it not for the spread of the doctrines that a
and
Sacrifice small group of men who called themselves Christians were preaching. The world accepted Christianity then, and much of the Greco-Roman culture was saved and Christianized. On this, western democracy
was built.
But the thing to remember here is that after the licentiousness of Roman
life, the world entered into a period of penance. Men and women took vows
of obedience, chastity and poverty. Freedom had grown corrupt. They saw
that the way to purify it was to sacrifice it. And that is what we must realize.
The only way we can save democracy and remain free is to return to our Christianity—back to its asccticism and self denial, back to God Who allowed Himself to be bound and crucified that men might be loosed from their bonds.


S. K. R.


OCTOBER, 1949


5


FOR LADIES ONLY?


HERE is a tag attached to the Philippines. It reads: “The onty
Catholic country in the Far East.” For the sake of accuracy, however,
another tag should be added—this time to the Church in the Philippines,
"For Ladies only."


The women of the Philippines, it seems, are forced to assume the major
role in Catholic Action, for it is a fact that our men have slowly left their
religious duties for the women to discharge. On Sundays one can without
doubt find people at the communion rails of any Philippine parish, and, to be
sure, a handful of these communicants are men. But this handful is lost
amid the crowds of women who seem cternally to approach the altar to receive the Blessed Sacrament.


When, last year, our Congressmen deliberated on the passage of a bill
liberalizing divorce, only a major miracle could have moved the
Where Are men of the land to rise in unison and condemn the proposed
the Men? legislation. With the folded arms of indifference, the great majority of our Catholic men sat while the Catholic Women’s League
and the Young Ladies' Association of Charity took up arms against the movement—and won out!
What, we ask, have the men been doing? To put it candidly: next to
nothing. The surest thermometer with which the tepidity of our Catholic
males can be measured is the effort they put into organizing for serious action.
Surely, the work of the Knights of Columbus and similar societies should not be
overlooked. But when we pause to think that the men of these organizations
are but a fraction of our male Catholic millions, the need for action sticks out
redder than a sore thumb. Consider for contrast what the women have accomplished. Last year, the YLAC was awarded the government prize for
being the country's most outstanding youth organization ... and all that while,
men, who coined the phrase "weaker sex,” merely shrugged their otherwise
inactive shoulders!
If self respect does not show men that the reconstruction of a country’s
caved-in morals is no woman’s work, at least reason should. Whereas in war
years, we saw YLAC girls rallying together in the name of Catholic Action,
now we see men standing meek at the sight of a nation slowly but
Not Only inevitably sinking into the stagnant immorality of peace. Where
a Woman’s in the face of danger the YLAC dared to help Filipino wounded
Work
for the love of Christ, now we have men hesitating to help
lave the cicatrices of broken souls. Is it because pleasure and
case seem more inviting than the cross of Christ? If women can crucify
themselves on crosses of self-denial and, when death is demanded, even die, should
not men be all the more able to do the same?
We must not think, however, that Catholic manhood in the Philippines
has been irrctrievably lost. It is never too late for action, Catholic Action.


6


“  "


We have indeed neglected our parish churches for so long a time that we have
forgotten that once out of school, our link—perhaps our only link—with the
Catholic world, will be our parish priest. If that link is neglected, once out
in the world of business or the professions, away from teachers and counsellors,
our Catholicism—principles and all—will wilt away in the face of a sinister,
"golden" sun.
It is true that it is never too late to start anything. Why
Never Too not, thercfore, start getting acquainted with our parish priests?
Late to His problems need our understanding; the solution of his difficulties await our help. By joining a parish activity, one can go
a long way in lightening parish burdens.
Among such activities, the recently formed Young Men’s Association of
Charity deserves special mention. Here is an organization especially cut out
for men from fifteen to thirty. Started a year or so ago, it had its beginning
in the hearts of high-minded youths—many of them members of Catholic men’s
colleges. Today, it has branched out to embrace, not only schools, but also
parishes—and it is from these latter that the organization expects to draw the
bulk of its membership. Its aims are the loftiest: by helping poor children
secure Catholic training, the country is to be supplied with a steady output
of moral leaders—not moral leaders shaped and moulded by feminine hands
alone, but also by hard, strong sinewy masculine arms; leaders who are to become representatives of Christ in every walk of life; in the priesthood, particularly; but also in the lay apostolate of the law, in the fields of commerce,
and in the white mercy-world of medicine. The YMAC looks forward to
turning out men who will not be afraid to work, and who will not stand
by while a woman bears the brunt of Catholic Action. For tomorrow, even
more than today, will need men who can fan the Philippines’ sputtering spark
of Faith into a brilliant flame and add it to the glory of God.
And then, when your young men, our YMAC boys, have attained the
fruit of their sweat and toil, then—and only then—shall we be able rightly
to think of a Catholic Philippines in terms of a red-blooded and stout-hearted
manhood.—A.P.G.M.


Start


OF KINGS AND A KING


LL the world loves a fairy tale. All the world cherishes a legend. For
Ain the fairy tale and the legend there is beauty and magic and gallantry. People love to listen to the fairy tales and the legends; like
ES
the legend of Bcowulf the Mighty and the tale of the "Little Lame
Prince.” But what about the tale of the Thorn-Crowned Prince? What
about the story of the Pauper-Prince-Who-had-no-kingdom, the King Who
died on an unroyal cross? What a story that is for the world to love and
cherish! The mighty, glittering princes of legend come forth from between
the pages of story-book history arrayed in shining robes, seated
The Unkingly astride fiery steeds. This King comes forth riding upon an
King
ass! The kings of song and story shut themselves in grim
fortresses, holding sway over their subjects from an impe

OCTOBER, 1949


7


rial throne. This King walks among the lowliest of His people, mingles with
the sick and the diseased in all their filth and misery, breaks bread with
unlettered fisher folk. And He has no throne except a criminal’s cross! THe
kings of legend pass into oblivion with all their pomp and all their majesty.
This King today walks among His people as He walked in days of old, just
as much a living Presence, just as much a triumphant King.
All the world loves a fairy tale. But this tale is more than a tale of fairies.
It is more than a tale of angels. It is a tale of God. We look for beauty and
magic and gallantry in our legends and in our sagas. Do we overlook the
beauty in the sacrifice of a King Who died that His people might
More Than be free? Do we fail to see the magic in those words "And the
Thirty Tales Word was made flesh”—the awesomeness in God’s becoming
man? Or was Saint Gcorge of England more gallant because
he slew a Syrian dragon than Christ Who slew the universal Dragon of Sin?
Many a fairy tale and legend start off with the words: “Once upon a
time when knighthood was in flower . . .” When knighthood was in flower!
Why the past tense? Is knighthood, therefore, dead? If it is dead, why did
it die? Perhaps, we might answer, men today find no king
Is Knighthood worthy of liege loyalty and service. Perhaps men today
Dead?
find that all the battles have been fought and all the
causes lost or defended. For the way of the world is such: give
a man a burning cause and he will gladly die for it; give him no battle to fight,
no causes to defend—and something in his soul will die. And so, men no
longer go into battle fearlessly, no longer do they seek noble deeds; their swords
have become rusted and their hearts have become cold.
If "for want of a nail the battle was lost,” or so the old Mother Goose
rhyme puts it—for want of a king the world is lost. But we have a King, a
King worthy of all allegiance, worth the most splendid knighthood this earth
can muster. Men want a King to serve—here is a King! Men clamor for a
cause—here is a cause! A "lost cause” eynics have jeeringly called it, but a
cause all the more glorious because it is "lost.”
This is October, the month of Christ the King. And the King promises
to His knighthood only a hard life and unending combat. He promises those
who would serve Him nothing but pain and sorrow and priThe Month of vation on the battlefield of earth. But also, He promises
the King
triumph in the end: a victory eternal and an eternal reward!
For after all, as Monsignor Sheen once remarked, we, Catholics,
believe in Easter—all rhe glory, all the triumph, all the rejoicing of it—but
only after the suffering, the crosses and the thorns of Good Friday.


M. V. S.


8


“  "


He was writing the greatest story
he was ever going to write, and he
wrote furiously even though he knew
this magnificent impulse to write was
driving him to a sobbing ruin...
My Brother Ramon
By GREG. C. BRILLANTES,
Litt.B. '52


Y brother Ramon was the
MI poet, the dreamer, in our family. When he started to
EE
yrite, he was seventeen, and
I was a little boy in the sixth grade,
and we lived in our old house, on Rizal
street, in Tarlac.
We lived then on the west side of
town, on a street that was lined with
acacias, in a ncighborhood where people sat in their porches in the moonlight and talked, and sometimes sang,
on summer nights.
It was summertime when my brother Ramon began to write: the leaves
of the acacias fell on the street and
scampered on the pavement.
I remembered my brother Ramon,
in a time and a life long ago, sitting
at Father’s writing table beside the
window in the sala, his brow knitted
in the intensity of a breathless moment, writing furiously, splashing
words on the white nakedness of a
sheet of paper. When he was not
writing, he was somewhere in the azotea or beneath the ancient acacia that
grew in the yard, reading, or sitting
down, his cyes far away, arranging the
disordered thoughts that whirled in
the hollow of his heart. While the
boys of the town went swimming in
the decp part of the river behind the
railroad station and while life on Rizal street flowed on with the river,


my brother Ramon sat at Father’s
table in the sala, writing frenziedly
until his fingers throbbed and his eyes
smarted from the strain.
People thought my brother Ramon
strange when they saw him walking
the streets of the town, alone, a sense
of lostness about him. “That
boy, the eldest son of Mr. Martinez
the school teacher—there is something
the matter with him, they would say
among themselves, pointing to my
brother, lost, walking alone. But I
was intensely proud of my brother,
seventeen, full of a tragic sadness and
wisdom, writing about things I was
then too young to understand: loneliness and truth and the glory of being
alive.
Time was that of brown ghosts, of
leaves falling when he left the town
to find somewhere in the heart of
the city a place where he might assert his presence on the face of the
earth; it was like the soft, final closing of a door. Soon he was working
in the city, and he had married, and
the girl’s name was Maria.
HEN I went one day to my
brother Ramon, in his house
in Sampaloc, in the city, to
EEN

tell him that I wanted to be
a writer, boyhood was as lost as a
voice in a dream, and early youth was


OCTOBER, 1949


9


a song, a cry, an ecstacy. And remembering that day and that moment
of clarity, cold and tragic, I am
filled with the spell of dark time.
I found my brother Ramon in his
room when I went to tell him I wanted
to be a writer. He was scated at his
table, in front of his typewriter, his
eyes staring blankly out the window,
some vast remembrance out of the
music of the lost years on the verge
of expression, his fingers tense over
the keys waiting for the flood of
words.
He smiled his greeting as I closed the
door behind me. My
brother Ramon was
like that—you saw
the goodness and the
greatness of his soul
in his smile.
I sat on the edge
of his bed. "I’m sorry
I disturbed you.
It’s all right, my
brother Ramon said.
How the years have
changed Brother, my
heart said. His hair
is uncombed and his X
face is sunken and f 4-
dark circles around his
eyes.
"I read your story in The Weekly,
I said. "I like it.
My brother lighted a cigarette and
took a long puff and exhaled the
smoke through his nostrils and suddenly coughed a little, then smiled, looked
at me and said, "How’s everything,
Ben?"
"Fine,” I said.
“How are you doing in college?”
"Not so good, not so bad.”
“And how’s the girl friend?
“Say, I have no girl friend.”
“Look here," he said, smiling again,


making fun of me, "you aren’t fooling anybody.
“Honest,” I said.
“What’s the matter?” my brother
said. "Things not turning out like
they do in the movies?
"Aw, skip it, I said. I paused uncertainly for a moment before I said,
"Brother, I’d like to be a writer. Like
you."
My brother smiled his quict smile
and sad, "You are too young, Ben.
'I am old enough, I said. "Why,
when.
So you want to
write. You want to
be a writer.
“Yes,” cagerly.
My brother Ramon
looked at me for what
seemed a long time,
then he looked very
intently at his hands,
pale and nicotinestained. He said without looking up, “Re
member this, Ben: a
good writer must be

a good man first. Remember that always."
EE
*
“Yes, Brother,” I
said.
“Write sinccrely,
my brother said.
"And you must think of writing as a
great responsibility and the whole
world is looking up to you to record
the grief and the laughter of mankind."
Yes, Brother,” I said.
"And when you write, write with
fury and anger and tenderness," my
brother said.
I nodded seriously. I remembered a
night years ago when my brother Ramon came home early from a dance.
It was the time of the town fiesta,
and he had seen a girl, a visitor from


10


  


the city, in the dance in the kiosko,
and he had come home to write a story
about the girl and he named the girl
Nenita.
Now he got up from his chair and
went to the window The window
looked out into world of ungainly
wooden houses, tin-roofed, unpainted,
huddled together in shabby intimacy.
Children were playing patintero on
the narrow street below and somewhere, a radio was softly playing the
song about the moon belonging to
everyone and the best things in life
being free.
I jomed my brother at the window.
We did not speak for a long moment,
my brother and I standing by the window watching absently the children
playing in the street. It was late
afternoon and pale sunlight lay
splashed on the tin roofs.
What is it you are writing, Brother?” I said, breaking our silence.
A story," my brother said. A
story about our town.
‘It must be a beautiful story,” I
said, remembering our town.
“This will be the greatest story Pll
ever write,” my brother said. "Perhaps the only great story. I have written countless stories. Poems. But
they were inadequate. They did not
express what was warm and vibrant
inside me.
My brother paused as if to find out
if I were listening, and then he continued, "It is a symbolic story. A
story of Man’s groping in the dark for
the good and the beautiful. A story
of the little world we knew back
home, in Tarlac.
He is a great writer, this brother of
mine who writes and speaks beautifully, I told myself, suddenly feeling
warm with love and pride for my
brother Ramon, his face pale and
sunken, in this room in Sampaloc, in
the ugly and beautiful city.


In this story,” my brother was
saying, "Father and Mother and sister
Amparing and all the people of our
town will live forever.” He placed
a gentle hand on my shoulder. He
was very close to me and I could hear
the ragged sound of his breath, beneath his talking. "Here, he said, "I
will record everything: the old songs
and the old days, the goodness of Father, Mother praying, Amparing playing the piano, the laughter and the
anguish of our lives, everything."
I listened carefully to my brother
Ramon talking. He talked slowly,
even painfully, as if the release of each
word from his lips touched a secret
wound, inside, hurting him.
‘Tll write into this story everything that I remember about our town.
The loneliness of the streets of our
town and the faraway barking of dogs
in the moonlight. The whistle of the
train in the night and the weeping of
the wind in the acacias—
His breath was labored and rasping
now but his cyes shone like stars in
the paleness of his face.
“I feel fine, my brother said. "I’m
all right. The writing makes me feel
good."
You must rest,” I said.
“There’s nothing wrong with me,”
he said, "except for this—this heaviness—this tightness here—" He placed
a hand over his breast. Then he
pulled his hand away with a start,
but now there was no mistaking the
futility and the tiredness in his smile.
"Don’t work too hard, I said.
“Take care ...
Don’t worry," my brother said,
nodding his head and grinning at me.
His wife Maria came into the room,
their child aslecp in the crook of her
arm. She walked into the room like
gentle rain coming.
"Supper’s ready, Maria said softly,
“You stay for supper, Ben, huh?”


OCTOBER, 1949


11


“Thanks,” I said, "but I’ll have to
go now. The landlady’s strict and she
does not—
“You’ll come next week then?”
Maria said. The baby in her arms
stirred and she started to dance the
baby back to sleep.
“Ill come, Sister," I said.
"Please do, Maria said smiling,
dancing the baby back to sleep. “EIl
not forget to prepare for you that dish
you like so much.
"Im going now,” I said to my
brother Ramon.
My brother Ramon followed me
down the stairs to the door.
When I came out into the street,
it was evening. The lights were on
in the windows of some of the houses.
The children had gone and the street
was quiet now, in the young twilight.
I walked slowly down the street, my
heart heavy with a great loneliness,
remembering how my brother Ramon
looked, remembering everything he had
said to me. I heard him again telling
me about a heaviness in his breast, I


saw again the futility and the tiredness in his smile, and suddenly, I was
afraid for him, for my brother who
was being driven to a gasping ruin
by this magnificent impulse to write
about our town, about the people of
our town, about Man lost and everlastingly groping for the Light on the
earth.
I walked down the street, in the
evening, thinking about many things.
I thought of my brother Ramon:
sharp-faced, his hair uncombed, his
voice pained and tired, I thought of
his house and the houses around his,
the tin-roofed, ugly, unpainted houses.
I though of other houses, the big concrete houses, firm, secure, and my
young heart cried out its protest: Why
is it like this? Why? But finally,
sweeping away all other thoughts, I
thought of the eyes of my brother and
how shining they were, like stars, when
he spoke of the story he was writing.
I felt good then, assured, unafraid.
“Tonight,” I said to the street and
the darkness, "I too will write—with
fury and anger and tenderness.


-
REMINISCENCE
By LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A.B. '52
Ah deep contentment! Let aye this moment be!
This slab of rock is hard, though much more soft
Than bed of eose, this bamboo-leafy loft
More rich than royal roof. No rhapsody
Sweeter have I heard — the bass of a bee
Set to songs of streams and winds and oft
Made sadly sweet by a tremulous lark aloft
Trilling away in dulcet tones for me ....
Enough, enough! O why must I persist
In pondering songs and sights of carefree years -
My boyhood's — clear-descried through the dewy mist
Of memory, and washed clean by tears
Still wet, still fresh? Enough now. When hopes slay fears,
Then 1 — with you perhaps? — to those haunts shall list.


12


  '


The Philosophy of a Fool
By SALVADOR R. GONZALEZ, A.B. '50


There are those who strive for wealth;
And those who sweat for health;
And those who race for fame;
And those who pay for name;
And those who, fools like me, N00
Content in their own stupidity.


Greek philosopher once dividAIed mankind into two classes:
philosophers and fools. Heiag ianpaoved on thies and
divided mankind into those who play
the violin and those who cannot. Stalin divided the world into comrades
and imperialists. Let us make a classification of our own and divide mankind into fools and greater fools.
There are those who give up everything for a true purpose, and those
who give up the truc purpose in everything. Many people today regard the
former as "fools;" the latter we shall
call "greater fools.
It is a popular contention that the
intelligent men most likely to succeed
in life are those whose ambition is for
the rolling coin and who count their
joys in terms of pesos and applause,
and the rest, who have the stupidity
to disagrce, are looked on as fools.
Nowadays, a man is often esteemed in
proportion to the bulge in his wallet,
and famous in proportion to his skill in
mancuvering himself into a seat in the
legislature or a chair in the board of
directors of a moncy-making venture.
By the same token, he is admired for
the obscurity of his arguments, re

spected according to his power to destroy men, and paid according to how
much canned goods he can sell in a
day. Science has advanced and wealth
has increased, but purposes have been
left behind, obscured by passions and
neglected among fashions. The scientist learns more and more about microbes and less and less about his fellowmen; he becomes a specialist and
focuses his glasses on one little spot,
shutting from his view the rest of the
world—he is interested in "facts" and
anything beyond his "facts” is beyond
him. The businessman earns more
and more and sleeps less and less; he
becomes excitable, wealthy, and miserable — he is interested in "money"
and everything outside of this is outside his interest. The politician talks
more and more and does less and less;
he becomes courteous, generous, and
pathetic — he is interested in “elections" and everything after that is left
for after that. And those who refuse to participate in this mad scramblo for rolling silver, elusive microbes,
and executive swivel chairs are conveniently dubbed "fools" by the ruling
class, the "intelligentsia.
The man who suffers when living


OCTOBER, 1949


13


according to principles he believes in
may be called a fool; a hero who dies
for his country may be called a fool;
one who has chosen Christ instead of
the glitter of the world may be called
a fool. A fool, so-called, is not a man
who wears a yellow shirt to match a
pair of green pants and a brilliant
polka-dotted violet necktie; nor a peculiar individual who is possessed with
the idea that he is Napoleon or perhaps Tarzan; nor one who will change
your five-peso bill for two ten-peso
bills. He is merely the person who
disagrees with the common error in
which the rest agree. He is the unconventional character who relects the
conventional procedure of not-thinking.
Modern knowledge advances out of
step with man’s sense of moral responsibility. It has produced machines
that are more efficient workers than
men and it has produced men that are
little better intellectually and morally than machines. Its misuse has made
war more frequent and more devastating. Its counterfeit aims to take
from men many of their most cherished religious beliefs in exchange for
mechanical and fatalistic philosophies
of life which would reduce men to the
level of brutes and would deprive
them of all human dignity. It has
emancipated" woman and wrecked
marriages. It has "liberated" thought
and debased desires. Pseudoscience
has made lives meaningless by present

ing no purpose beyond the grave.
Misused knowledge has brought nothing but misery and bloodshed and
pain to humanity—yet the shallow
worshippers of the idol of science"
combine to disparage the philosophy
of the “fool."
We wonder who the “fools" are and
who the "greater fools.” The scientist teaches us how to heal in retail
and how to kill in wholesale. The rich
man acquires riches and thereby becomes poorer in the things that really
count. A certai rich man..
thought withuin himself: ... I will
build greater barns ... and I will say
to my soul: Soul, thou hast much
goods laid up for many years, take
thy rest; eat, drink, make good cheer.
But God said to him: Thou fool, this
night do they require thy soul of thee:
and whose shall those things be which
thou hast provided? So is he that
layeth up treasure for himself, and is
not rich towards God.”
But the “fool" of our classification
lives differently from the fool of the
Gospel parable. He knows which
things are little and which are really
big. He laughs at the idea of "progress” that pseudoscience has popularized. He laughs at his derided inability to understand the so called
"more intelligent things of life. He
laughs at his own so called stupidity.
It is wisdom before the stupidity of
the “greater fools.


14


“THE ATENEO QUARTERLR'


The Greatest Lover


By HECTOR QUESADA, A.B. '51


—O the true Chestertonian, Gil"Tlbert is the world’s greatest
*
lover. And yet if one were
CC
to take mere external size and
appearance as a measure (which to
many is the only measure) one would
readily assert that Casanova is by far
a greater lover than Chesterton, for
obesity that borders on the mountainous is certainly not a help in climbing
the balconies of fair
ladies, and a face
that makes one wonder how so many SO
thoug hts can be
packed behind it
would certainly fail
to capture many a
young heart with an
empty head. And
yet, in the truer sense
of lover, there is an
almost infinite chasm
between Gilbert and
that roving Italian,
who fled from one
mad affair to another, 
a pparently seeking love, and yet died
without finding it; in fact, judging
from the consequences of his deeds,
one should call Casanova not a lover
but a sower of hatred.
There were three women who influenced the life of Chesterton, Our
Blessed Lady, his own mother, and his
wife, Frances.
Chesterton tells us that in his boyhood, when reciting the verses of


Swinburne'’s "Hymn to Proserpine,
he would “deliberately direct them
away from Swinburne’s intention ...
supposing them addressed to the new
Christian Queen of life rather than to
the fallen pagan Queen of death.
But I turn to her still; having seen
she shall surely abide in the end,
Goddess and maiden and queen, be
near me now and befriend.
He tells us that she
was the chief instrument in bringing him
to the Faith, that to
him, she embodied,
as a complete human
being, still only
human, all that this
Thing had to say to
Humanity. The instant I remembered
the Catholic Church,
I remembered her;
when I tried to forget
the Catholic Church,
I tried to forget her!"
E
And it was before an
LO
image of Our Lady at
the Adriatic port of
Brindisi, that Gilbert pledged to enter
the Church.
Perhaps the reason why Our Lady
was especially dear to Gilbert is that
she was human like ourselves; she was
once a tiny girl, quite helpless like all
little girls, who loved to be told stories
about fairies and giants who inhabited
the dark forboding forest, and who
loved to be rocked to sleep like all


OCTOBER, 1949


15


little children, and yet, she is the Regina Angelorum, Queen of Powers and
Archangels, Queen of all the saints
and Mother of God. No one can express this berter than Chesterton himself.
Our Lady went into a strange country,
Our Lady, for she was ours
And had run on the little hills behind the houses
And pulled small flowers;
But she rose up and went into a
strange country
With strange thrones and powers.
Perhaps in a manner of speaking,
Frances was to Gilbert Our Lady’s
counterpart on carth, for Gilbert, after
they were married, practically depended on Frances for his material existence.
Throughout their married life Gilbert
was the kind and ever devored lover.
Even during courtship however, when
a young man is wont to portray himself as the best and only man in the
whole wide world for his beloved, Gilbert’s letters showed that ever present
tincture of humility which is the true
trait of the troubadour: the loved one
is far greater, far more precious than
the lover. But what was more remarkable about Chesterton is that even
in the most serious moments of telling
his beloved of his great love, he preserved that distinctive sense of humour
and proportion: “I am looking over
the sea and endeavoring to reckon up
the estate I have to offer you ... A
walking stick, very knobby and heavy:
admirably fitted to break the head of
any denizen of Suffolk who denies
that you are the noblest of ladies ..
a body idle and omnivourous, absorbing tea, coffee, claret, sea-water and
oxygen . . . It is happiest when swimming, I think the sea being about a
convenient size ... A heart mislaid
somewhere. And that is about all the
property of which an inventory can be
16


made at present. After all, my tastes
are stoically simple. A straw hat, a
stick, a box of matches and his own
poctry.” At another time he wrote,
‘There are four lamps of thanksgiving always before him (Gilbert). The
first is for his creation out of the
same earth with such a woman as you.
The second is that he has not, with
all his faults, gone after strange women. You cannot think how a man s
self restraint is rewarded in this. The
third is that he has tried to love everything alive: a dim preparation for loving you. And the fourth is—but no
words can express that. Here ends
my previous existence. Take it: it led
me to you.
At this point, it would perhaps be
well to leave off by saying that they
lived happily forever after, had a dozen
children and were never heard from
since. But none of these things happened. Much to their disappointment
they never had a child, and Chesterton,
though living a comparatively happy
personal life, fought a relentless battle
for what his critics called a "lost
cause, and certaily the Faith in England was then sailing through rather
tempestuous waters. At the age of
sixty-two Gilbert died and two years
after, Frances followed him. Bernard
Shaw, a friend of theirs, asked, "Did
Frances die of widowhood?”
Thus Chesterton died, at an age
when he could have done so much
more. Perhaps he died because his
heart could no longer contain the great
love that he bore, not merely for humanity, but for each and every man;
for Chesterton was not only a lover of
those who were near and related to
him, he was, like the great Apostle
of Love, a lover of everything that
can be loved; and in his love, he
fought earnestly to right the wrongs,
to cure the ills, to bellow out to the
sick and ailing world that her cure lies
not in a new and as yet to be dis“  "


covered remedy, but in a way of life
that was discovered two thousand years
ago. And during his lifetime he
wrote prolifically; so much so that his
critics compare him to a vast waterfall which overwhelms by its mere
abundance. And yet, the most powerful volume that Chesterton ever wrote
concerning his philosophy was his own
life; for before he was a writer, he was
first a man, and before he talked about
loving one’s neighbor, he was first the
lover. In a poem dedicated to
Frances, fitled “The Ballad of the


White Horse” he wrote:
O go you onward, where you are
Shall honor and laughter be.
Past purpled forest and pearled foam,
God’s winged pavilion free to roam,
Your face that is a wandering home,
A flying home for me.
Up through an empty house of stars
Being what heart you are,
Up the inhuman steeps of space
As on a staircase go in grace
Carrying firclight on your face
Beyond the loneliest star.


—-
-
WANDERLUST
By: O. PAGSANGHAN, A.B. '51
Already my mind, it is flying
At the call of the wanderlust.
Already my feet, they are aching
For the feel of the road and the dust.
My song is the song of the whirlwind,
Of the raindrops splashing at play,
Of the dancing trees down the woodland,
Of a star who has lost her way.
Mine — rubied canopies of sundown.
Mine — its molten monstrance of ligbt.
Mine — the silver scimitared ocean,
Minc — the star coroneted night.
Cannot men ever look up a moment
From their miserly heaps of gold
To the west where the Lord has hoarded
His treasures, vast and untold?
Cannot men be ever like children
And behold the newness of things,
For only to these is the kingdom
Of angels and balos and wings?
Take your coins and your palace and buildings
That crowd out the sunlight of God,
While I roam under stars, suns and moonlight
With the wind and the rain and the sod.


OCTOBER, 1949


17


On Writing Letters
By JOSE TUASON, Jr.,
Litt. B.'51


——HERE have been reams written on how to compose gracious social letters. But all these volumes teach you to say what you don't want
to say. No book teaches you to say what you really want to say.
After all, we don’t want to play the hypocrite. It is not that we
want to express ourselves insincerely, but we’ve been so used to doing so, that
we can’t come out with it. This short treatise is on how to write what you
really want to say.


“Most everybody has been to a birthday party or wedding party or whathave-you? But not everyone can write a letter of thanks or acknowledgement.
This one is bound to be effective:


My dear host:—
It is Monday morning, and I’m still picking the splinters out of my
mouth from the wood alcohol you used in the cocktails. You weren’t
kidding when you said that we'd have all the seafood we'd want. But
I didn’t think that we’d have to take it away from the goldfish. And
your cuisine, judging from the general lack of flavor, can have only army
field rations as a rival, and even then, you wouldn’t compare favorably.
I was never happier than when I got home and out of your clutches. Under separate cover, I enclose your stomach pump.
Sickly yours,
Undoubtedly, you have received a birthday gift or Christmas gift that
took your breath away. Such a gift is called a mouthwash. But leave us be.
Whenever you receive such a gift, this letter of acknowledgement is guaranteed
to bring results:
Dear friend:—
You cannot imagine the delight that came over me when I received
your gift. How, in heaven’s name, did you know that I gargled with
'Dutch Cleanser'? My neighbors are looking at me with green eyes 'cause
they need 'Dutch Cleanser' terribly to clean their kitchen sink. You
know how hard it is to get 'Dutch Cleanser' nowadays, especially for
mouthwash. Next time, don’t bother. Thanks.
Garglingly yours,


18


"  "


Sooner or later, you will be called upon to write a letter of recommendation
for a friend who has been a parasite all his natural days, and, if just to get rid
of him, you will oblige with the lerter. And if this friend has been the type
that keeps on borrowing your party clothes, your ink, your comb, your typewriter, and, during his lucid moments, your food, this letter is bound to land
him on the seat of his pants.


To whom it may concern:
This is to introduce my friend, Mr. . . . . . . . . .. who is seeking employment in your concern. Mr. . . . . . . . ... is a card. You know, a
joker. Ha, ha. I’ve known Mr. . . . . ... ever since he was a pup,
and even now, he hounds me. You know, chow-hound. (Laugh) As
for his ability, I can’t say much. But I’ll say this for him. He’s not a
clock-watcher. He’s usually not around enough to know where the
clock, is and if he does find it. ... It’s not that he’s dishonest or anything like that, but it wouldn’t be a bad idea if you kept the Philippine
Constabulary and the Police Force in the vicinity of your vault.


Cautiously yours,
And now, for the letter everybody’s been waiting for — the
Love Letter. This, of all letE
ters, is the hardest to compose.

The thing to kecp in mind, and
S
this has to be upper-most, is that
you be nonchalant about the
whole business. Never show in
your letter your purpose. AlFEr
IN
though this is contrary to what I

El

said in the beginning, it is the

exception that proves the rule.

Here is the setting: you have
been courting this young daisy
for well over a year. And now, suddenlike, she goes on vacation (we shall not
bother to mention from whom), and it is now that you find courage to propose marriage. (Absence does make the heart grow bolder.) You are not a
bad chap, as good as they come. So, you go to your typewriter (if you know
how to type) and this is the letter that emanates from the machine:


Dear Miss . . . . . . . . . .: (Notice the familiar term used.)
Ever since you left three hours ago, I have been reading the funny
papers. Mutt and Jeff seem to be feuding again, and Bud Fisher simply
spilled ink over them. (Nofice the nonchalance). I miss you and the
weather outside is pleasant. Several minutes ago, the funniest thing happened to me: I decided to go and have a haircut. But, as usual, well,
never mind. At any rate, here I am writing you. I love you and the
telcphone just rang, and guess who called. You did, and you've been gone
only four hours. You see, it took me an hour to write this much, which
just gocs to show you. I’m wondcring why you charged the telcphone


OCTOBER, 1949


19


call collect? But that’s all right. You’ll by paying for it very soon.
Will you marry me? Totoy just came by and invited me to a movie.
You know how I enjoy going to the movies, especially if I’m invited. —-
Painstakingly yours,
And this is the killer! There is a very bad habit, prevalent among stores
where you have credit of sending you your bill at the beginning of every month.
This is the proper way to answer such lecters.
Dear (name of store):
This is to acknowledge receipt of your letters of (month) 3rd,
(month) 5th, (month) 7th, referring to a one peso (P1.00) debt incurred by me at your store six months ago.
I regret to inform you that I passed away several weeks ago.
Indebtedly yours,


&


PICTURES
By CARMELO P. QUINTERO, Jr., A.B. '53
Moon-goddess sprinkling silver dust,
Across a cosmic velvet veil;
Pave thou a royal path, to hail
Rose-budding morn, gold eastern thrust!
A fiery bastion bathed in blood,
Bears sunset’s flags against the flood
Of charging gloom, that, smote the sun
Into the sea of Batadn.
Dim haunted depth of woods; black spite
Of Nature's breast unwed to bliss,
Mysterious patch of horrid sight;
Why barred are you from Sunbeam’s kiss?


20


  "


COMMUNISM DISCUSSED
HEN the Round-the-World
ATown Hall-Meeting-of-theAir came to town last August,
ES
Atenco students took part in
the discussions on Communism in the
Old Senate Hall. Justo Albert, Luis
V. Sison, Salvador Gonzales, and Sixto Roxas gave the Christian answer to
the question: How can the Filipino
youth best cope with the threat of
Communism in the Philippines?"
Father Williamson Masterson, S. J.,
president of the Atenco de Manila, was
present as guest administrator.
STUDENT COUNCIL RESTORED
A definite step toward the early restoration of the pre-war "Student
Council,” which ably served as contact between departments and cooperated greatly with the school authorities when it was in force, was initiated
by Father James Meany, S.J., Dean of
the College, last September 16 when
he announced the members of an organization to be known as the "Students Comnuttee. The members of
the Students Committee are class presidents who will, pending the formation
of a Student Council, begin to discharge some of the ordinary duties of
any Student Council and also to consider plans for the eventual formation
of a complete and permanent organization.
The Dean revealed that the restoration of the pre-war Student Council
or the formation of a Student Council
along different lines has long been


under consideration. With the formation of the Students Committee,
the way has been paved for the long
nceded Student Council.
Prudencio R. Europa, A.B. '53
LABOR AND SOCIAL ECONOMY
Dusk was slowly setting in. The
milky white mist hovering over the
President Wilson’s smokestack blended
well with the pale orange sunset sky.
As Father Carroll Fasy, S.J., walked
down the gangplank of the giant
ocean liner on September 16 for a
brief stopover at Manila, he was met
by a Jesuit delegation. Father Walter
B. Hogan, S.J., was among those who
welcomed the former president of the
Atenco de Manila. As they warmly
shook hands Father Fasy, now Superior of the Jesuit Mission in Jamshedpur, India, must have asked further
information about the first Catholic
labor school in the Islands. While
they walked along the pier to their
waiting car, Father Hogan may have
told Father Pasy, how within the
gaunt adobe walls of the former college smoking room labor classes are
held every Wednesday from 5:50 to
8:10 in the evening.
This labor school, which is managed by the Institute of Social Order,
is not a gigantic undertaking. In
fact only some twenty odd men regularly attend its sessions. In the
United States about twenty of the
twenty-seven Catholic universities
have labor schools, but it was not the
novelty of this projcet in the Philip

OCTOBER, 1949


21


pines that prompted Fr. Hogan to organize a systematic and practical way
to equip honest union men with the
tools of leadership. He saw how prevalent were labor organizations that
cheat gullible members of their union
dues. He realized that a large number
of well-intentioned and conscientious
men are untrained for effective leadership, and that Catholic leaders must
not only be as simple as doves but also
as prudent as serpents. He sent out
invitations to several labor leaders
asking them to participate in the
formation of a school. Union men
from the PAL, the Cebu Portland Cement, the Philippine American Life
Insurance and others eagerly responded
and formed the nuclcus of the present
school.
The doors of the labor school were
opened in the last week of July. Father Hogan lectures on the moral aspect of labor, its rights and duties as
embodied in the papal encylicals; Atty.
Simeon Gopengco expounds the legal
aspect of labor, labor laws, their interpretation and application; Atty.
Raul Manglapus discourses on parliamentary law and procedure. This
labor school, by stressing the proper
relation betwcen labor and management, hopes to bring unionism to a
high degree of efficiency and honesty.
Closely akin to the idea of labor is
that of social cconomy. Overlooking
the charred ruins of the auditorium
is the library of the Department of
Social Science. Within its cramped
quarters Father James J. MCGinley,
S.J., the present Director, is daily
busy at his desk setting up the administrative organization of the department. In addition to this huge
task of organization, Father MCGinley is conducting a weekly semunar on
Social Economy. The rains which fall
almost every Saturday afternoon at
22


this time have not dampened the interest of his fifty students.
The Department of Social Science
hopes to expand its services to the
community and help in solving the
manifold social problems that arise
and require the trained leadership of
Catholic laymen. It hopes also to offer a greater variety of courses on Sociology, Political Science and Economics at a graduate level.
At the present, the Department is
lending educational aids to the present faculty and student body of the
Ateneo. Its growing library which
contains about 700 books and an almost equal number of pamphlets and
magazines is open to both the students
and the interested public. The library
also includes a series of vertical files,
made up of items not suitable for
shelving yet pertinent to specific social questions. By such a grouping
of materials, the vertical file aims to
make educational research attractive
and at the same time comprehensive
cnough to satisfy several individual interests. Additional reading materials
from the United States valued at
P2200 are expected to arrive soon.
LOGIC CHOPPERS
A full half an hour before starting
tume, the philosophy students of the
Atenco began to arrive at the campus
of Saint Theresa s College. Exccpt for
twelve boys and twelve girls everyone
was merry and talkative. Promptly at
9:00 Father James J. Meany, S.J., began the minor logic specimen. Six
girls and six boys all of whom were
chosen by lot were called alternately.
The girls went up the stage with their
usual air of feminine assurance, the
boys with their chests fully blown.
The panel of interrogators was composed of Mother Edmunde, Mother
Ignacia, and Fathers Eliazo, O'Shaugh"“  "


nessy and MeCullough, and Mr. Narciso Pimentel. As the prayer ended
the intellectual joust the audience
silently filed out of the hall. Outside the auditorium everyone became
merry and talkative again.
FOR THE SPIRITUAL NEEDS
OF THE NATION
A long train of motor cars with
“St. Francis Xavier Bless the Philippines stickers on their windshields
wound its way from the Manila International Airport to the Ateneo
Chapel. The motorcade accompanied
the Holy Arm of Saint Francis Xavier.
This four hundred year old miraculous
relic was brought by Father Paul
Pfister, S.J., Superior of the Jesuit
Mission in Japan. The relic reposed
overnight in the college chapel while
the Fathers and students kept vigil.
Two days later, on August 19, the relic was again exposed for public veneration in the chapel. In spite of the
blazing noon day heat the pious faithful patiently waited in a long line
which extended to the Padre Faura
gate for their turn to venerate the
precious relic.
LIBERAL ARTS RETREAT
Silence was the watchword during
the three day retreat of the Liberal
Arts students. Father James MCMahon, S.J., the retreat master, stressed
the need for prayerful thinking and
the practice of self denial. “Give the
girls a respite, he said. “They won’t


pine away in three days.” And the
girls were given a respite. The
pamphlet display of Father Cannon
attracted many and the spiritual books
in the library which were slowly
gathering dust once more found
serious readers. On the fourth day,
after the papal benediction had been
imparted, the boys felt that they were
in need of a rest. Many promptly relaxed in a downtown movie.
E
SEMESI ER'S END
The school is approaching the end
of the first term. In less than a
month, as the college readies itself for
the semestral examinations, extra-curricular activities will come to a standstill. The practice of religion as revealed by the recent survey is very encouraging. Surely when the Campion
Literary Guild suspends its plannings
for the Book Exhibit, when the ACIL
men give the children at Santa Mesa a
vacation, when the Chesterton Evidence Guild slows down in its preparations for the grand semuinar on Communism, the religious activity will go
on without interruption. At this
crucial time of the year more and
more will be scen in the chapel. It
is hoped that when one kneels before
the taberancle, he prays not only for
the light to hurdle his semestral tests
but also for strength and perserverance to pass his riNAL Examinations.
—Enrique L. Esquivel, Jr.
A.B. '5I.


OCTOBER. 1949


23


lotoy and Latin and
a Hard Night
By ARTURO TANCO, JR., A.B. '53


T was one of those anxious
days before an exam—and a
II
a Latin one at that!—and
GUED
Totoy simply had to study all
the conjugations and vocabulary
which the poor, misguided professor
had tried to pound into his head for
two months now. So, armed with a
plate of sandwiches, a bottle of coke,
and an unshakable determination to
cram until the wee hours of the morning, if necessary, he retired to his
room directly after supper.
Placing the sandwiches and coke on
his desk, Totoy arranged his books,
brushed the cobwebs from them, and
set to work. Opening his Latin book
to the declensions, he began to read.
For two minutes, nothing could be
heard except the impatient ticking of
the clock and Totoy’s laboured breathing. Five minutes passed — an impatient wriggling. Seven minutes — a
yawn. Finally, after a full ten
minutes, he looked slecpily at the
clock. “Gosh! Its seven-thirty already!” he exclaimed, "Time for the
"Saludos Guaracheros”” With this, he
sprang to his feet and dashed for the
radio. "After all,” he thought as he
was twirling the dial, "it will help to
relax my mind."
Thirty minutes later, Totoy decided to resume studying; so, pulling out
his book again, he leafed through the
pages. "Hic, haec . no, that
wasn’t it! After a valiant, fiveminute struggle, our hero gave up


and decided to look up references; and
now we see him peering at the motley
collection of books gathering dust on
his shelves. "Nothing here — no,
here's one!” He pulled it out and
scanned the first few pages . . . . Ah,
this was more like it! True, it wasn’t
exactly a reference, but who can deny
the logic of Erle Stanley Gardner; and
besides, the title (The Latin Hat
Mystery) did refer to the subject he
was studying. "Nothing like firsthand knowledge to give you good
grades, he thought as he began to
read.


"Bong ... bong . .. bong..
The Clock was striking ten when Totoy, who was decp in his second corpse,
remembered the business at hand. Unburying his nose from the mystery, he
stretched and yawningly muttered:
“Now, where were we? Oh, yes, the
first, or was it the third, conjugation.
With renewed vigour born of necessity, he attacked the third conjugation; but, as his mind was wandering
far from Latin, he remembered that he


24


“  


had not eaten anything for two solid
hours now! Hurriedly, he rushed
down to the refrigerator ....
Ah, that was good” he sighed with
satisfaction as he was gulping down
the last quart of milk. "Now I’m
really in a condition to study!” So,
back he clumped up the stairs, waking


up the whole household on the way ...
Don t you think it’s rather late,
dear?” Totoy’s mother admonished
him a few minutes later as she peeped
into the room. “Well . . . maybe
you’re right, Ma, he answered, closing huis book, "I have been studying
pretty hard."




A SILVER MORNING
By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52
God has dipped this morning
In a silver pool
And left it iridescent,
Glistening and cool.
All the sky is silver
And the bills between
Veil their verdant beauty
With a silver sheen.
Even buds are silver
On the walking trees,
And the larks discover
Silver melodies.
And the gliding river
Sings a silver song
To the sentient willows
As it purls along.
And the shining morning
That must pass too soon
Leaves a silver echo
In my lilting tune.


OCTOBER, 1949


5


The Campus Monarch
By RODOLFO PASIMIO OLIVARES, A.B. '51


WT has been said that if all manI kind were assembled in a sin gle moment, the true heroes,
BEA
the saints, and the great
would appear like children frolicking
together.” They are the stars that
scintillate while the rest of the heavens look on. To debase the comparison somewhat, on every college campus you will come upon a distinguished
constellation of glamorous scholars
who enjoy the appellation of "playboys.” They usually form a conspicuous group because, being of like
feather, they tend to flock and move
about together
The first thing one notices about
these glamorous scholars is their remarkable resemblance to one another
in externals. They have, you know,
a common background — like hardware stamped “Made in Japan.” Out
of such specimens of humanity as
these, whom we see so often gathered
in the college store, frequently around
the magic jukebox, more frequently in
the vicinity of another school, and infrequently in the chapel, we can draw
up a sort of formula representing what
is typical of them.
We give our model the official title
of "Swickle-bum” for that will save
us the trouble of picking up anonymous letters thrown at our windows.
Swickle-bum claims to be the scion
of a family that boasts of a prosperous sugar plantation in the south or
countless hectares of rice fields in the
26


north, with business connections in
foreign and neighboring cities. This
family possesses a gay villa in the suburbs and, we are informed, an enviable precedence in the social register
of a palace. Swickle-bum holds, as a
certain thesis, that he is rather goodlooking. We certainly admire the efforts he exerts to get others to acknowledge the uniqueness of the
great profile.” Whether inside his
ubiquitous convertible or in the concert hall, or just listening to that thesis
on "universals,” which he does sometimes with rapt attention, he sits in
such a manner as only a play-boy can
sit and fixedly gazes heavenward -
thus allowing once more the personal
asset he prizes most, to assert its magnetism.
Swickle-bum is what you might call
a tailor’s dream. Around the campus
he sports garments of the latest fashion
from Manhattan or Fifth Avenue and
wears them with such kingly elegance
that he soon becomes an authority in
clothing styles. He spends two leaden
hours every week in a barbershop. The
very name of the establishment is in
conformity with his dignity and his
impeccable taste. The proprietor,
who knows his customer, frequently
praises the Barrymore-like features and
employs the various cpithets that
should correspond to it. Swickle-bum
delights in the buzz of the barber’s
paraphernalia because it reminds him
of the whine of his perfect engine.
“  ”


He likes the fast, rollicking music
blaring out through the radio because
it is in keeping with his fast nature.
He likes the gleam of the ncon lights
coming out of the walls because it reminds him of the poetic softness of a
Sunday night in a casino garden.
Swickle-bum is an inveterate daydreamer. In the midst of debates and
similar intellectual clashes, particularly after a pleasant week-end, it is his
wont to dwell in that misty world
high above the clouds where he and
she of whom he dreams are the only
denizens. It is during such mystic
flights and momentary departures
from our own world that he falls vic
tim to embarrassment at the hands of
the pedagogue. But Swickle-bum is
not an arrant dreamer. He returns to
redeem his lost laurels by manifesting
occasional flashes of intellectual brilliance which he claims occur to him
on the impulse of the occasion. In his
softer and milder moments he provides
himself with magazines of such transcendental names as Life and Time
which, according to him, are most refreshing and informative. He has an
intense desire not to be classified with
morons and takes great pride in having read through a book by Chester

ton which produced a pleasant "highbrow” elation, although to him its
contents were quite incomprehensible.
Swickle-bum is not only a practical
prankster; he is also a consummate and
incorrigible punster. Due to his vehement affection for laughter, he consistently miscontrues humor for puns
and puns for humor.
Swickle-bum is innocuous when
quiet but expert in instigating rowdyism and mutiny when in a hazy
mood. In a fit of frenzy, which to
him is not at all unusual, he causes the
academic barometer to collapse; he
metamorphoses the whole class into a
mob of ruffians, the whole classroom
into a forecastle of boisterous seamen.
Such lawlessness and reigns of terror
which exceed their French counterparts in number are however, easily
nipped in the bud with our Swicklebum always the recipient of the bitterest penalty. He receives such punishment with a grin for he finds consolation in the reflection that he was
able to drag the rest to a similar fate.
We hear him often declaim in unbridled bursts of eloquence the motto
All for one and one for all.” In his
opinion misery loves and should have
company.


MARCHADESCH ABS!


OCTOBER, 1949


27


Bell of leace


By GABINO MENDOZA, JR., A.B. '53


LL the world seeks peace—in
Anoisy conference halls and in
— noisier battle-fields where mauine guns rartie vath dadiy
din. The wisest statesmen of our time
consult with its most brilliant politicians. They talk to, argue with, shout
at, revile and insult one another—and
get nowhere. Like powerful horses,
they can capably do the job of bringing the world to peace, but they have
gone berserk and now are pulling the
earth farther and farther from the
peace it secks. In their wisdom, they
think that they need no hand to guide
them. They have forgotten that only
the King of Peace can lead our troubled world to peace. They never will
succeed in the task they have undertaken.
I caught a glimpse of what that
King can give, one early evening at
Novaliches. A hundred men were
praying to their King. A hundred
men heard Him answer in majestic melody to His creatures’ prayers.
After the thunder of the hymns of
benediction, the following silence was
relicf—not that the hymns during benediction were oppressive but they
were like the murder scene in Shakespeare's “Macbeth, so gloriously taut
that they needed relicf. Then came
the clear melodious clanging — no,
not clanging for that implies a certain
harshness; toll is more the word we
need—the mellow tolling of the bell
and the sound gently floated like a


falling leaf from the belfry to the
waiting chapel below. No doubt it
also glided above the verdant fields
and silently stirred the stalks of grass,
making them dance, while the weary
workers ceased their labor to pray.
But there was something I could not
quite catch. There was a song in the
tolling of the bell, a song anciently
dignified yet childlike. It was a sound
I had heard faintly in my fairy tale
and nursery rhyme days. It was the
sound of "Jack and Jill,” the music of
the rolling hills seen from Jack’s enormous beanstalk; it was "Long Ago
and Far Away.” All that child-like
innocence and peace was in the song
of the bells.
The sound cchoed and reechoed in
the darkening valleys and the green
hills of Novaliches; on and on it
seemed to sweep until at last it met the
ancient mountains fringing the faraway horizon and winged its way to
the sky. I had just arrived from Manila and some of its harsh, noisy, irritable spirit still clung to me, but now
over me a stillness seemed to descend;
a stillness which we feel only in men
whose spirits are mellowed by old-age
or holiness. I forgot all my troubles
and my worries. The King of Peace
reigned for a moment in that chapel,
completely, in answer to our prayer.
Perhaps it was this moment of peace
that Count Bernadotte had sought and
which had drawn him to that land far
from his. Maybe this was the dream


28


  


that Gandhi always had, and maybe,
never saw fulfilled. Perhaps the craving for moments such as this is what
draws peoples and nations into war
after war, slaughter after slaughter.
For it is the love of peace, not of war,
that brings on war. Once we heard
the tolling . . . . then twice and once
again in one long enchanting song of
praise; again and again. Never hava
I heard our King thanked in more
worthy song, never have I heard prayer more right. It was the “Gloria”


and the “Our Father;" it was a baby’s
incoherent "Thank you, God."
The prayers of a hundred men and
the answer of their Creator, the pleadings of the world and its King’s reply,
all blended into the melodious, mellow
tolling of a bell.
One moment peace was there—then
it was gone.
Perhaps some day I will find it
again, not in this world led by foolish
wise-men, but in the world of the King
of Peace.


SILENT SERENADE
By O. PAGSANGHAN, A.B. '51
I cannot sing the silent sympbony
Of starlight lured into your wistful eyes,
The magic of a muted melody
Stolen from some enchanted paradise.
My piteous poems can never even trace
The veiled Madonna of your dear, dear face.
So why weave whirlwind words and listless lays
About the angel gentleness of your ways?
But what are poems and songs when our eyes meet;
When hearts are full they speak in silence sweet.


A DYING TREE
By GERVASIO DIAZ, Jr., A.B. '53
A dying tree 1 chanced upon
Amid the rugged forestlands,
Its bonny days forever gone,
For age no living thing withstands.
Cold death will take its toll and all
That lives on earth must some day fall.
Pale leaves in never-ending stream
Drip teurlike on the barren clay;
As dying hands the dark roots seem
To clutch the clod; untamed lives pray,
And all the trees in some degree
Bemoan the passing of a tree.


OCTOBER, 1949


29


**
UNIVERSIIY OT TIA PIMLIPPINES.
LIBRARY
Symphony of Life
By FRANCISCO BORJA, A.B. '51


IFE has often been called a
LIjourney and less frequently a
stage which one enters, and
UES
after acting, leaves, sometimes
dramatically, but usually prosaically.
Others have compared it to a turning
wheel in which each man is a spoke,
so that, while the wheel turns, one
cannot help but go with it, up or
down, with his fortunes fluctuating
accordingly. But now we shall compare life to a symphony, which is one
of the most magnificent forms of musical expression.
The composer of a symphony divides
his music in such a manner that it
comprises several distinct parts. Each
part is called a movement, and each
movement has its own little story to
tell. These movements however, are
but parts of the composition and correspond to chapters in a biography, so
that, taken as a whole, a symphony
can be compared to a life story and the
different movements to a life’s main
events.
All of us lead different lives, and
our biographies, if anyone in the future will be so kind as to write them
for us, will tell different stories. All
of us, therefore, whether we like it or
not, have different parts to play in
the symphony of life. While playing
in the symphony, we are confronted
with a variety of interpretations which
we may select with regard to the music. We can play in different tempos
which may range from a very slow
30


Largo to a very fast Prestissimo. In
whatever manner we choose to play,
there is one thing to which we must
conform, and that is the exact pitch
of the notes. We may play in tempo
but, if we do not play the right notes,
we shall create only noise and consequent torture for our hearers. Similarly, while living we must conform
our actions to definite principles.
Those principles are no other than the
laws of God. We may keep on living
but if our lives are not in accordance
with those laws, then we harm not
only ourselves but also our fellow men.
But before considering further the
manner of playing, let us first consider
what parts of our lives correspond to
the different movements of the symphony. It will not be hard to do this.
People pass through different stages
during their brief sojourn in this valley
of tears. For our purpose we shall
divide those stages into youth, which
includes the years of infancy, childhood and young manhood or womanhood, maturity of adulthood, which
comprises the larger portion of a person s life, and finally old age, that
period during which one is supposed to
have grown not only mellower but
also wiser. We shall not include
second childhood” because I doubt
that there is such a stage.
The first, second and third movements of the symphony would, then,
correspond to the different stages in
the life of an individual which we have
“  "


just mentioned. Continuing now with
our analogy, each of us at this very
moment is playing in what we shall
call the “Concert Hall of Reality,
and the conductor of our orchestra,
which is made up of ourselves and the
rest of our fellow men, is God.
In a real symphony orchestra, each
and every member is required while
playing to keep one eye on the conductor and the other eye upon the music
he is playing. He has to follow the
beat of the conductor’s baton or else
be out of harmony with the rest of the
orchestra. This is the only way in
which the orchestra can play as a
whole, for if each member followed
his own sweet will, the only result
would be complete discord. No member can begin playing even a fraction
of a second ahead of the others; he
can not play a single extra note after
the others have stopped. All must
play as one and one must play with all.
Unfortunately, while playing in the
symphony of life, many become overfond of their particular instruments,
so much so that at times they ignore
the conductor and play as they please.
They act like children who, upon being given toys to play with and having become over-attached to the toys,
no longer heed the call of their mother.
Of course this would never do. In
a real orchestra onc cannot afford to
incur the wrath of the conductor by
playing in any way one pleases, especially if the conductor has the temperamental qualities of a Toscanini. One
who refuses to follow the baton
wielder makes himself liable to expulsion from the orchestra. In a similar
way, God docs not let pass our playing out of tune with the rest of the
orchestra without imposing a punishment, and we fully know that God
has His own way of punishing.
As we said before, cach of us has a
distinct part in the orchestra and we
play different instruments. Some
OCTOBER, 1949


have received similar instruments;
others have been given other kinds.
These instruments are nothing more
than our own individual personalities
or abilities, and all of them are mere
gifts. God owns everything in the
Concert Hall of Reality" including
the orchestra members and their instruments. God is also the composer
of the symphony we are playing. We
either play the music as it is written
or else remain in discord with the rest
of the orchestra. We either obey His
laws or come in conflict with Him and
society.
We have seen that we were assigned
various positions in the orchestra,
which is supposed to be the society we
live in, and that we are now playing
different instruments. Some are playing the strings, some the woodwinds
and others the percussion instruments.
Among the musical instruments, there
is supposed to be a hierarchy. One instrument is considered superior to or
more noble than another. They are,
however, all equal in the sense that
they are all musical instruments and
are capable of producing music. Similarly, among men there is a hierarchy
in which men differ from one another
accidentally, though not essentially,
because all possess a body and a rational soul. This is the only sense in
which we take all men to be equal.
Secing therefore that God did not
endow men with equal gifts, that He
did not give equal gifts of beauty,
talent and wealth to everyone, we
must conclude that men have no right
to be unduly proud of their talents.
Whether onc has been given the noble
violin, the majestic piano or the lowly
cymbal and drum to play on, every instrument is equally a free and unmerited gift from the supreme Giver of
all good things.
Another analogy concerns the manner in which one plays his part in the
symphony. On the music sheets of


31


the members are found various musical signs and notations indicating
tempo and manner of playing. As in
an orchestra some members may be
playing in Andante and some Con
Brio, so in life some may be phlegmatic
and others swept away by activity.
Those romantically inclined no doubt


play “Gracioso" and "Appassionato.
The old folks are perhaps playing
either "Adagio" or "Largo” which are
very slow tempos. Finally, all must
play "Morendo," "dying away," at
some time or other, for afrer all the
symphony must end. By the way,
what tempo do you play?


BARREN TREE
By CARMELO P. QUINTERO, Jr., A.B. '53
Fantastic tree against the skies,
Bare relic torn by stormy years,
Black twisted arms that reach to rise,
Toward heaven's sunshine or its tears;
On wind-blown cliff its roots like claws
Clutch deep in rocks no wind can toss.
What lovers sat beneath thy shade
In green days past when life was young?
What sweet birds sang thy serenade,
When soft their brood wind-swayed was sung
To sleep 'midst fruits turned sweet to gold?
Alas! those days will be untold!


NIGHT SOUNDS
8y ARTURO TANCO, Jr., A.B. '53
Sad nighi's soft mantle drifts below,
And vagrant light slow flits away;
A million stars infest moon's glow
Of golden lucency, till Day
Commences in triumphant grace,
To dim the emeralds of space.
Mournful are winds that gently blow
Through sparkling, dew-dropped trees and sward,
Swaying in never-ending flow
Of grieving dirges to the Lord.
Lonely is this obscure night-sound,
Awake — I listen — all night round.


32


  


YOUTH
By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52


Like a fierce battle, youth is wild
With bugle, spear, and counter ery
Fanfare and drummery, but child
Dreaming of that sweet chivalry
The piercing terror cannot see.
He with a mild and serious eye
Along the azure of the years
Sees the sweet pomp sweep hurtling by;
But he sees not death's blood and tears,
Sees not the plunging of the spears.
And all the shrilling horror of
Horse and rider, in sad retreat
Is only music fine enough
To lull him into slumber sweet
In fields where ewe and lambkin bleat.


Oh, if with such simplicity
He should take arms and suffer warWith beams bis shield shall gilded be
Though the steadfast light of some star
From the thickening gloom be far.
Though on him boarse war's eagle perch
Ouickened with guilty lightnings — there
In vain shall it for terror search
Where child’s eyes bencath bloody hair
Gaze purely through the dingy air.
And when the whecling rout is spent
Though in the laps of slain he lie
Or lonely in bis last content
Ouencbless shall burn in secrecy
The flame Death knows bis victors by.


OCTOBER, 1949


33


Christ in our Time
By JUANITO ORDOVEZA, A.B. '50


AN is gifted with powers to
MIinfluence posterity even after
 death. He can perpetuate his
ideas through writing and
telching and through character and
human dignity that impress his fellow
men. When we mention perpetuation
through teaching, we are aware that
men who, in their lifetime, have uttered profound truths may yet be
heard from the grave. Plato and Aristotle are enshrined in our institutions
of learning, and we feel as if we had
walked with them through the rostrums and porches of Athens. Saint
Francis and Saint Ignatius by their
lives and writings instruct our minds
and souls in the things of God. Do
not Rizal and Quezon live beyond
their day in their political writings
and in their state papers which speak
so eloquently of the finest political
traditions of a free people?
If these are facts, then there is no
reason why Christ cannot influence
us by His teaching. His words of
heavenly wisdom were not allowed to
disappear from the world as do leaves
borne by the breeze. Rather these
words and teachings were treasured
and shared by His followers and they
in turn passed them on from generation to generation. These teachings
are contained in the Scriptures and in
Apostolic tradition—the great links
between His carthly life of the past


and our modern existence of the present.
Apart from teaching, example is a
means for a person now dead to make
himself felt in the present. Thus the
daring exploits of a Columbus and a
Magellan, the military example of a
Caesar and a Napoleon, and the holy
life of Saint John can be told and retold, and become an inspiration and
a challenge to brave and saintly men
of other times and different nations.
In a similar manner, Christ can influence our day, because He has made us
the heirs of that beautiful example
of a holy life which we should cherish.
When Catholics today say that they
admire Christ, they mean that they
admire His example, His holiness, His
point of view. They mean that, more
than any mere poet, He puts them in
a position to view the world as manifesting God.
But Our Lord, being not only man
but also true God, exercises a new kind
of influence—spiritual influence. He
perpetuates Himself not by His teaching and examples alone, but also by
His ever continuing Life. He brought
Divine life to earth at Bethlchem, but
He is too good to circumscribe this
gift to the time of his sojourn on
earth. Christ imparts to us and infuses into our souls sanctifying grace
—His own divine life and energy. He
adds to this a supernatural vigor and
help necessary to our retaining sancti

34


“  '


fying grace and to making it produce
abundant fruit of virtuous actions.
Yet this grace infused in our very
hearts and the concomitant help and
vigor issuing from the glorified Christ
in heaven, is concealed and withdrawn
from our sight. It is mysterious and
for this reason it is called the Mystical
Life of Christ in our souls.
Such are the ways—teaching, example, and an indwelling in our spir

its—in which Christ secures the love
and loyalty of men even centuries after His death. If there were no other
means by which Christ could influence
present day hearts and minds, then
Christianity would be but the memory of a man" who had lived and
died; then too, His examples, His
teachings and His powers would be
merely human and not a divine gift
for mankind.


BE SOFT, MY THOUGHTS
By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52
Be soft and beautiful, my thoughts
As shadows fall upon the ground
Reflecting all things perfectly,
Songs, sung without a sound.
Be soft and colorful, my thoughts
As blossoms to the sun unfold
With fragrance drifting on the wind,
And honeyed hearts of gold.


OCTOBER, 1949


THE GREATEST STORY EVER TOLD


By FULTON OURSLER
MCMullen, 1949
—HE blue and white jacket of this book has the by-line: a reporter’s acacount of Lourdes. This may appear misleading to a prospective reader,
for in the cighty pages of Fulton Oursler’s latest work there is much
a
ga
more in evidence besides the conventional crispness of journalistic style.
Indeed, except for two chapters which recount official medical reports verbatim, it has flowing diction to delight the litterateur; factual information to
catch any historian’s fancy; arguments to convert any dyed-in-the-wool skeptic; decp faith to inspire the religious; and that appcaling modern touch characteristic of the author’s best-selling The Greatest Story Ever Told.
On its surface this book reveals how a journalist journeyed to Lourdes,
interviewed priests, doctors and a count, investigated miracles, visited historical
sites like Saint Bernadette’s home (formerly a prison), and all in all tried to
learn the truth about the famed grotto—what force magnctizes countless pilgrims every year. From the start emphasis is placed on the "paradox of happy
failures” which chicfly motivated the author’s trip.
Only one percent of the ten thousand sick people who go to Lourdes annually is healed. Yet still they come. Why? The answer, Oursler writes
with marvelous conviction, is the genuine peace and inward happiness men find
in visiting the shrine. The other nincty-nine per cent goes home unhealed, unchanged except in their hearts.” They are like Monsicur Galland, a living
statue in his bed, who, after coming from Lourdes said, "I have everything I
want!" or like Paulette, a girl without a face, soon to die, who exclaimed,
“Everything is all right with me since I visited that happy grotto."
Yet after a short while the reader understands that Oursler’s findings are
not merely superficial, made to satisfy plain curiosity. In this account the author depicts not only the externals of Lourdes, but, more important ,the flow of
faith bubbling side by side with the miraculous water. For he writes, "I pass
into the cave . . . stand below the niche . . . where anyone — knight and rook
and queen and fool: all who come — feels the impulse to kncel.” Here is another testimony of how a man sought certainty with all his might and found
it in God’s arms. Here are seen the steps on which an unbeliever’s mind ascends from the darkened dungeons of godlessness before reaching the Light.


36


  '


Rising from early chapters, which depict the search after faith and its
discovery, is that climatic thirteenth chapter in which Oursler, hearing the
murmur “Notre Dame de Lourdes, priez pour nous," walks to the grotto and
experiences that miracle of a lifetime, that “curiously tranquil feeling of renewed energy,” that "paradox of peace and eagerness with its strangeness and
assured urgency,” that “hint of the joy of things to come.” What reader will
not here feel almost divine joy when there is a place in this vale of tears where
unwavering trust in God can make a man say, "At Lourdes it is a joy to flout
the microbe! We find our Lady putting the bacilli in their place?”
In this work, the author’s literary experience as senior editor handling religious matter for the Readers' Digest is clearly evident. He does not weary
the reader with long continued philosophical thought but starts off with interesting interviews and spices his more profound passages with aesthetic observations and descriptive bits. Also he ends chapters quite suggestively, using
lingering phrases that trail off easily into the next page, furnishing the effect
of non-completeness, adding incentive for the reader to read on. Cold chapters too, containing medical reports, are sandwiched between heartwarming pages
of narrative account. Oursler proves the miracles at Lourdes are miracles. At
the same time he saves his work from the dullness that might follow from an
over use of the unemotional language of science.—FERNANDO S. DAVID,
AB. '52


GEORGE BERNARD SHAW


By GILBERT KEITH CHESTERTON
BODLEY HEAD. 1948


—HE admirers of Chesterton should be grateful for his friendship with
NIGcorge Bernard Shaw, if only because it has given us this brilliant bio graphy of a clever, if somewhat shallow, man. From close association
with Shaw, G. K. Chesterton reconstructs his observations of the great
Irish dramatist. These observations, however, do not concern Shaw as a politician or a Socialist, but as a creator and critic of drama. Three aspects are
essential to an understanding of Shaw. These are presented in the first chapters, in a penetrating and sympathetic study: “The Irishman,” “The Puritan,"
and “The Progressive. The titles in themselves give a hint as to what those
clements are. They are not treated as mere ornaments, but as the directing
factors in Shaw’s psychological growth. His inability to appreciate the meaning of traditions and conventions may be traced back to his carliest youth that
was cut off from the typical Catholic Ireland of ancient tradition and living
convention and confined to a segregated atmosphere of strict but rapidly expiring Protestantism. But Chesterton’s emphasis is mainly on the "positive
elements” in Shaw’s character: his cheerfulness, his serious kind of optimism,
his Irish fighting spirit “too reasonable to be anything but fierce,” his consistency that would carry an idea even beyond the point where sane men would
dare to carry it; these and similar traits are brilliantly portrayed with that
charming Chestertonian sense of humor and fair play, better called Christian
charity.


OCTOBER, 1949


37


Shaw’s drama is the central point in this book. More precisely, it is the
message of these dramas that Chesterton is interested in, since it is through his
own dramas that Shaw, who is primarily an apologist—for Shaw—reaches hisadmirers. It is difficult to write a review of these chapters, as they themselves
are reviews—rather concentrated philosophical reviews—of the dramatist’s message. His plays are taken up one after the other, and Chesterton champions
Christian philosophy with his pen that was a sword, with a giant’s laughter
ringing on his lips.
The materialistic pessimism in “Major Barbara” which is the defeat of
the human will before the bitter experience and environment that poverty
brings, weakly balances itself on the presumption that poverty is a crime; that
even to endure it is a crime. Money is the first need. Everything must be
sacrificed for it. Poverty is the disease that degrades the poor morally, intellectually, and physically. The emancipation of the poor from poverty is imperative—by any means. Shaw does not seem to stop and consider whether the
Hich may also be degraded. Chesterton quite effectively asserts that “the
doctrine that poverty degrades the poor is much more likely to be used as an
argument for keeping them powerless than as an argument for making them
strong."
In “Joan of Arc” Shaw takes a stand against the cleries by defending them,
instead of the the orthodox manner of anti-clerics of denouncing rather directly those that condemned that popular and saintly heroine. Although this
new argument is as fallacious as the old, yet it is still refreshing to find a new
argument. It simply states that even at their best the clerics would have
condemned St. Joan because she was a heroine. But what even Chesterton
could not understand was how G. B. Shaw could have found some Protestant
element in her.
But the greatest defect in Shaw’s treatment is his complete inability to
grasp the reason for Saint Joan’s success. G. B. Shaw compares the Saint with
Napoleon in their masterly manner of achieving success in their military campaigns, as if there were no more than a Napoleonic military genius in Saint Joan.
And Chesterton refers to this: “Joan of Arc achieved far more instant and
worldly success Ithan Napoleon); but Joan of Arc achicved worldly success
because she believed in another world.”
The first great work of Shaw brought his type of philosophizing within
the reach of the common man. His second really great work was, “the
letting in of the world on to the stage . .. .” And with the letting in of the
world, he let in his materialistic, pessimistic world, because his plays are as
ugly and indecent as a gross materialist, full of crude words and sensual facts.
But he is brilliant even in a style that is bathotic.
Attached to the later editions of this biography (those issued in 1935 and
“T
after) is a chapter, The Later Phases” in which Chesterton reaffirms his old
interpretation of Shaw as still true, and again proceeds to take up the fight
against the same old Shavian principles, with a difference: this time he takes
up the pen as a Catholic convert. An autobiography of George Bernard
Shaw has recently appeared—"Sixteen Self-Sketches"—and, comparing it with
this book, first written in 1909, we discover that the Shaw of today is still
the same as the Shaw of 1909 portrayed by Chesterton.


38


  "


The biography, "George Bernard Shaw,” may be classified as another
classsic if only because it deals with changeless and immortal issues with a masterly approach. It is not only a critical study of a friend but may well serve
as a monument to an unselfish and devoted friendship. Of this book Shaw
himself made the best appraisal when he said in his typical Irish manner: “This
book, as everyone expected it to be, is the best critical study I have yet produced.”
CARMELO P. QUINTERO, JR., A.B. '53

BEAUTY UNSEEN
By LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A.B. '52
I love to watch the blush on sunset's cheeks,
To hear the tearful arias of a brook,
To climb the rhyming hills, the crags, the peaks
Of song, and at the silent stars to look;
From clouds shot through with slanting lancing streaks,
To learn from Nature's vari-dyed book
Her secrets: the earth, the sea, the sky — each speaks
Of beauty. What beauty! Lord, my heart leaps so
Words fail at glimpse of Thy glory here below!
Thy glory? nay, shadows. ... If ruby, topaz, blue
Of transient skies this mired tired heart can move
To timeless song, what then — could eyes pierce through
The light bright soft white of the Bread of Love?
ENDING AND BEGINNING
By ANTONIO P. GELLA MANUUD, A.B. '52
Tomorrow waits. Tomorrow patiently
Now leaves the hour today unshackled — free,
Now bides its time in the eternity
Of more tomorrows in tomorrow's sea.
Not so today. The agent of the act.
Today is weaver of the dreamless pact,
Which orders and decrees, that no intact
Today should follow in tomorrow's fact
Until all else is yesterday. But when
Tomorrow shall no longer wait, the ken
Of lost todays shall haunt the souls of men
As Being Uncreated wields His pen.
The scroll then sealed, the last good fight is done.
"I feel no sting; my soul, my dust are one.”"


OCTOBER, 1949


39


Reunion with Mother


By ALFREDO TENGCO, A.B. '51


would not be surprised if on
that morning in March,
U1 1944, St. Peter had peered
through the curtains of the
clouds to watch me. It was not that
I was up to some mischief as I pedaled
my bicycle along Taft Avenue, but I
am sure St. Peter must have sensed the
importance for me of that journey,
whose goal was a place that seemed to
blaze with intense suffering. Liken it
to Purgatory, if you will, but my destination, somewhere in the vicinity of
the Philippine General Hospital, was
the Cancer Institute.
To my surprise, however, I discovered that the place itself was not
gruesome, as I had wildly imagined.
Far from it. It was a quiet two-story
building with large windows that admitted plenty of sunlight and fresh air
that made it most pleasant in the early
morning. Even the smile of the nurse
at the information desk blended with
the sunlight that filled every corner
of the building. Nevertheless, the very
name of the Institute was a grim reminder that within those bright walls
the shadow of death loomed over some
thirty afflicted souls.
“Room 18 is upstairs,” I was told.
I answered, "Thank you," and
started for the upper floor. But halfway up the stairway I halted. Breathing was difficult and cold perspiration dampened my forehead. For the
frightening reason for my coming to
the Cancer Institute suddenly came
40


home to me — mother’s illness.
“Cancer, I gasped and instantly
days, forgotten days, ran through my
mind. I remembered myself standing
in agony at the sight of mother in the
X-ray room. I had shuddered with
horror when I heard the doctor pronounce the dreaded disease and saw her
cager face drop and wilt. I felt the
burning tears that trickled down her
cheeks when I kissed her good-bye. I
saw her as she left to stay in the hospital, saw her lifting her face up to
view the tender home she was to leave
behind, perhaps never again to return
to it. The ghastliness of cancer
stretched out farther. It stabbed
deeply into the lives of a husband and
children. In the dead of the night,
secing father as he lay wide awake, I
felt that in him Gcthsemani had its
little counterpart. And horror was at
its highest peak when, as a small boy,
listening behind the closed door I heard
whispers that said in a few days mother
was going to die! But somehow the
kind Lord is always with those who
suffer; and although the bitter chalice
does not pass away, heaven sends an
angel to strengthen them. When they
mourn they are comforted. Before we
realized it seven months had drifted
by.
Once more I pulled myself together
and tiptoed to Room 18. To think
that I had not seen mother for seven
months frightened me. When she had
left for the Cancer Institute I was sent
“  "


to the province to live with relatives
and during all that that time the only
contact we had with each other was an
occassional note. The doctor had ordered the separation. "For the sake
of her health, he explained.
I now reached Room 18 and found
the door half-open. At the threshold
I hesitated for a moment while my eyes
began to scan the room slowly. They
gazed at an empty bed, then shifted
to the garlands of sampaguita at the
foot of Our Lady’s statue beside the
bed, continued, suddenly stopped. I
thought I saw something with long
black hair, dressed in a thin white
gown and seated on a wheelchair.
Could that be . . . . 2 Of course not!
Something five feet four inches in
height, something reduced to nothing
but bones and a little skin could not be
the woman I came to visit. Surely
there must be a mistake. Perhaps this
was the wrong room. But then a
smile flashed from her lips! Dear
God! Did you see her smile? Did
you hear her call to me, did you see
her raise her fragile arms to me, hug
me? Did you see her kiss me? Oh,
no! There was no mistake, absolutely
no mistake. This was my mother,
her face still beautiful, but now


with the transparent beauty of one
who has suffered, her body once
healthy, but now consumed by disease
and mental anguish. After countless
diagnoses, and numberless injections,
and radium treatments, and blood
transfusions, and a most delicate surgical operation, did this woman,
nestled in my arms, still have the
strength to remember that she was a
mother?
I think so, for our words ran like
this:
“Hello ma.
“Hello darling.
(We both sniffed.)
"Did you receive Our Lord today?'
“Yes ma.
And did you remember me when
you talked to Him?”
“Yes ma.
"And did you slcep well last night?”
“Yes ma.
"And you didn’t let the cats sleep
on your bed, did you?"
At this point, St. Peter must have
drawn away from the curtains of the
clouds and turned his attention elsewhere, the conversation down on carth,
in Room 18 of the Cancer Institute,
having become too personal.


OCTOBER, 1949


41


Doodling
By ANTONIO MA. GASTON, Litt.B. '53


OODLING, you may think,
Iris a queer topic, offering
litrle room for comment. But
SEE
I assure you that it is most
interesting. For the most part, students are unaware of its possibilities
even though nearly all indulge in it
at one time or another. Their technique, however, is amateurish, for to
doodle is an art, you know, aside from
being a medium of transporting oneself to far away places when the
class matter becomes boring and when
one still has three quarters of an hour
to pass before the bell rings out for
freedom. Try it sometime and you
will discover that doodling offers a
fascination all its own. The field 1s
amazingly vast and the game admirable.


As soon as class starts I always have
the best of intentions to make the
most of it. That’s it! Concentration!
I brace myself before taking my seat
in the second row from the back.
“Easy now, I say. "It is not so hard.
Just listen to the teacher and, presto!
I’ve made the grade.” Ah! It is a
beautiful morning and the sun is wonderfully warm and the birds ecstatic
in their freedom. Determined, I
push such thoughts from my mind. I
strongly affirm that I will not let
such things distract me from what is
really important. There I am, sitting
in a position that even a scholar would
envy, prepared for anything with pen


in hand and a clean, white sheet of
paper before me.
Now the professor, with splendid
enthusiasm, starts his well planned
lecture on the Greeks—the genius of
the Greeks. All is well. “The
Greeks simply loved living—for them
life was one adventure.” I jot that
down as fast as the professor can utter
it. Again I can feel the warm sunshine. It is a glorious feeling. The
birds dart here and there; the insects
hum softly on the breezes. The professor rambles on with his Greeks and
I look down on my paper. My letters
fascinate me. I trace my o’s and t’s
over and over again. Funny lines. I
trace some more lines and I make
more intricate patterns that completely fascinate me. Grotesque, distorted
figures emerge out of circles. Dali


42


“  "


had nothing on me. Still forming
figures on my paper that used to be
clean and neat, my mind soars and
wanders through lands of many adventures known only to those who
dream. I fight, I fly in a super
sonic plane, I am a hero. I bask
in the sun with strewn husks about
me, simply following the path of my


pen without thinking. Now the
teacher pounds on the table freeing
oddles and oodles of bacteria in a cloud
of dust. That’s what he deserves—
bacteria—I think vexedly, for now I
am back in the classroom.
I have missed three centuries of
Greek living.
The bell rings.


How to Lose Friends
by PABLO SILVA, JR., A.B. '53


cannot see any reason at all
Ifor supposing, as many people do, that the useful art
9EUNO!
of losing friends is the result
of a man s stupidity and imprudence
rather than of his cleverness. Any halfwit might manage to dissolve a friendship involuntarily, but it takes a really
clever man to accomplish it with
finesse. Since you and I are by no
means of the former type, I herewith
present various methods of losing
friends, concocted by human ingenuity
and proved by experience.
One most effective method is to
apply the precepts and suggestions of
books on friendship. Get one of
those "How-to-Win-Friends-in-teneasy-lessons-for-only-10 cents-C.O.D.
booklets; or buy a copy of "How to
Win Friends and Influence People.
Then follow what these publications
recommend, and in no time at all you
will be amazed to find yourself relieved of the annoying company of
many former friends.
Or you can resort to a subtle way of
cultivating this subtle art by taking
your friend for granted. Appear unOCTOBER, 1949


concerned over him; be thoughtless
and inconsiderate, yet exacting; ignore
him at times; always act as if you are
his superior (even if it actually is the
other way around). In other words,
simply be your natural self; let go of
the leash of discipline which restrains
your temperament; cast off the thin
veil of superficiality which shrouds
your social existence; remove all frosting from your character, and poof!¬
amity disintegrates, a friend is lost.
All is simplicity itself.
There are many other possibilities,
as yet unexploited, which tend to show
the natural aversion of man for man,
hidden beneath that polished veneer of
man’s social relations; a veneer which
may be conveniently rubbed off
for the disposal of unwanted friends.
These few suggestions I have enumerated serve as but an antidote against
the droll nonsense doled out by the
exponents of universal friendship
on a purely selfish basis. Like all nonsense, such ideas are popular with the
masses. And since we are finished and
cultured men, we shall shun them,
follow sense, and thus ever seek to lose
friends.


43


NOTES ON “THE AGAMEMNON" OF AESCHYLUS
LTHOUGH Aeschylus lived five centuries before the coming of our
ASavior, his concept of justice is profoundly Christian. The theme of
retribution for sin constantly comes to the lips of the characters in
the emotionally overpowering tragedy of “The Agamemnon.”
In the conversation between Clytemnestra and the chorus of the Argive
Elders at the beginning of the play, Clytemnestra says: "Even if no sin against
the gods should hang heavily over the returning host, the wrong done to the
dead is wakeful still. Evil finds requital, even though it comes not at once.”
In turn the chorus conveys the same idea of retribution when it sings the
second choric ode: "Some one has said that the gods do not care about human
transgressions; but that man spoke impiously. For the curse on the sinner’s
daring is manifest, when his prosperity grows to excess. They continue the
same trend of thought: “The black Furies overtake a man that prospers
through injustice. They turn his course backward and drop him into the dark,
and once he is in the abyss, there is no help for him!” And then when the
herald arrives, Acschylus puts the same idea in his mouth: "For Paris and the
city that backed him cannot boast of having come off with better than he gave.
Convicted for theft and rapine, he lost the prize he had taken, and brought to
utter ruin all his father’s house; yes, with the ground it stood on! Priam’s
sons have paid double for their guilt.
The chorus resumes the same thought in the third ode: “She came to
Troy, a bride of sorrow, wafted by Fate’s wrath, that was one day to avenge
the dishonor done the guest-board and its guardian, Zcus, on the groom’s kindred
who sang the wedding hymn so lustily in their prosperous hour." Now Agamemnon pronounces, in his turn, the same message of punishment for sin when,
upon arriving in Argos, he says: “To Argos first I give due greeting, and to
our country’s gods, who have aided me to my homecoming and to the vengeance that I have taken on Priam’s city. They heard our deadly argument,
that was pleaded not with tongue but with might of arms for Troy’s destruction; and they cast their votes unanimously into the Urn of Death."
When Agamemnon is murdered by Clytemnestra the chorus makes the sad
comment: “She spoils the spoiler, the killer is paid. While God remains on
his throne, the truth remains, that to the doer it shall be done. Such is the
law.” Aeschylus has a keen insight into the unescapable sanctions of the natural law which he stresses here.
Finally Clytemnestra, after rejoicing in her deed of murder, feels qualms
of conscience regarding retribution for her sin when she muses uncasily: "All
this house’s wealth is now mine. Yet I would be satisfied with but a small


44


  "


part of it, if I could rid the house of its murderous frenzy.” She senses what
portentous calamity will befall her in the future because of her evil deed;
she sees that she must pay in a way for her crime sooner or later. For she is
a human being: and God has implanted in the nature of man the consciousness
of the natural law, the law of justice—the law of retribution for sin.
MARIO C. REYES, A.B. '50
“The Agamemnon" is a story of intrigue, of illicit love, of hate and violence. Though written for the Greek of twenty-four centuries past, it is a
play for today and for all time. For human nature is unchanged by the
passage of the years; Clytemnestra may very well be the twentieth-century
woman who carries on affairs with other men while her husband is away.
And because of this deep penetration into the complexity of noble aspiration
and uncontrolled passion that is fallen human nature, and the action that these
two involve, “The Agamemnon" is rich in unforgettable scenes and richer still
in moral value.
Agamemnon’s bloody end may be considered the deserved consequence
of his unnatural deed—his sacrificing of his daughter to the goddess Artemis
to appease the enraged deity. This deed initiates a chain of intrigue, plunges
his wife into the quagmire of adultery, and ultimately leads to his murder—
that is Aechylus counselling his audience: "Sin begets sin.” And personal
retribution is never justified in the play: Aegisthus and Clytemnestra revel
in their new-found power after the slaying of the King, but the Chorus,
which is the voice of impartial truth that runs throughout the play, stirs up
an atmosphere of impending doom, and summons Orestes that "by fortune’s
favor he come back to kill this pair” who have “defiled the land and its gods.
But what makes the tragedy truly great is its moral lesson which applies to all
mankind, for all time. Its lessons were for ancient Greece; its lessons are for
the Atomic Age we live in today.
GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, Litt.B. '52
Ranking as one of the most profound works of Greek drama is Aeschylus”
N
Orestean Trilogy, comprising “The Agamemnon,” “The Libation Pourers," and
‘The Furies," and of which “The Agamemnon" is the opening play. "The Agamemnon" begins with the execution of Atreus' two sons and concludes with the
bold assassination of Cassandra and Agamemnon by Clytemnestra, the latter’s
wife.
According to Gilbert Murray, noted critic on Aeschylus’ masterpieces, this
play has "all the splendour of language and lyrical magic of the early plays,
and the old, almost superhuman grandeur of outline, while it is as sharp and
deep in character-drawing, as keenly dramatic, as the finest work of Sophocles. Murray especially noted the Cassandra portrayal, in which the
doomed prophetess, whom none belicve, sees the vision of her own death and
the king’s, and finally, in an appalling scene, awaits her approaching fate in
the palace.
Reading the translation of the Agamemnon in English, we lose some of its
beautifully constructed phrases, but even when translated, it is studded by
unforgettable vivid lines, such as the description of the Grecks in battle, "where


OCTOBER, 1949


45


the knees bow in the dust, and the spcar snaps in the spousal rite of death,”
and the five word sketch of the character of Clytemnestra "a woman with a
man’s strong will."
JOSE A. PAMAN, Litt.B. '52
—HE Stage, next to the actor, properly belongs to the playwright, for
Ifhis exacting art requires that he be both a creator of character and a
master of situation and mood. The one-act play makes even greater
NAL
demands on the artist. Full characters are easicr born in novels and
balanced plots are wielded with greater facility in three-act plays, while mood
is created more easily in the short story. But the stage with its physical limits
of time and space requires in the playwright a totality of view that regards
actors, stage and audience in conceiving any given effect.
This challenge offered by the one-act play was met, on the actor’s side,
with varying success by the Dramatic Guild in its four presentations to date.
R
JUNIOR A.B. and LITT.B. PRESENTATION
This year’s Junior A.B.-Litt.B. "dramatic evening" offering featured an
original play written by their class moderator and Guild supervisor, the Reverend Henry Lee Irwin, S.J. Relying on the services of veteran thespians like
Jose Avellana, Onofre Pagsanhan, Francis Moran and others, Father Irwin fully
utilized the talents of his men, and judging from the reception it received,
the evening was a success.
Entitled “Thicker Than Water,” the story seemed, to most of those who
were fortunate enough to be invited to its first performance, pleasingly similar
to Dickens' “Great Expectations. It contained indced the main plot of
Dickens’ story but its originality lay in its presentation as a compact one-act
play. While the novelist spins plots through the written word, the playwright
must convey his impression through his characters and their actions. And perhaps it is precisely because of this that we find some parts of the play structurally weak.
It is the story of a young man, who, through the charity of an unknown
benefactor who had supplied him with the money for his legal studies, stood
well upon the threshold of a bright future. In love and about to marry the
sister of his good friend Benito, Felipe Rodriguez on the eve of his final bar
examination receives a call from an unknown Mr. Carluin who, as the play
develops, turns out to be his benefactor and long-lost father. From him he
learns of the crime his father committed to save his mother’s honor and of his
escape from the law. Fclipe is torn between his duty to welcome his father
and his desire for happiness with the girl he loves. Just as he has decided in
favor of duty, he receives an unexpected visit from his fiancee’s father. To
our mind, it is at this point that the play is deficient. We find no sufficient motivation indicated why Don Juan de la Paz should arrive at just that precise
moment. A police officer comes to make the arrest and the curtain closes with
Felipe pledging himself to the defense of his father, winning the admiration of
his friend Benito for his decidedly manly stand. He is consoled over the fact
that by his decision he has secured himself a still firmer place in the heart of the
girl he loves.
The closing scene showed Felipe in a musing mood, tenderly fondling the
“  "
46


hat which his father forgot—a small point of dramatic perfection that gave
the play its final note of completion.
We missed the usual vitality of Jose Avellana in his portrayal of the young
man Felipe. It is evident that he was uninspired but his grace and full command of the stage enabled him, nevertheless, to give a creditable performance.
Victor Silayan as Mr. Carluin was dignified and soft-spoken. His poses were
natural and properly spaced to heighten the elements of suspense that the play
needed badly. Onofre Pagsanghan as Benito de la Paz was a little too effusive
for a would-be brother-in-law, but his expressive delivery deserved credit.
Francis Moran provided the comic relief of the evening with his remarkable
characterization of the grandiloquent Don Juan de la Paz. Helped by his
previous stage experience, Moran utilized to the maximum his power of achieving audience contact. His hearers leaned forward to catch his every word and
his "pausing for effect" poses were excellent. The only trouble now is the
danger of his being labeled as a "type-player.” Somcone remarked, during
the reception, "He is getting to be an institution.” We found Alfredo Tengco
as Officer Vasques too posed with the result that at times we did not know
whether he was striking a posture or struggling with his lines.
THE SOPHOMORE A.B.-LITT.B. PRESENTATION
The Sophomore A.B.-Litt.B, presentation of Eugene O'Neill’s "In the
Zone,” evinced painstaking preparation, superb direction and acting, and minute
concern over seemingly insignificant details. For group morale and the desire
of all to make the project a success, as well as for the performance itself, we
offer the Sophomores the choisest of orchids.
Admittedly, "mob scenes” are the most difficult not only to direct but
also to present. We have seen many a good play needlessly ruined by an illrehcarsed "mob.” "In the Zone" presents an almost continuous "mob scene”
in the sense that there is hardly a time during the course of the play when there
are less than five men on the stage. To present a group like this successfully
without having an individual steal a scenc or step on the line of another is no
mean achievement and the evening’s presentation of this play highly rewards
the efforts expended. Once again, as director of the play, Father Irwin added
another leaf to the laurel of his "great" productions.
With the stage set in the forecastle of a ship going through a submarine
zone during the war year of 1915 while loaded with a cargo of explosives, the
curtain opened on a carefully sustained, almost visual atmosphere of suspense
as Smitty suspiciously draws a mysterious black box from his personal belongings. David witnesses this act from an effectively lit doorway while Scotty
peers furtively down from an upper bunk. From then on the plot thickens
through suspicious conjectures of the crew that there is a spy in their midst.
This is further complicated by their discovery of a porthole unexplainably left
open in a black-out zone and by the violent insistence of a swaggering but
nervous Driscoll demanding a showdown. The resulting search of Smitty’s
dunnage, however, produces nothing but a dozen well-read love-letters tenderly
preserved. After a carcfully worked climax the curtain closes on the painfully
moving scene of a beaten Smitty sobbing unashamedly and a crew shecpishly
turning in.
More than any other play offered thus far, "In the Zone” is an example


OCTOBER, 1949


47


of an expertly worked out characterization of a leading player without having
to have him speak more than a few lines. Thus, from a few love-letters read
on the stage the real character of the man Smitty was brought out with full
force and the sympathy it evoked from the audience showed its superiority
over many a long drawn-out characterization.
Acting honors go to all the members of the cast—to Tomas Tancinco as
Smitty, Manuel Roxas, Jr., as David, Antonio Manuud as Scotty, Jose Ma. Montinola as Swanson, Jeremias Jose as Ivan, Jose Paman as Jack, Victor Diaz as
Driscoll and Luis von Heiland as Cocky—who all turned out individual performances worthy of "star” ratings. Worthy of special mention however, are
Manuel Roxas, Jr., Antonio Manuud and Victor Diaz. Remembered for his
dignity and composure as Colonel Moscardo in Father de la Costa’s "Siege of
the Alcazar,” Roxas gave a brilliant performance as the suspicious David. As
the monstrously proportioned Driscoll, Victor Diaz gave a good picture of
burliness and strength. Antonio Manuud as the youthful Scotty impressed us
as having wholeheartedly enjoyed playing his role. And justly so, for an actor,
to give a creditable performance, must find this sort of attachment to the role
that Manuud has consistently brought to his portrayals on the stage.
THE SOPHOMORE PRE-LAW PRESENTATION
“The Lost Silk Hat,” in the opinion of many who braved the threatening
downpour that night, should have stayed lost! Though it may seem too harsh
a criticism to make, the Sophomore Pre-Law presentation of Lord Dunsany’s
comedy very nearly turned into a successful “flop.” The play itself is indeed
a comedy but it is certainly not a popular comedy. Typical of Lord Dunsany’s
plays, expressed in language richly coloured, “The Lost Silk Hat" was simply
too English for our local audience. Full of verbal felicities and an unusual
plot which had to depend on the clear delivery of its lines for its full effect,
the play demanded a much more delicate treatment than it was given.
Briefly, it is the story of a gentleman who forgot his silk hat in the
house of a girl with whom he had just quarreled. In order not to appear ridiculous on the streets of London, meticulously dressed—without a hat—the
problem is to recover the hat—but without seeming absurd to the girl. To
his rescue, as he thought, came first a laborer who was suspicious of the bribe
offered him, then a “clerk" who saw no reason in his pleadings, and finally a
poet,” who sought to immortalize the situation but sensitively complained that
love has been murdered” when the gentleman decided to get the hat himself,
consequently effecting a reconciliation. The curtain closes on the laborer returning with a policeman who looks perplexedly at the poet bitterly moaning
over his lost "song."
The production, however, was not entirely without merit. The set was
well planned and followed the trend in modern stage designing—that of dramatizing the salient and excluding the irrelevant, providing just enough "props"
for the audience to complete the scenery in their own imaginations. The
stage-crew should be complimented for this excellent job. The other stageeffects, however, left much to be desired.
Claudio de Luzuriaga, Jr., as the “caller” was the most excellently cast.
He was so perfcct a gentleman that his portrayal was easily the best of the
“  '
48


evening. Using fully the experience he has had in previous appearances on the
stage, he injected into the play whatever life it possessed.
As the "laborer,” Antonio Diaz looked the part. On the whole his performance was satisfactory, but he failed to establish the contact with the audience which he should have effected, so that the first wholehearted laughter
came only with the entry of Remigio Maranan as the “clerk.” His very stoop
was evocative of laughter and yet Maranan missed exploiting fully the hilarious
possibilities of striking a pose for effect. Had he utilized this more fully he
would have carried off the scene. After all, that particular scene was properly
his.
Raul Goco as the poet, was erratic. We remember him well for his past
splendid performances and we expected him, in this role as poet, to surpass in
brilliance his past appearances. At times he was good but there were times too
when he simply swallowed his lines. And a play that depends on every line
to produce its full effect is bound to fail unless every single word is clearly
and distinctly enunciated. This is especially true in good one-act plays, where
no line is unnecessary—so that a line lost is a thought lost. Walderico Valdes as
the policeman was authoritative but was a little too stiff even for a "flatfoot.”
FLORENCIO TAMESIS, JR., A.B. '50


D K

Republie of the Philippines
Departmeat of Public Worka and Communications
BUREAU OF POSTS
Manila
A
SUORN STATEMENT
(Required br Act No. 21t0)
The undertigned, MANUEL M. ROXAS, butineis manager of “  ," publithed
QUARTERLY in ENGLISH, at the ATENEO DE MANILA, after having been duly sworn in accordance with
law, hereby submits the following statement of owncrabip, manigement, circulation, etc., which is required
by Act No. 2110 as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 2011


Name
Poit-Office Addrent
Editort SIXTO K. ROXAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Atenco de Manila
Maniging Editori MAXIMO SOLIVEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Atenco de Manila
Busineto Manager: MANUEL M. ROXAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Atenco de Manila
Owner: ATENEO DE MANILA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Atenco de Manils
Publither: STUDENTS OF THE ATENEO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Atenco de Manila
Printer! CARMELO & BAUERMANN, INC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Azcarraga, Manila
Office of Publication ......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Atenco de Manila
In cane of publication other than daily, total number of copies printed and circulated of the last inue
dated Auguit, 1949:
1. Seat to paid subicribers ................................... 420
2. Sent to othera than paid subicribers ........................ 140


Total........ 600


($8d.) MANUEL M. ROXAS
Bulinest Maniger
Subicribed and aworn to before me this 26th day of Augunt, 1949, at Manila, the affiant exhibiting hit
Residence Certificate No. A-27406 inued at Manila on January 12, 1949.
(Ssd.) JOSE PADILLA
Notary Public until Dec. 31, 1949
Doc. No. 39
Page No. 68
Book No. 1
Serien 1949
(Note) This form is exempt from the payment of documentary itamp tax.


OCTOBER, 1949


49


A Pool of Enchantment


by PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52


EEP in the woods a pool of
lenchantment casting a spell
far too strong for youth to
EI
asist lay lazy and sail. Sunlight filtered through the treetops,
turned to gold a school of fish that
floated just below the surface. Birds
flew unafraid along the banks, insects
droned and butterflies danced, their
wings flashing like burnished brass.
When you came back years later,
irresistibly drawn by long-treasured
memories, you were amazed to see how
the old swimming hole had shrunk.
Why, it was only a tiny thing-muddy
and sluggish and weed-grown. Yet in
your mind’s eye you still saw it as an
unforgettable spot around which most
of your childhood’s sunny days revolved. It recalled carefree hours
when you trudged barefooted down a
shadowy lane, keen and hungry for
that first ccstatic plunge.
The years might have dimmed many
memories; names and faces might have
grown hazy and hard to recall. But
the old swimming pool remained bright
and fresh and clear. You remembered
every turn, every tree along the path
which drew you like a magnet to the
water’s edge.
At dawn and at nightfall, the pool
was the abode of a placid forest silence. Then suddenly in the afternoon, it would be invaded by a half
dozen boys, who tossed off their


50


clothes and stood for a few moments
naked and a little shivery on the bank.
Then one would climb up on the
homemade springboard and take a
header. Soon all of them would be
splashing and shouting and roughhousing, as though the placid silence
were an enemy to be frightened away.
Perhaps the provincial boy of yesterday was poor, as wealth is usually
measured. But his life was so full of
pleasant things that he did not realize
that anything was lacking. And, indeed, he had incalculable riches—freedom, fresh air and sunshine, bubbling
health and spirits, miles of ever-changing landscape and, best of all, the old
swimming hole. What did it matter
if the water was sluggish and muddy?
Who cared if his swimming stroke was
little more than a dog paddle?
Stripped of his clothes and of cares, he
could splash and shout to his heart’s
content.
When school hours were over he
made a beeline along with other boys
for the pool, even if it meant sneaking
away from work around the house.
If occasionally upon return, he was
given a half-hearted whipping for
leaving tasks undone, it was all well
worth while. And the next day if it
were possible, he’d be glad to sneak off
again for another afternoon of sheer
delight.


“  "


A PREDICTABLE TEAM


EL


T is said that our basketball varsity is unpredictable. On the contrary.
Warning is given that it is a fast team. Correct. It is praised as a
'fighting” team. It is not always such. Has it the talons to claw
he championship? Absolutely. These are my opinions. Sce if they
are yours, too.
Our team is predictable: as much as a child is. Veterans in basketball,
the members of our team have not matured in it. This lack of maturity is
manifested, among other ways, in inability to play a steady game. Usually the
games of our team run like this: an inspired start which gives it a descrved
lead, then a let-down, allowing the opponent to catch up by about the fourth
quarter, which shakes the Blue Eagle, loosens a few feathers so that the Eagle
squawks tremulously, spreads its wings, readies its talons, and pounces upon its
enemy. This final fight gives the famous "die-hard” name to the Atenco.
You and I have seen games where this final ferocious surge has been either too
late, or too much for our fatigued team, so that the various Manila newspapers
report the following day that "the dic-hard Ateneans died again.
Our team does not fight to the end but at the end. In tight games the
let-down comes in the third quarter. This let-down is noticcable in our defense. Our boys seldom let a man bypass them, but then they do not raise
their hands to stop one-handed flipshots performed in front of them. When
they use a zone defense as they often do now, our boys during their let-downs
do not return to their back court to form the zone defense as soon as they
make a goal.


Sometimes this let-down occurs in the first quarter. Fans call it overconfidence. It is identical with the let-down after a comfortable lead, only
more iminature, because before coming to grips with the opponent our team
is alrcady under-estimating him.
I have purposely understood the fighting spirit to mean not only effort
but also good playing, simply because to fight heroically without using one’s
brains is of no practical value, as was evident in the Atenco-La Salle game. I
have it from “Chito” Calvo who witnessed that game that the Atenco team
lost its head. And against La Salle our boys fought, as far as effort was concerned, to the point of exhaustion.
Ours is a fast team. It is faster than Mapua’s which is one big reason
why it defeated the Cardinals. Atenco and Mapua have natural speeds. On
the other hand La Salle plays a deliberately slow game. Playing fast as they did
against Atenco and Mapua, the Green Archers had to cope with the speed of


OCTOBER, 1949


51


the Eagles and the Cardinals. Mapua won and Atenco lost. The Blue Eagle
outsped the Green Archer’s arrow but the Eagle’s brain did not guide it to
victory.
As long as our men avoid the disaster of losing control of themselves, the
Atenco team with its speed, teamwork, shooting power, and fighting spirit,
the fighting that sweats out a good game from the initial minute through the
four quarters to the final blast of the gun, has the talons of a winning team,
a champion team. Nothing can stop it.
ROBERT WILSON, A.B. '52


-P &¬


SPORTS A QUARTER OF A CENTURY AGO
Dear Atencans,
EMEMBERING is a good thing. Many a time we depend on our own
or other people’s experiences to guide us in our undertakings. Moreover, as a general rule, almost everybody enjoys reading articles about
the past. I don’t know why. Maybe man is naturally curious.
Well, it really makes no difference.
You see, while reading over copies of the ATENEO MONTHLY issues of 1924
and 1925 I came across bits of sports news which can be considered part of the
scrolls of glory of the Ateneo. Indeed these news items are real treasures ...
Tuesday, June 24, 1924, marked the call to arms for the Varsity and High
School basketball teams. Twenty-five enthusiastic lads answered the call.
Some were skinny, some were stout, and some were short. But they were good
players . . . The Catholic Basketball League, formed by the Santo Tomas
University sporting officials, had San Beda Collegc and the Ateneo grappling for
the championship. Ateneo won the first game, lost in the second encounter
and finally emerged as the Catholic League champions.
We owe much to Father Goggin for the high standard of athletics in
the college and also to Father John Hurley, S.J., the originator of our beloved
and well-known post. The departure for the States of these two priests meant
a loss in Ateneo sports activities. But one who has done much in the sports
field is still with us, Father Henry MeCullough, S.J., at present philosophy professor in the college department. He and Father Hurley represented the Ateneo
at the meeting called by Regino Ylanan, then U.P. athletic director. Out of
that meeting was born the most popular of all basketball leagues in the Islands
today, the NCAA.
Some few days ago in the course of an interview with Father MeCullough,
I expressed surprise at the way he remembered Ateneo sports activities during
those years. His memory was amazing. Though he confessed that he couldn’t
remember exactly the dates and minute details of every sports event, Father
MeCullough supplied me with very enlightening data. He told me that it is
his impression that the Ateneo was the school which organized cheering (Brother
Ateneans, we surely have an example to emulate). Father James Martin, S.J.


52


“  "


was the combination Coach-Moderator of Athletics in 1924-1925. Incidentally, Father Martin introduced the shock-troops in the Philippines. Shock
troops are the members of a team who play for one full quarter or more. The
reason for calling them shock troops is that these players play only to tire the
opposing team, even to the extent of sacrificing points. When the opponents”
first team is tired out, the first team of the other side comes in. They don’t
guard or dribble. They just put in all their goals in order to make up for the
loss incurred when the shock troops were in the court. Father Martin was
one coach who disliked dribbling or bouncing the ball—quite different from
the brand of Ateneo basketball today.
The first Ateneo Midget team won the first NCAA Midget championship
trophy. That team was then called the Ateneo "Pequinines. In a game
during the Christmas holidays of 1924, the midget team scalped the San
Andres tots. Santiago Sanchez, skipper, piled up thirty-eight points. That
was quite a record, in fact a new record. The Grade School diary read,
"December 11th... we could not have had a better day as there was no sun,
but just a few sprinklings of rain, and the events were run off smoothly and
systematically due to the good work of the teachers.” The event was the
Track and Field meet held at Wallace Field. On the fifteenth and sixteenth
of January 1925, the high school and college track and field meet featured
three new stars, Antonio Jerez, Francisco Garay and Severo Able. Garay negotiated the fifteen meter dash in five and one-fifth seconds, breaking the
world’s record by two-fifths of a second. Jerez took seven first places of the
thirteen events he entered . . . . The sports quote of those years was the familiar,
“They can beat us once, but twice ... never!”
In the old days, fighting spirit was a factor to be reckoned with. This is
a heritage we should uphold. Clear illustrations of this spirit are found in the
pages of the ATENEO MONTHLY. All throughout the editorial and sports
pages, articles are seen which prove that fighting spirit does not consist in
quantity but primarily in quality. Quality was the distinguishing mark of
their spirit, and this was carried on not only in athletics but in academic as well
as the practical ventures of the students. Although basketball games were
played in Nozaleda Park, a dusty, hard ground court, attendance of the student
body was almost a hundred per cent. They were there to cheer and help the
team to victory. As a parting word, dear Ateneans, the classes of 1924-1927
paved the way for us and surely we will never ler them down.
MANUEL M. CUENCA, A.B. '50


OCTOBER, 1949


53


Aunt Suzanne


By ANTONIO B. JOAQUIN, A.B. '53


NE bright July morning, I
Olhappened to visit the house of
a friend, Danny, which was
Oan the saest kon mian.
and I was surprised to find at the door
an old lady, evidently a new-comer,
with all her bundles beside her. Murmuring wearily in French and looking
somewhat bedraggled, she sat on the
sofa and gazed at me. My interest
was aroused, for her clothes were rather out-dated and conservative and
she wore the same hair-do as my grandmother did, but her speech was entirely different from Danny’s broken
French-English. That was the first
time I had heard idiomatic French
spoken, and, as the visitor talked and
gestured artistically, I caught the word
—"Paree” and I unconsciously repeated it, for I had often wished to learn
the correct pronunciation of French.
She suddenly stopped talking and
turned to me, amicably saying "Paris
Paris, oui. Evidently, she could
not speak English, and from that time
on she just smiled at me whenever she
felt like saying something but
couldn't.
That was a start of a queer vacation
for Tata Suzanne who had come all
the way from France to spend three
months here with her niece and
nephew Perhaps her seemingly strange
way of acting and speaking were the
ordinary ways in which people lived
and conversed in France. But Danny’s
54


sister Nena soon began to notice her
eccentricities. She told me that Tata
Suzanne (Tata meaning aunt" in
French) kept forgetting where she had
placed her things, and that she could
not keep her comb in a definite place
—no wonder her hair is rather witchlike. "And whenever she eats, said
Nena, she slurps the soup, licks her
fingers, and gulps down her food
fast. "It is probably because of her
age, I told Nena, that she is acting
that way.
Tata Suzanne was terribly handicapped by her inability to speak English. My sympathies were aroused on
one occasion especially, when she came
home from her job at the French Legation, with her skirt and stockings spattered with mud. I happened to be
talking to Danny when she arrived,
half-hysterical, and almost in tears,
muttering in a high pitched voice
something about "un voleur.” While
Danny and I gazed at the mud-spattered skirt, she started blurting out
phrases flavored with brisk gesticulations that seemed to show that she had
been robbed and pushed to the ground.
Finally, Danny gathered that Tata Suzanne had been relicved of her handbag which contained quite a large
amount of money, and that, after being robbed, she had been pushed by the
snatcher” into a convenient ditch.
Luckily, she was not hurt, and she
yelled “Robber!” to the people around
“  "


but, since it was quite dark, the robber
had easily escaped. Besides, she had
cried out in French. After a few seconds, when the people realized that she
was not just wading for fun in the
ditch, they had come to help her out.
When I heard this, I pitied poor
Tata Suzanne for the barbaric treatment that had been dealt her. But in
spite of the unpleasant experience she
had just had, she continued to come
home late, and to go shopping alone.
She certainly was one of those women
who will not give up her habits because of difficulties.


The very last experience she had before she left for France, was the
merry-go-round" ride in a jecpney.
She heard the conductors yelling
Quiapo” every time she went downtown, and she also must have heard
about "Paco. She confused the two
names and one day said "Paco” to the
conductor instead of “Quiapo.” The
driver nonchalantly brought her to
"Paco. After a complicated few
hours of traveling about, she finally
reached a district familiar to her.
Small incidents like these, however,
made no change in a woman with a
character as strong as Tata Suzanne’s.


OOo

OCTOBER. 1949


55


ne 1, 7. 3
WDecemben, 1919


E


LgA





A MAGAZINE OF THE


ch ATEEG
VOLUME ONE * NUMBER THRE


THE STAFF


Editor-in-Chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . SIXTO K. ROXAS, A.B. '50
Managing Edifor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51


SECTION EDITORS


Rodolfo Olivares, A.B. '5 1
Onofre Pagsanghan, A.B. '51
Fernando David, A.B. '52
Florencio Tamesis, A.B. '50


Antonio P. G. Manuud, A.B. '52
Enrique Esquivel, Jr., A.B. '51
Robert Wilson, A.B. '52
Jose Tuason, Jr., Litt.B. '51


Norberto Marchadesch, Jr., A.B. '51


ASSOCIATE EDITORS


Mario C. Reyes, A.B. '50
Francisco Borja, A.B. '51
Hector Hofilena, A.B. '5 1


Hector Quesada, A.B. '5 1
Gregorio Brillantes, Litt.B. '52
Erncsto Gorospe, A.B. '53
Emmanuel Torres, A.B. '53


Business Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . JUANITO ORDOVEZA, A.B. '50
Cireuiation Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. MANUEL ROXAS, JR., A.B. '52


  , a literary magazine supplement to The Guidon, is published
four times annually by the College of Arts and Sciences of the Atenco de Manila. Its editorial
offices are at the Atenco de Manila, Padre Faura Strect, Manila, Philippines; its publication
office at Cormelo & Bauermann, Inc., 2017 Azcarraga Manila. Subscription rates are four
pesos ycarly, single copics onc peso.
This publication was entered in the Post Office of Manila as second class mailing matter on
September 10, 1949.


2


“  '


GENERAL LITERATURE


LORIERE
DECEMBER, 1949
E


THE CONTENTS


Page
EDITORIALS
4
Bethlehem in Our Civilization ........................ S. K. R.
The Wise Men ............ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. V. S. 6


ESSAYS


Peace on Earth .......... . . . . . . . . .
For Better Things ................
Christmas Is Forever ...............
Our Hometown ...................
Looking Back ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . .


. . . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Yap
. . . . . . Gabino Mendoza, Jr.
. . . . . . Onofre Pagsanghan
 . . . . . . . . . . . . Cesar Concio
. . . . . . . . . . Jose Tuason, Jr.


SHORT STORY
A Boy and Christmas ....
And Heaven and Nature Sang
Every Valley Shall Be Filled .
Gift for a Godson ................. .


 . . . . . . Aurelio B. Calderon
. . . . . . . Fernando S. David
 . . . . . . . . . . Rodolfo Tupas
. . . . . Sebastian B. Santiago


VERSE
Sonnct to a Star ......... . . . . . . . . . .
Tonight is Christmas .............
Lullaby of the First Christmas .
A Christmas Tear ............. . . . .
Birth of Christ ........... . .
A Christmas Prayer .............
Mary’s Hymn to the Christ Child
His Face Undimmed ....
Re-Birth ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Christmas .......... . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bathos ...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


. . . . . . Carmelo P. Quintero
 . . . . . . . . . . . Percival Olarte
.... Antonio P. G. Manuud
. . . . . . Carmelo P. Quintero
Guillermo L. del Castillo
. . . . . . . . . . Hector Hofilena
. . . . . . . . . . . . . Romulo Lara
. . . . . . . . Aurelio Calderon
. . . . . . . Leonidas V. Benesa
. . . . . . . . . . . Percival Glarte
Onofre Pagsanghan


FEATURES
Campus ............... ... . . . . . .
Drama.................. . .
BookS........


Enrique L. Esquivel, Jr.
... Mario C. Reyes
O
. . . . . . . . . Emmanuel Torres
Feliciano Jimenez, Jr.
Ricardo A. Henson
Eladio Aldecoa, Jr.


12
19
27
29
38


8
14
22
31


7
10
11
13
18
21
26
28
30
37
41


35
39
42


DECEMBER, 1949


3


BETHLEHEM IN OUR CIVILIZATION


Very few people nowadays attend to the banalities and platitudes of
Christmas messages. If, however, you were to go up to some fair-minded politician (if there are any of the breed left) and catch him off-guard with the
question: “Would it not be wonderful if we could find some potent force
which could temper the passions of our pcople and our leaders,
Democracy guide their reason, protect their political judgment and experand
ience against the illusions of selfishness and fear, give them courChristmas age and compassion for their fellow men and create a fraternal
bond that would impel every man to curb his selfish instincts
and look to the common good?” If you did that, he would, perhaps, smile wistfully and sigh: “Yes, son. But this is no time for dreaming — our country
faces serious problems.
You might then shake his hand vigorously and wish him a merry Christmas. He has reason to be merry on Christmas day. For we bave such a potent force. It was brought to the world by a little Child who lay in a manger . . . on Christmas day.
Next you might go perhaps to Lake Success, to the United Nations offices
and confront one of the more reasonable delegates with this question: "Would
not all your troubles be solved if you could find a kind of
Christmas and love which, when extended to all men, would transform
their very life and integrate all humanity into a community
the
United Nations of peoples and nations without destroying the traditions,
self interest and pride necessary for a fervent nationalism?"
And thinking of all the headaches and fruitless argumentation such a reality
would save, he would smile sadly, pat your shoulders and walk away in silence.
You might wish bim a Merry Christmas too. For we bave such a Love. He
was born in a stable . . . on Christmas day.
Then you might visit one of the good pagan professors of some American
university, one who mourns the decadence of our age, and say to him: “Mr.
Sorokin, one of your famous sociologists, has analyzed your Western Culture
and found that it generates egoistic forces of war, that it produces predomin

O much does the world need the gifts which Christmas brings that we
can say, though with more reverence than Voltaire, that if there were
no Christmas, mankind would find it necessary to invent onc.


4


  "


antly selfish, avaricious and uncreative personalities as well as criminals. He
is convinced that if there is to be a peaceful, harmonious, coChristmas operative and creative social order, this culture must have a
and
change of its premises, its basic values and its major institutions
Our Culture into components that will generate forces of mutual aid and
love.
“If you could premise a culture on a conception of man with all his spiritual nobility and strength clevated to an infinitely higher level and dignity,
with a spiritual destiny to be sought not in this life but in the life after death,
would you not have a creative culture based on mutual aid and love?”


No matter what he answers, wish the good professor a merry Christmas.
Tor man does have such a spiritual destiny and his nature was elevated when
a Child was born . . . on Christmas day.


So the world has good reason to be merry on Christmas day. But the
world is not. It is still afraid. Its nations sit around a council table eycing
one another with fear and suspicion. Man has erred. He has
A Terrible
sinned terribly. And his guilty conscience has ruled out ChristSin
mas from his sessions. He has ruled out peace and good will.


But the first gleams of dawn are breaking through the darkness. In many countries men are returning to the Faith. In France and Belgium there is a resurgence of Christmas and its spirit, a return to Bethlchem.
In the United States there is a trend back to the manger of
Christ, back to faith and prayer, back to our spiritual values,
The Star
of
back to the God of Divine Love. Writer Evelyn Waugh preBethlchem dicts that this Amcrican nation may become the bulwark of the
Catholic faith in the coming era. The star of Bethlchem is
glowing brighter and this time it is the wise men of the West who are following its light.


But in the Philippines we are still on the road leading away from the
Faith. It is true, we have not gone very far, but we are turned in the wrong
direction. The decaying Western Culture has set us on the wrong path, the
path that leads away from our sacred tradition of faith, the road that leads
not to the stable of Bethlchem but to the Palace of Herod. It is not yet too
late. We can still retrace our steps. And as we have followed
the West in its erring path, let us follow it now in its return.
Light and
Shadow
Many of us still hold the true spirit of Christmas. Many
in the
of us still belicve that the tottering stable of Bethlchem is more
Philippines
enduring than the sturdy buildings of our decaying civilization.
And we have reason to rejoice. What if man has erred? He
is realizing that his errors are too evil to be true—and that the gifts of Christmas arc too good to be false.


S. K. R.


DECEMBER, 1949


5


THE WISE MEN


HE Magi were men of good will, scekers after learning, and — what
brought them into known history — seekers of a Star. Their becoming known for this seems strange, for all men are seekers, cach after
what appcals to him as worthwhile in life.


The stars we follow are many and varied. For some there is
Scekers the star upon the coronct of a king — the glitter and pomp
of a Star of power. Others are lured on by the pale red gleam of the star
of Mars to war and glory and death. And many have sought for
and loved the star that glows in the cyes of woman.
Yes, we follow many stars, but no one calls us wise men for that. There
must be a mistake somewhere. Is it possible that the mistake is ours? Perhaps the Magi were wise men not simply because they followed a star
Wise but because they followed the frue Star. For the true Star came and
Men shone over the cities and towns of men. Some saw it and shook their
heads and went their way; others did not sec the Star, for they were
blinded by the glitter of gold or the hardened masks of their own hypocrisy.
But these threc men saw the Star and knowing that it presaged a great event
to which it beckoned them, they left all and followed it. Over the mountains
and over the desert, over the desert and over the mountains led their quest.
The journey was not casy but their hopes were great. And what did they find
at journey’s end? A shining palace whercin the King the Star had whispered
of sat enthroned in glory? No, they entered a small stable cave and looked
on a Child and His Mother. They bcheld no royal court nor army terrible
with banners, but only a few sheep and oxen and some awed, adoring shepherds.


It was not even a big cave — it was such a little one. And the
God Become King — He Whom the Star had proclaimed to be the Saviour
Man of the world — He was such a little, little Child. What a disappointment, we might think, for aged and hoary Melchior, for
bluff Balthasar, for youthful Gaspar! But no, they were not disappointed. For
the Star had not lied to them. They saw the power that lay bencath the humility. They beheld God become man; Eternity become time; Master become
servant; Creator become creature — Divinity become incarnate. And they -
these three wise men, these kings — knelt down and adored.
More than ninetcen hundred years have passed since then. The so-called
"wise men" of the modern world have gone a long way since then. We have
progressed. We have progressed to such an extent that we have invented weapons mighty enough to destroy all the externals of our progress. Symbolically
the Star shines again over the modern cities and towns of men. Some
Again, of us do not even see it, for we are, as those of old, blinded by the petty
a Star things of carth. Some of us do see it but we shake our heads and go
our way. And some of us, seeing that the Star beckons, decide to follow. But when we come to journey’s end and see a stable, we begin to advance
more reluctantly. When we stoop to enter the cave and see only a Child and


“  "


His Mother, only a few oxen and a handful of shepherds, many of us say, "That
is not for me," and we go away — leaving the manger, leaving the stable.
We who go away deem ourselves wise, perhaps, because we have gotten
away. Within the stable we have glimpsed the shadow of the cross; upon the
hands and feet of the Babe we have seen the imprint of the nails and we say:
“That is not for me. For we do not like the humble stable, we
The Truly do not like the heavy cross, we cannot bear the sight of the wounds
Wise of Christ. We go away and follow other stars. And, of course,
since we will not share in the humility of Christmas and the pain
of Good Friday, we cannot share in the joy and triumph and resurrection of
Easter. We, thinking ourselves truly wise, go away and follow other stars and
find, too late, that each one is a falling star. The only star that does not fall,
the only star that shines forever, is the Star of the Magi, of the wise men, the
Star that so many of us reject — the Star of Christ.


M. V. S.


Sonnet to a Star
Ly CARMELO P. QUINTERO, A.B., '53


I oflen wandered far and blind adown
The midnigbt realm of thought, forever sborn
Of life-light, passion bound, where pagan clown
Or wise man gropes in bopeless bope of morn:
And under heathen skies I dreamt of peace —
Of fairy stars on lowly beigbts — to hold,
To conquer, and command; but fancied bliss,
I kuew not bow, gripped all in grayness, cold.
So all life's praises were but tinsel notes,
That played ligbt dirges on a broken chord,
Till saw I through yon starry veil of motes,
The Star of Bethlehem proclaim'God’s Word.
For like kings we, that drift with fickle wind,
Will find the Star beyond life's troubled mind.


DECEMBER, 1949


Sbort Story Contest: First Place


A Boy ana Christmas
By AURELIO B. CALDERON, Litt. B. '52


¡AWN was breaking. When I
Dlwoke up, the bells of the
church were setting up a terde din, ya thoy cculdi not
drown the noise on the streets coming
from the shouts and laughter of the
people and from the clatter and clang
of calesas. Mother said, Asiong,
wake up! We must all go to church,
for today is Christmas.
A simple breakfast of steaming rice
and tinapa and a cup of black coffee
was all our little nipa-hut could offer.
I remembered that in school my teachcr, Mr. Valdes, had told me that coffee
is bad for little children like me, but
my mother didn’t buy chocolate and
sometimes we couldn’t afford even to
buy coffee. "We arc poor people," my
mother would say everytime I reminded her of what my teacher Mr. Valdes
said to us his pupils about coffee, and
don’t you ever tell me such silly things
again!"
Last night, my father came home
with a new white polo shirt. It had
been bought at the feria or gallery.
In the show window was a red shirt
and I liked the red shirt better, but
my father said it was rude to wear red
shirts. Only rich people wear rich
colors, my father said; and we are
poor people, my father, my mother,
and I.
I think, however, that the red shirt
cost more than the white shirt and
that this is why my father didn’t like


it. I also remember my father saying
that the good Savior doesn’t like loud
colors such as red, and, because it is
His birthday, I must not wear the
red shirt lest I be rude to Him. But
when I reminded him that the saints
in church are clothed in red and violet silks, my father said, "Never
mind, son. So I wore my new white
polo shirt and old khaki pants and
brown, worn-out shoes. Only a few
months ago the shoes had been white,
but the streets in our town are dusty
during the dry season and muddy during the rainy season.
There was a flow of people towards
the village church. Old men were
wearing cerradas or silk camisas, while
their daughters wore tight-fitting
dresses after the latest styles and their
sons were wearing new shirts, new
pants, new shocs—so different from
my old clothes, except for the white
polo shirt. I was going to church to
pray, to pray not for new shirts or
new shocs or a new home but to pray
that my father would find a better job
than carrying baskets and baggage for
cther people in the market. You see,
my father is what people call a cargador.
The morning air was cool, and I
walked fast while the church bells
kept ringing and ringing, calling rich
pcople and poor people, and children
and mothers to the Christ Mass. Rosita was a classmate of mine and she


8


“  "


passed by me in a berlina with her
father. Dust rose in the air from the
berlina and the people walking in the
street covered their noses while I covered my eyes. Children like Rosita
woke up that morning and saw near
their beds stockings full of gifts and
in the sala pointed trees heavy with
toys and small boxes like those I had
seen in a movie the other night when
my friend the policeman took me in
face. My mother said that such
stockings full of gifts and Christmas
trees are not needed in life; but when
I said I just wanted to experience how
it felt to have so many nice things,
like toys and bicycles and new shoes,
my father had said,
“Never mind, son.
That’s what he always says. I passed
by the feria where
my f a ther had
bought the polo
shirt the night before and I again
saw the red fountain pen which I
thought I needed

because my teacher, Mr. Valdes,
said I needed one for writing. It would
cost only fifty centavos and maybe if
I were Rosita’s brother and her father
were my father I would have that
fountain pen and my teacher, Mr.
Valdes, would say, "You are a good
boy, Asiong. Now you can learn to
write like the rest of the boys. But
then Rosita’s father is not my father
because my father carried things in
the market for other people while her
father rode in a big, big car.
The door of the church was wide
but the crowd was so thick that I
could not go in. In front of the
movic-house I had seen a boy who
could pass under the legs of tall men


and enter a movie. I tried now to do
the same thing, although the church
is not a movie, but I thought of my
new shirt so I waited and pushed, and
waited and pushed, until at last I was
in the church. Inside, the people
were singing the Alleluia, the meaning of which I didn’t know then, but
when they started to sing Silent Nigbt,
I proudly jomed the chorus, for this
song I was taught in school.
Outside the church after Mass the
air was fresh and I felt better. I saw
boys setting off firecrackers on the
street and when a loud boom filled the
air the boys laughed aloud. Then I
a saw my good friend
Pedro, the son of
the Pintakasi manager, and I asked
him where he was
goig, and he said,
"I am going to
ask for aguinaldos. And I asked,
"From your godfather and godmother and aunts and
uncles?” “Yes,” he
said, "and also
from many other
*
S.ONea " people. Are you
not ashamed to ask other people for
agumaldos?” I asked and Pedro replied,
Why should I be? It is Christmas today, is it not?” And I remembered
suddenly that I needed a fountain pen
because my teacher, Mr. Valdes, said
so and it would cost onty fifty centavos and I said, "I will go with you,
Pedro. And my friend said, "Yes,
come then.
Pedro and I went first to his godfather who was a short man and was
holding a red rooster, and Pedro kissed
his hand and I also kissed his hand.
He gave ten centavos to Pedro and
five to me. We didn’t even say, "MaLigayang Pasko po,” but he told us to


DECEMBER, 1949


9


eat ricecakes in the house. We went
next to Pedro’s godmother who was
selling fruit in the market and we did
the same kissing of the hand, and she
gave thirty centavos to Pedro and ten
to me. She also gave us an apple each.
There were many houses where people were noisy and happy and laughing
and smoking cigars; and at the Chinese stores there were musicians playing violins and guitars and saxophones
and the Chinese store owners gave the
musicians twenty centavos each. Seeing all these, Pedro approached a Chino
and asked for an aguinaldo right away
and the Chino gave him five centavos
and he gave me five centavos too.
Now our pockets were heavy with
coins and fruits and candies.
Finally it was afternoon and we


were tired but happy because our
pockets were heavy, and Pedro went
home to the barrio and I went to the
feria and bought the red fountain pen
which my teacher, Mr. Valdes, said I
needed for writing.
That night I could not eat my
supper of steaming rice and fried bangos because my stomach was heavy
with cakes and fruits and candies, and
besides I was continually thinking of
my new fountain pen and my teacher,
Mr. Valdes.
In my sleep I dreamed of a shining
red snake and I dreamed of bells and
my father and mother laughing and
my teacher, Mr. Valdes, was saying,
'You are a good boy, Asiong. Now
you can start learning to write with
your red fountain pen.


Tomight Is Christmas
By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B., '52
Tonight is Christmas and I think of thee:
I cannot stay these many feelings wailing
Within my heart in this serenity
There is power in this peace compelling
My vagrant thoughts to wander where you are;
A sighing in the silence 1 shall be,
Low light of lanterns, shimmer of a star
Twinkle of a tinsel around your Christmas tree.
My thoughts will haunt thee, my beloved, tonight;
1 shall be a lone shadow lingering
Where children play in the soft Christmas light.
And in the flood of carols that they sing
Love will conquer me midst the revelry
And I will love even your hate of me.


10


  "


Poctry Contest: First Pla.


Lullaby of the First Christmas
ty ANTONIO P. G. MANUUD, A.B., '52


Sleep, Jesu, sleep -
Is it the whining wind that frigbts Yon so -
This secret ghost that strokes the palm tree's mane
With icy fingers? Or the ecrie glow
Of candlelight? (Is it some dream of pain?)
Hush, darling, do not weep
But softly, sleep.
Husb, Jesu, hush -
'Tis not the desert wind You feel: but lo,
The velvet brush of angel wings. The gleam
You see is golden stardust cherubs throw
About, rejoicing. (Banish now this dream.)
My darling, do not weep.
Soft! gently sleep.
Slcep, Jesu, sleep —
Seck not yet to shake the world. Above
Its tears and laugbter reign—and never ccase—
Hereafter. Reign in the arms of Mary’s love
This night. (Soft on ber bosom, dream of peace.)
Quietly slumber decp,
My darling, slecp.


DECEMBER, 1949


11


Essay Contest: First Plaec


Peace on Earth
By EMMANUEL YAP, Litt.B. '53


—THEY died on Christmas Day.
TIsome called them Huks.
 Some called them Communists. On the day before
they died I had called them friends and
had given them food. It was food
that had lured them from the safety
of their swamps, lured them to death.
When they received it, they prayed to
God, thanking Him and asking His
forgiveness. "Dios ko patawarin mo
kami, they prayed. “God forgive us.
If this is the praycr of a Communist,
then I am a Communist.
I knew these people well, for they
were our "kasamaks,” who wore bolos
around their hips day coming and day
going; who lived contentedly in the
poverty of their farms; who prayed.
They were people who all lived in similar houses, structures of wood and
nipa with a bamboo ladder, with onc


room used for dining and sleeping and
living, with just one lamp hanging bencath a ceilingless roof. These people
went to Mass three or four times a
weck. They prayed reverently, because they had faith in the omnipotence of Almighty God and in the
Catholic Church of His Son. These
pcople prayed more reverently than
most of the so-called cultured people
that I have known.
To these pcople their way of life.
though not the best, was good. A life
better, they knew, than the life of the
over-wealthy, better than that of the
highest ranking officers. And why?
Because they had no guilt to hide, no
shame to keep hidden in their hearts,
no hypocrisy in their souls. Their
life was simple as the life of Bethlehem. All they knew was work and
more work and home and church.
Christmas was their happiest day, the
day they went out riding carts pulled
by carabaos; when they dressed up in
their finest clothes and serenaded their
friends and loved ones; when they held
their simple processions, goig from
door to door, asking lodging for Mary
and Joseph; when they ate their medianocbes and checrily half-sung, halfshouted their Merry Christmas. Those
were the happy days for them, days
when peace was king. No guns, no
hideouts, no constabulary to fear.
The day I gave them food, the day
I saw them die—how different! They


12


“  '


wore rags instead of their simple Sunday best. They used guns in place
of bolos. Therr bodies were thin, their
faces skull-like, their eyes deeply
sunken into the sockets. They were
living skeletons who had come out of
the swamps. There was no Mass for
them, no sermon, no medianoche, no
Christmas.
Looking at their bodies wet with
blood, dirty with mud, covered with
bruises, their figures pitiful to behold
yet eloquent in their accusation, 
could not but contrast their Christmases of past years with this, their
last, a Christmas filled with intrigue,
betrayal and death. I saw them in
my minds eye, running through
swamps, lurking in the dripping forests, trembling whenever a leaf
trembled, panicked whenever a twig
snapped. I pictured them weary and
afraid, ured, hungry, yet always on
the move with death and his seythe


barely a step behind. I saw them
falter as their strength failed. I heard
their cries as death in the guise of a
PC trooper swung his seythe. They
fell, but as they did so, they turned
their faces to heaven and from their
throats parched with thirst came a
last plaintive appeal: "Dios ko patawaran mo kami.” “God forgive us."
On this Christmas Day of 1949
there are tnousands more like those
whom I saw dic on that Christmas Day
three years ago. Driven there by what
oppressions? Lured there by what promises? Held there by what fears?
Communists or Huks or heroes?
Whose the greater guilt? Theirs?
The oppressors? The promisers? The
fear-makers? Must they stay there
in their swamps until they, like their
comrades, find their peace only in
death?
And on earth peace to men of good
will.


A Christmas Tear
Ly CARMELO P. QUINTERO, A.B., '53
A rose on that first morn
Dropped a diamond dew;
A Maid pure lily born
Shed a tear God knew;
Swcet Flow'r thy pearly bead
For Man's rebirth is seed -
The star of martyr's creed .
That on Calvary grew.
DECEMBER, 1949


13


Short Story Contest: Second Place


And Heaven and Nature Sang
by FERNANDO S. DAVID, A.B. '52


T had been a little awkward
Ilthe last time they were together, he and Cecy. She, who
 ney lin so vel, vas cencerned about this new unhappiness of
his. Oh, he had tried to explain, but
she no longer seemed to see things as he
now saw them. To her, all in life
was beauty and goodness ... How
could he make clear to her the growing, absorbing realization that was
closing in on him as he neared the ending of his college days? — that life,
which had always seemed so lighthearted and joyful, was really not so,
but was — for so many — a journey
through sickness and poverty and
struggle toward bitterness and disillusionment. For the beggar, for the
street vendor, for all the poor... and
yet the rich man in his Cadillac...
"Freddie,” she had said, "don’t be
so grim. The trouble is in you;
honestly it is. You are presuming that
for the poor, happiness is impossible,
a thing simply not theirs. Is the
crooked politician, the shady business
man less unhappy than the petty
thief? Two months ago I enjoyed our
going to a concert as much as the man
in the front seat. We walked home.
That never diminished the pleasure
cither for me or for you. Right?”
“Sure. But why is it that some will
never have the chance of hearing good
music while concert halls are filled
with men who sit there, as good as
14


deaf, spoiling the air with foppery?"
‘They do have a chance, Freddie ...
in their own simple ways. You'd
think laborers never have holidays.
You’d think newsboys never play or
laugh. For that matter you’d have it
that the wealthy are immune from
sorrow. Life is truly hard. But not
one bleak picture, Freddie.

‘They’re young, those newsboys.
That’s why."
"My mother laughs and sings and
she’s forty-two. You’ll sing, Freddie,
now and twenty years after. You'll
sing when you can’t even count your
grandchildren. And you'll always
find gladness singing.
“Too true, Cecy,” he smiled, remembering the last Christmas when
they were singing O Holy Nigbt together and got miscrably stuck at the
word brigbt and how they had laughed
with great delight.
She was appraising him when she
said, "Look, Freddic, please come here
on the twenty-third, P.M. Just want
you to help me buy something. Now
play Jingle Bells and be happy."
“I can’t. The yoke of a woman
shopper is about my neck.
"Silly boy."
Once more Bing Crosby was heard
in the solemn Advent evening.
He returned on the twenty-third
but they did not go shopping. Instead
they waited for dusk which at Christmas time is clear and cool and so glassy
“  '


silver that heaven and earth seem a
vast virgin pool — the earth, the bottom; the air, the water; the sky, the
surface. He had helped her wrap a
white-topped cake and then she led
him still puzzled out into the street.
Now they walked side by side, Freddie
gingerly hugging the cake, trying hard
at the same time to keep pace with
Cecy whose unburdened steps he envied. "Woman s prerogative, he
consoled himself, but a nasty idea
about being a woman’s tool incessantly bothered the other half of his mind.
He strode on purposefully. Cecy
smiled. Then he knew there never
was a more willing tool since Adam.
They went on through trec-lined
walks, through four long blocks and
three streets down, till they reached
an immense lot enclosed by a wall
bearing the grim sculpture of machine
gun bullets. The wall had been
breached, and from the gap stretched
a dirt road that revealed the site as a
former army camp. Now it contained one of those barong-barong
communities. Iron-wrought gates
crazily covered up a long disregarded
entrance and exit while, farther down,
the ruins of a mansion poked its fingers skyward, ghost-like in the twilight. As they entered the lot, he
noticed tough-looking lads bunched
by the dirt road and he, following,
shuddered inwardly. But they civilly
doffed their caps and one even said,
Good evening, Miss Santos, in Tagalog.
It was then, mildly amazed, he realized that he was amidst a galaxy of
man-made stars. All about were bobbing blots of light, rustling crepe,
rainbow colors whose vividness is enhanced by the shades of oncoming
night.
"Did you have to smile at those fellows?” he warily whispered.
“Oh, I know most of them, she
DECEMBER, 1949


said, watching him with an amused
light in her eyes.
He felt guilt rising in his neck.
“We’re bringing the cake I promised
our gardener’s wife. They live here.
Oh, he sighed understandingly.
He followed her through patchedup homes and dilapidated quonsets,
with eyes carefully intent on the narrow labyrinthine path. Yet with
cvery window they passed, he saw the
glow of a lantern on the ground and
he could sense his heart slowly wandering back on the path of time...
back to a province he would never
forget.
Back to a bright Christmas and
lighted homes; paper stars smiling to
every passerby, gleaming warmth and
hospitality and good cheer. How tangible the signs of the gladness of the
people inside those houses—people who
could never bear to hide it, but must
reveal and share it with the outside
world, even though that world was a
wisp of a town, or just a barrio, or
empty ricefields. It seemed to him
as if those lanterns were lighting the
way, like the star of antiquity, to happiness. They brought him back to a
night when five boys strolled through
an unsleeping town, grecting friends,
chasing one another, munching nuts,
laughing in cverybody’s ears, waiting
on the old stone wall for the church
bell to peal midnight...
"Here we are, Freddie.
The place was a small frame house
reinforced with rusty iron sheets. Its
door was half-opened and the light of
two bulbs peeped faintly through. At
two windows, yellow airplane lanterns
shone like gold.
Aling Maria, Cecy called softly.
A mild commotion instantly arose
within the house and a girl, about six
years old, ran out shouting, "Nanay,
nanay! Cecy is here!” And when the
mother came out—a small fat woman


15


—Freddie saw the roundest face he
had ever seen and tiny eyes that
sparkled with good-will.
As he made a ceremony of unwrapping the gift, he could see the children’s eyes, five pairs of them, brighten up into perfect discs of enchantment. The father’s eyes too were taking in with silent satisfaction the delighted cries of his children. The mother flitted back and forth, brimming
with pleasure, not knowing what to
do. Finally she hurried out with halfmurmured excuses and was heard callpag her neighbors and reminding them
to bring a plate along. By the time
they arrived to join with unbelieving
"Ahs" what now
seemed to Freddie
a miniature banquet, the gardener
had given them
sugar-coated slices
S
of hardened papa
FILE
ya. "A delicacy of
the northern reE
gion,” he said.
2
Munching one,
E
Freddie sat down

on a stool.
TRRAS 
—a riotous clamor
of joy. Cecy was conversing with the
women but he did not have a heart to
listen. An urge to remember was
surging in him — impelling and sweet.
Magic Christmas days! Gifts given
from the heart. The media noches he
had known in his twenty years. The
table loaded with chestnuts and ham
and rolls and coffee. Himself almost
hysterical with joy. The sight incomprchensible to his childish mind; the
sight one feared to touch lest the illusion vanish. And the faces of his parents holding him up and his elder sisters and cousins all aflame with eagerness. And his great grandmother


whom he thought then had no reason
to be happy since all her teeth were
gone. But now he recalled, there was
something rare in her toothless smile.
And remembering he longed in vain to
see it again. He saw the single cake,
heightening the barrenness of the table
before him, and he wondered how
these people could be so happy. Yet
they were and was he not the fool?
He beckoned to the little girl who
had met them. Without fear she
came. He held her at arms length
with his hands on her shoulders and
fixing his gaze on her innocent face,
he slowly asked, "Why are you so
happy?"
“Because it’s
Christmas!” The
answer was prompt
and, he could admit, very sure.
“Well, what does
that mean? Why
be happy?” he
pressed on and he
was very unsure.
“Because 1t's
Christ’s birthday.
"And so who is
Christ?” And he
was very ashamed
feeling much like his catechism pupils.
“Christ is God Who came down to
carth to make men happy. Oh, don’t
you know?”
He never wondered how such a girl
could possibly know all the answers
for at that moment a mist seemed to
blur his mind. Then Cecy was telling
him to meet her star pupil. But this
and how Cecy taught catechism here
after school every Wednesday, he only
half-heard. He nodded absent-mindcdly, waiting for things to clear up a
bit. Then he questioned the little garl
TO
agam. "Well, after that, what can


16


  


still make you happy?”
Her eyes danced.
“The cake you gave us. And I shall
go to Ninang and the carnival with
tatay and he’ll buy us toys and we
will go to the big church at night.
There is very nice music there. Small
bells, big bells and a loud piano.
"An organ, he corrected.
Freddie did not know that Cecy was
watching his eager face.
“Oh yes, the organ. And also we
will make some more lanterns. And
Anya will go swimming and the ...
the Belen! With its big star.
He lost her words again. Her childish anticipation trembled in his hands.
He could feel her happiness, as if it
were his very own. It was something
real and really precious. And all the
others there in that house, old and
young, possessed that treasure. Then,
it seemed a voice came to him—far
away but fully clear. It was the
voice of a child laughing at marbles;
of a boy smiling in school; of a student cheering a basketball victory; of
a college man chuckling over excellent
satire, carefree at parties, experiencing
the throb of early manhood. After
awhile the voice changed. Now it
was of a man whose hair was turning
white but whose soul was happy and
young.
"Odd, how one’s voice can change,
he murmured, letting the child go
with a playful spank.
He told Cecy he would be waiting
outside and he rose to leave but the
two sons of the gardener, their
mouths ringed with white icing,
caught his fingers and implored him
to see their game of patintero on the
road.
Most of the people had finished
their supper and many stood along the


dirt road in circular groups. Many
more were clustered before a lone
sari-sari store and he heard them
heartily arguing about a cock to
match in the Christmas pintakasi.
Yelling children were everywhere,
defying the chill with their halfnakedness. Dogs yelped at their heels as
they plunged with full abandon into
every cranny lest they be it in the
sipang preso. Farther up the road, the
tough-looking fellows were playing a
game of their own. He stopped,
quite fascinated by the sight of big
fellows romping at a child’s game. He
was already feeling a bit foolish, looking on, when they recognized him.
"Do you know sipang preso?”
“Of course!”
“Then play with us!” Right there
he gauged their sincerity. They too
wore happy hearts of youth on their
slecves. On their faces was some regret when he explained his patinfero
engagement. He was sure of it.
Where his small companions brought
luim, the ground was smooth and hard.
Traces of apog had seeped into the
ground forming indelible lines for the
game. It was already going on — a
turmoil of legs and flying arms. He
sat on an adobe slab nearby. Prankish
catcalls, excited shrieks, he heard
them all. It was a strange but sorrowassuaging melody.

Someone cried. There are so many
stars!"
And obediently he scanned the skys
and bcheld them. They were all
there—God’s priceless gems. Yet,
contemplating the heavens, he could
not forget the stars that shone on
earth — man’s gleaming happiness.
And there in the night echoing with
music, he saw again the ten-year old
Freddie toiling at his first lantern.


DECEMBER, 1949


17


And his heart was swept once more
by the simple pride he had felt when
his parents had told him he was old
enough to wake up for the Midnight
Mass. And he recalled the chill outside as he went to
church that night
and he felt strangely warm, just then. 
Clearly he saw the
men smoking cigars after the Mass
and greeting one
another vociferousAy. How he had
scorned the young
ladies and their Ba
attendant gentlemen, standing in
the patio, blocking the way while
foolishly looking at each other in the
shy candlelight.


He laughed at himself noiselessly,
pondering whether life could be one
long Christmas . .. how maybe it
could . .. if one tried hard enough.
He did not know when she
came and sat by
him.
They left the lot
and walked on a
bit in silence. The
happy din receded.
He heard her ask,
"Happy?'
As he looked at
her, she under stood.
EN "Let's sing,"
9 she suggested.
And they sang, very softly together,
of joy coming to the world because the
Lord was come.


Birth of Christ
By GUILLERMO LOPEZ DEL CASTILLO, A.B., '53


Merry and light,
Angels do sing,
Melodies ringCherubs look bright,
Dancing and gay,
Hailing Christ's day.
Shepherds do wake
Though cold the night,
Drenched all in light
Graces partake.
“Thon art God’s Word!
Bless us, O Lord."


18


  "


Essey Contest: Second Place


For Better Things
By GABINO MENDOZA, JR., A.B. '53


OOK at the trees and tell me
Lawhat they think. What are
 their dreams, ther hopes and
ambitions? Do they pity
little boys lost in the woods, tremble
at the sound of robbers’ plottings,
weep for suicides like Judas? Tell me
of the trees.
It seemed just another ordinary
night with the stars gayly singing unearthly melodies and the forest trees
humming with the wind. The moon
sailed regally across the sky like a
prima donna in an opera and dazzled
the little distant stars with her light.
And all the stars blinked and winked
and blinked again.
The smallest tree in the forest
swayed with the gentle wind, and
with its shrill voice, hummed happily
with the others. He liked this time
of night best, this time when the moon
was new risen, the stars still fresh and
tuneful, when the firm-set mustard
tree and the whispering palm with
drowsy yawns were dancing and murmuring to the music of the winds and
the stars. The little tree lifted his
thousand unseen eyes to the twinkling
sky with a sleepy sigh. Suddenly, he
awoke from his contened lethargy,
closed his eyes, and then looked again.
The stars were really coming closer.
Their song was getting louder. They
seemed to have wings and they came
down singing, singing still. They
filled the hilly country-side, its grassy
DECEMBER, 1949


valleys and the clumps of trees on its
many slopes with their exultant music.
“Hosanna in excelsis! The Christ
has been born in a stable in Bethlehem.
Jesus the Savior has come!”
As the singing lights in twinkling
confusion retreated to their places in
the darkened sky, the wind murmured
to the trees of the forest, “Those were
the Angels of God, God’s chosen
Angels. The Savior has come ... has
come ... come....
The little tree stayed awake all
night thinking of the wonder he had
seen, the angelic paean he had heard.
Who is this Savior?” he wondered.
He asked the passing wind, "Who 15
God?” But the wind did not answer;
it was too busy playing with the
leaves on the forest floor. And as the
little tree mused in the sleeping grove,
a resolve grew in his mind. "I shall
see that Savior some day. I shall see
cod.”
Years passed. And the tree grew
and the forest grew and the stars still
sang at night, the wind still came to
tell of distant lands, of trees that
sailed the seas, of trees that housed
great families, of trees that were
carved to look like men. And birds
all came to the forest to perch on the
tree’s now brawny branches. They
sang of a boy in Nazareth who played
with them, of the kind little Savior in
Galilee. And the tree still kept in his
heart the desire to sec this Savior.


19


When the other trees in the forest
dreamt of breasting thunderous seas
or of lording it over a palace’s atrium,
he only looked at them with superior
eyes and half-whispered to himself, "I
was made for better things. I shall
see the Savior, and I shall serve Him.
But the years were long and the
days secmed endless. The tree sometimes despaired of ever secing his
dream fulfilled. At times men would
come to the forest and
make it resound with the
finging blows of their
-2
axes. Trees crashed joyfully to the ground. And

they were carted away to
make new statues, fighting triremes, lofty towcrs, lowly tables, stools,
and fuel for crackling
fire-places in the land of
N
God’s once chosen people.
But they never took the
tree.
Till one day ...
“This should make a
good cross," said a woodsman as he and his companion walked through the woods tapping every tree they passed.
“Yes," agreed the other, a capital
one for that criminal of a Galilean.
And they both laughed and the biting
axes laughed with them.
A boisterous wind blew into the
forest and the other trees rustled therr
leaves and laughed derisively, "You
truly were made for better things.
What thing is better than a criminal's
cross?” But the tree kept silent.
“Better things" rang in his mind when


he hit the ground with a boom.
“Better things” echoed and reechoed
each time he hit a stone on the rond
to Jerusalem. The woodsmen dragged
him to a carpentry shop. The saw
t
buzzing through him snecred, Berter
things, better things. The chisel
chipping at his sides whispered, "Better things, better things. And the
hammer mocked him with cach resounding tap, tap, tap—“Better
things.
But through all his suf9
z.
fering, through his passion,” he could see in his
WS
A
mind’s reminiscent eye the
glorious night thirty years
or more ago, when the
stars had come down to
earth and Angels had sung
God’s praises. And he
said to himself, "Somchow
I shall see the Savior.
He did. Christ carried
him up the Mountain of
the Skull; he carried
Christ on the altar of Golgotha. He cradled the
grown child of Bethlehem, tenderly, lovingly.
He felt the nails drenched with God’s
blood, piercing him. On that day, all
the longing of years, all the waiting
was rewarded.
This is not the story of the tree of
the Cross alone; it is also the story of
man who waits and waits in the forest
of life, who looks at the stars and sings
with them, lives up to them till some
day he sees God, trudges the weary
way to Calvary—and there triumphs
with the long sought, long awaited
Savior. This is the story of all men
who were made for "better things.


20


“  


Poetry Contest: Second Place


A Christmas Prayer
2
by HECTOR HOFILENA, A.B., '51
They tell me, Lord, that when Yon bung,
Upon that man-made tree,
E
You gave Yourself, a sacrifice,
To stress Your love for me.
aa 
Bat didn't Yon show the self-same love,
That cold December morn?

Was it not burning in Your breast
The day that You were born?
They say 'twas painful on the Cross,
When men their Lord reviled;
Wus not that same abasement there,
RE.,
When God became a cbild?
Was not the stable's barren floor,
With all its cattle-dross,
As pungent as that other wood,
As galling as the Cross?
Was not the bay where lay Your brow,
A litfle crown of thorn?
Was not the wind as sbarp as nails,
The day that Yon were born?
(Was not Your Mother tender then,
When She sang You to rest
As when She laid Your lifeless bead
Upon Her sword-pierced breast?)
And when Yon looked about the gloom,
And saw an empty stall,
Did Yon not ery, "I thirst I thirst,"
And thus for my love call?
So teach me, Lord, to realize,
1 am the reason why,
Eternity became a child,
And God forsook the sky.


DECEMBER, 1949


21


Short Story Contest: Honorable Mention


Every
Vaney Shal Be Filed
By RODOLFO TUPAS, A.B. '50


—HERE lay the two silent
graves of his two sons, Ray
and Eddie; two white stones
EED
poking their weird noses out
of the ground and catching fire from
the crimson sun. They had a sacred
quier all their own. Possessed by the
mystery in the twilight, by the majesty of the immovable mountains in
the distance and the coolness of the
chanting wind that gamboled about
him, Dr. Jaime Bernardo, the town’s
top ranking physician, lost himself in
a trance.
He could feel there was something
wrong, an emptiness within him. It
was as though an extra light had gone
out inside of him. It was wonderful,
the love he had for them—intensely
he loved, to be surc; as a matter of
fact, too intensely. He loved them
more than life itself, a hundred times
more than the blue August sky and
the brown soil beneath and a thousand
times more than either fame or honor.
In their own right, his sons had been
the world to him.
But that was all gone now, the
world of beauty and music. He closed
his eyes for a moment and pictured his
baby, Ray, sitting on his lap with soot
on his nose. He remembered clearly
twelve years ago, how naughty but
lovable Ray once splashed a spoonful
of oatmeal on his face while he was
making faces at him, and how Ray,
amused, followed up with his happy
baby giggle. Dr. Bernardo laughed so
22


hard then that his glasses had trouble
settling on his nose. Suddenly, he
gritted his teeth when he remembered
Ray helplessly gasping for dear life on
his death bed with broncho-pneumonia.
And there was Eddie, handsome,
playful and cheerful. He thought of
Eddie at his side, his hand in his, with
Eddie trying to match his stride as
they retracted their steps home from
the Sunday Mass. But he too had left
him, pinned under an army truck
while rushing home eager to celebrate
his ninth birthday. To think of it
was heart crushing for Dr. Bernardo.
He was living as one dead now with
no room for feeling or tears. God
could have had them later, but why
did He have to take them so soon?
He had made up his mind. There was
to be no room for love ... not even
for his youngest surviving son, Benjamin, now twelve years old. A man
could only suffer so much, he reasoned, and he was afraid to love Benjamin lest he lose him and be crushed
into the dust by fresh grief. He
clenched his fists and, looking upward to the blue heavens with red
cyes, uttered a defiant "Why?”
Dr. Bernardo plodded home with
his head sunk on his breast. Araceli,
his wife, who had been waiting for
him, gave him a warm welcome. By
the dull look in his cyes, she knew he
had just made his monthly visit to the
graves.
“  '


It was December now and Christmas was just around the corner. The
town was in a hectic mood as people
busied themselves preparing to welcome the Magi and wish the Savior a
happy birthday. Everybody seemed
lost in the hustle and bustle except
Dr. Bernardo.
Dr. and Mrs. Bernardo sat down for
supper with candlelights which Araceli
deemed so conducive to domestic harmony.
"Its a warm December, dear, isn’t
it?” Araceli said with a smile that had
a brightness that comes from goodness
within.
"Hmmm, Dr. Bernardo groaned as
he wiped his mouth with the napkin.
"And where is your dear Ben?” he inquired with a truculent scowl. "Does
he want me to send him a special invitation?"
"He’ll be down before you’re a minute older, she assured him, and true
enough Ben came scrambling down the
flight of stairs, his hair disheveled, as
he whistled his favorite Becthoven
concerto.
With his head bowed, Ben made as
little noise as he could in pulling out
his chair. His father chewed what
was in his mouth as though he had
not heard, but as soon as he had swallowed he turned to look sternly at
Ben as though he had never seen him
before.
"And who, he said, "do you think
you are, coming this late. The King
of Siam?
“I am very sorry, Pa, Ben apologized, but with no fear in his eyes or
his voice.
Araceli did not say a word but
looked at him from the corner of her
cye; then she cheerfully blinked as she
caught Ben’s eyes and motioned him
to take his seat.
“I understand, Dr. Bernardo
growled, "You have not been study

ing up to my expectations in school.
You failed in algebra. You must stop
your piano lessions. It is the cause
of your poor showing.
"But ... but Pa, Ben protested, "I
love playing the piano more than anything else in the world. I . . . wouldn’t
know what to do without it.
Araceli rested her fork on her plate,
but before she could speak her mind,
Dr. Bernardo said, "I have given my
decision. It is not to be questioned."
"Please Pa, anything but that, Ben
implored. "I promise to study harder.
'Enough of tha:, Dr. Bernardo
thundered and a scowi marked his
face. "Either stop talking back or
leave the table.
Ben paused to ponder awhile and
then left the table.
Jaime, Araceli said, reaching out
a hand to Dr. Bernardo. “Ben, she
said turning to her son, tell Pa you
are sorry.
“I am not sorry,” Ben muttered
without bothering to look back and
then ran upstairs straight to his room,
threw himself on his bed and wept his
troubles out.
"Jaime,” Araceli said ruefully,
“there’s got to be an end to this.
You’ve tormented that child as far
back as I can remember ... and you've
inflicted a wound in him only love
and understanding can heal."
“The only sons I have,” Dr. Bernardo said in a voice that was not a
voice at all, are resting in boxes under
the ground."
Araceli withdrew her hand from
his, frightened, as if from a snake.
She stood up abruptly and walked towards the stairs. She paused on the
third step, turned towards him and
clasping the rail tightly said, "I know
You are afraid to love your son..
am sorry for you. She ¡erked her
head in anger and made her way to
Ben s room.


DECEMBER, 1949


23


Araceli lifted her sobbing son who
lay pitifully on his bed with his head
resting on his arms. She raised him
up and pressed his head close to her
breast.
“There, there now, she said in a
way only a mother can talk to her
son. "Brave boys don’t cry. You'll
go back to school and at
the same time you will
continue your piano lessons in Profesor Albert’s
studio ... and someday,
somehow Ill buy you
your own piano.
Ben’s weeping began to
PAY
die down and he said, "O
Mommy, if only Pa were
half as kind as you are...
why can t I be happy?”
You can,” his mother
answered. "Jesus wants
cverybody to be happy.
Dry your tears, son. You
wouldn’t want the baby
Jesus to see you this way
on His Birthday, would
you? Oh no, the baby
E
Jesus loves children who
can take it on the chin,
and helps those who are brave. Don’t
disappoint Him, son. She lifted his
chin with her finger and then said,
“Let’s see you give a big, big smile."
"Oh Ma!” Ben exclaimed, "You re
wonderful," and Ben did smile with
almost all his twenty eight teeth show.
ing.
n * 
The church bells rang and their solemn notes floated down the air to
the home of the Bernardos' to announce the Sunday before Christmas.
Araceli was doing her daily morning
chores in the kitchen and Dr. Bernardo was reading the Sunday paper.
"Berter wake up the boy, Pa, she
suggested, and it’s high time you
came to church with us again.


“Church?” he shouted as he lowered
his newspaper, and his voice was higher than hers.
“Church, she repeated, solid as a
rock. “You can at least favor us
this once. How do you expect our
son to look up to you. Fine example
you make ...
“My dear good wife,
he bellowed with a look
that hovered between a
frown and a smile, "if I
ever set foot in the church
again, it will be in my
coffin and I will know
nothing of it.” Araceli
searched desperately for
words to say but they
would not come. Ordinary things like flowers
can be easily talked about
E because we can see, smell
and feel them. But to talk
of the world of bitterness
and pain that is hidden in
a man is an agonizing
struggle. An uncomfortE
able silence arose between
AT!
them.
"Oh Maaaa!” Ben suddenly shouted in a swecping note as
he inserted his head between the pillars of the stair rails, "I can’t seem to
find my pair of socks. Got them?”
“Come down here, son, Araccli
said in a subdued tone.
Ben positioned himself on the stair
rail and gleefully gave out a
“Wheece!” as he came sliding down
fast. He walked carelessly towards
his mother and then felt his father’s
stern look upon him. He dragged
himself to within arm’s length of the
chair. "I’m sorry about last might,
Pa, he said in almost a whisper and
his fingers were busy with a loose
thread of the curtains, "Guess I must
have lost my temper.
"Hmmm...I am glad to hear


24


“  "


you’re sorry,” he said and cleared his
throat. "It’s the books for you from
now on and then the medical profession later. I went the hard, long way
myself before I finally made the grade.
There’s nothing like being a doctor.
Forget the piano. That’s for the
women and I am not raising you up to
be a woman.
“Yes, sir,” Ben nodded, glad to
have the words agree.
“Come son, Araceli interrupted as
she stretched her arm for Ben s.
"'Let s leave your father alone with
his thoughts and go to church. At
least there we can have words of comfort, she said, and the river never
ran colder.
To church they went with Ben, still
very much in his boyhood, executing
an occasional skip and hop. In the
church they found words of comfort
and renewed strength. The church
bells continued their triumphant song
above and Araceli fervently mingled
pleading with her prayers.
They heard the priest read from the
pulpit the glorious last words of the
Advent gospel: "Prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make straight His paths.
Every valley shall be filled; and every
mountain and hill shall be made low:
the crooked shall be make straight and
the rough ways plain, and all flesh
shall see the salvation of God."
 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday flew swiftly by, but the
valley" of her husband did not seem
to be "filled. At last, on Friday,
Araceli bravely decided to come into
the open and engage her husband in a
renewed battle in the study room.
"Don t you have any heart, Jaime?
she said, "Ben s in love with the piano
more than you think he is. It’s his
life and his happiness. You don t seem
to understand ...


“Understand,” he said resentfully,
“I don’t need to understand.
wouldn’t mind if he were born a girl
but he’s a boy and I aim to raise him
up the tough way ... and not even
God can stop me.
‘Merciful heavens!” she cried out,
now it’s blasphemy."
And you had better make sure
your son obeys ...
"My son?” she interpolated as she
raised an eyebrow and drew her head
back. "He’s your son as much as he
is mine and as much as Eddie and Ray
were. What is wrong, Jaime? You’ve
changed a lot. We’re like strangers
to each other now ... let’s fall in love
again, she said, and forced a smile.
She was going to say more but she
stopped and her smile faded away as
she caught Ben quietly tip-toeing on
the stairs to steal into his room unnoticed. "Is that you, Ben?” she said
in a voice thin with fright. But no
answer came. She hurried to meet
her son.
She came to a dead halt suddenly
and put her hands to her face and
then, voiceless, looked at her son with
a scream in her eyes. In pain she beheld Ben with cheeks bruised and a
cut lip bleeding profusely and soaking
his shirt red. But there is a limit to
woman’s endurance. She knelt down
before him, threw her arms about him
and cried her heart out.
Dr. Bernardo stood before them and
placed his hand on Ben s shoulder.
“What happened, boy?” he asked,
very much concerned and troubled.
“I fell over a bicycle, he said with
a full throat. "I’m not hurt, just a
little dizzy, that’s all.
“Bicycle?” Dr. Bernardo exclaimed,
Nonsense, you’ve been fighting.
Gently he separated Araceli from
Ben and carried him to his room and
to his bed.


DECEMBER, 1949


25


“Go get some bandages, medicine
and some ice, he ordered and Araceli
hastened to the medicine cabinet still
sobbing.
Dr. Bernardo stroked Ben’s ruffled
hair and he looked into his eyes—eyes
which were flooded with shining tears.
Dr. Bernardo looked towards the window and the memory of Ray and
Eddie surged back into his mind. He
looked into Ben’s cyes again, eyes
glistening with calmness and with
courage and Dr. Bernardo saw his
mother and Eddie and Ray in him.
Araceli returned with the medicine
kit and Dr. Bernardo went to work on
Ben’s bleeding face.
“Tell Ma and Pa all about it, son.
Everything, Araceli said.
“They called me a sissy, Ma, because I play the piano instead of playing ball with the boys in the neighborhood. There were about three of
them. I didn’t say a word until they
began pulling my hair, and they said it


was like a girl’s. Then I let go and
my fist went flying to their faces ...
but they fought back and left me
bleeding when they said I had enough.
But I didn’t give up Ma, I didn’t.
He paused and reached out to his mother’s hand.
But Dr. Bernardo took it instead
and exclaimed, "My son!" At long
last he said it: “My son, and he said
it in tones full of meaning and love.
A flush of overdue understanding invaded him. His son was no coward,
he thought, he was a fighter—a fighter with a big heart, and—merciful
God—what a fool his father had been
in his defiance!
Araceli stared at her husband with
wide eyes of womanly understanding,
and, flushed with joy, she murmured
the words again, “My son. She
cuddled close to him on the bed and,
with her heart warm for both of them,
said: "It looks as if we’re going to
have a real Christmas, a beautiful
Christmas.


Poetry Contest: Honorable Mention
Mary's Hymn to the Christ Child


by ROMULO LARA, A.B., '53
Thou whom the heavens cannot confine
This tabernacle bore.
Forger of creation's fire wild,
Within my arms a helpless child!
Upon this earthly shore
Truly, as priests do, I assign
His flesh to mine;
To mine, His blood.


26


Essay Contest: Honorable Mention


Christmas Is Forever
By ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B., '51


DO not have to be the fourth
Wise Man to predict that on
A
NOI Christmas Eve a chain of unexpected events will happen.
At exactly six that evening, Mr. Boss
who has been underpaying Mr. Employee for three hundred and sixtyfour days a ycar will pat the skinny
Mr. Employee on the back and hand
him a ten peso bonus. “Cheer up, old
chap, he will say merrily. “Christmas comes but once a year."
At exactly seven o’clock Mr. Employee will bump into Mr. Snoop in a
downtown department store. Mr.
Snoop is sheepishly buying a crazy but
romantic trinket for the wife he has
been treating as a piece of household
furniture from December 26, 1948,
to December 23 1949. Mr. Snoop,
who is a hardened snob and is proud
to be called one, will see Mr. Employee
this time and will condescend to
invite him into his tomato-red limousinc. "After all," thinks Mr. Snoop
my fellow snobs will not mind my
being charitable on Christmas day.
Christmas comes but once a year."
As the limousine crawls along trafficjammed Rizal Avenue, it will bypass Mr. Gasoline and Mr. Firc. Mr.
Fire and Mr. Gasoline have the peculiar characteristic of igniting each
other into an explosion of unprintable doxologies" when they come
near cach other. But tonight they
DECEMBER, 1949


are as ice cream and soda. "You
know,” both say, “Christmas comes
but once a year. Mr. Gasoline extends an invitation. “Mr. Fire, how
about coming with me tonight to the
Riviera? Then we can go straight to
the Atenco Chapel for Midnight Mass.
It’s quite near, you know” Mr. Fire
will be smiling by this time. Mr.
Gasoline apologizes, "It’s true I
haven’t been going to church regularly, not since my wife died. But tomight is Christmas night . . . it brings
back memories, you know ... Besides
I think I need it ... tonight at
“I understand," says Mr.
least ..
Firc, who is never in the habit of understanding. "But tonight, the family is getting together. It seldom
docs, you know. What with everyone so busy. But tonight we have
decided to get togcther and sit around
the Christmas tree and . .. well...


27


talk .. My wife is not going to her
Mahjong session. My son decided that
he has been going to too many parties.
And my daughter is bringing her new
boy-friend home. And the two will
part with cheery smiles on lips that
are seldom cheery or kind.
Electric bulbs will blink from
everywhere and from nowhere. Half
a dozen Santa Clauses will be giving
away toys at big department stores.
The whole of the Escolta and Rizal
Avenue and Quiapo will blossom with
green twigs and red berries and silver
tinsel. All will be happy — even
the jingle in the blind beggar’s tin cup
will be merry. All will be giving
and forgiving. All will be loving.
not hating. All will be thinking of
a stable and a Mother, who is a Virgin, and a Baby, Who is God. Hatred
and greed and war will be strangers
that day. For it will be Christmas.
and Christmas comes but once a year.
Christmas comes but once a year.
That is what is wrong with the world.
Christmas comes but once a year. So
we give and forgive only once a year.


So mankind is a brotherhood only
once a year. So we are children of
God only once a ycar. Is it any wonder, therefore, that on the other three
hundred and sixty-four days we have
hate and greed and war?
Christmas is not Christmas trees
and Christmas lanterns and Christmas
tinsel. We don’t have to wait for cold
mornings and long nights and the
cooking of "bibingka and "puto
bumbong" to feel Christmas and
Christ in our hearts. For these things
are the trimmings of Christmas -
not Christmas itself. Christmas is in
the heart. It is Christ being born
and living in the manger hearts of
mankind. It is acting as the Christ
Child would have wanted us to act,
giving and forgiving; loving, not hating. Christmas and Christ can come
on a torrid April afternoon or on a
rainy September night. It can come
anytime. It should come all the time
—three hundred and sixty-five days
a year. For Christmas-time is heaventime ....


MII


His Face Undimmed
ty AURELIO CALDERON, Litt. B., '52
Hungry hearts for ages prayed
With agony and pain of mind
To some far God they groped to find
And in the shadows grew dismayed.
But since that blue Iudean nigbt
Of singing beralds an dstarflame
On which the infant Jesus came,
There is forevermore a Light
To lead them to that glory place
Where God has waited through the years
To wipe away all stain and tears
So they can see, undimmed, His face.


28


  


Essay Contest: Honorable Mention


Our Hometown
By CESAR CONCIO, A.B. '51


do not know when it all
Ibegan, but every Christmas
pI would find us going to our
hometown. It is not such a
big town, you know, this town of
ours, but then, you would not call it
a sleepy old town either. Right from
the moment you enter it (which is
when you cross a creaking wooden
bridge) you see the market to your
left swarming with people, as they go
about their way, perhaps buying food
for city folk like us whom they expect in their own homes. These people in the market, these wonderful
people, are poor; buz once in a while,
when a big feast like Christmas comes,
they leave their poor ways and for a
day or two live a kingly life: for is it
not a king who will come to them?
This is our hometown, where we return every Christmas. As you walk
along the dusty gravel streets at night,
you sec bright paper lanterns hanging
from small windows. Some have curious designs. Others have the shape
of a star or a candle. Strange as it is,
I used to sce the most beautiful lanterns in the windows of the smaller
nipa houses. But then, why not?
Christmas is a poor man’s feast. When
the poor man cannot have a Christmas
tree and all the bright trimmings that
go with it (which big houses have) he
spends his labor on a paper lantern
and with his own hands gives it all the
beauty he can. Unlike the rich inn

keeper at Bethlchem, he will not turn
away the Savior on His first night on
earth. It is these simple, humble and
lovable people whom Christ visits
every Christmas. For they alone,
simple-minded as they are, have room
for Christ. And through it be but a
hut with a paper lantern in its window, Christ would still smile: for did
he not smile when he first saw the hay
and the ass and the ox?
And so it was that night before
Christmas in our town. The children,
sleeping huddled together, dreamed
their dreams. Why, this Christmas,
Cuya will wear his first long pants.
And Ate’s dress will be the saya her
mother used to wear when she was
young. And Kiko and Petra will
make their rounds again, to grandma
and grandpa, to uncles and aunts, kissing their hands in the old Filipino custom, and getting for this (the darling
brats) a handful of coms. To them,
Christmas has a newer meaning, every
year. It is something more than last
year; next year, it will be berter. This
Christmas is as new as the first, when
the poor shepherds tending their flock
heard the good news and hurried down
to the little stable. It was these rustic people who first adored the Saviour, because the people who lived in
big houses would not. Today it is
the same story. The rich have no
time to adore their true God: they
adore another god, the god that clinks


DECEMBER, 1949


29


and buys. ... They, as long ago in that
little town of Bethlehem, have no
room for Christ. They are too busy
with honors, treasures and the applause of men.
But long ago too, there were three
rich men, rich not merely because they
had honors, treasures and the applause
of men, but because they offered these
three to the true God, and were called
wise. Many of us today will travel
thousands of miles and stretches of sea
and land to seek a fortune, an earthly
fortune. These three journeyed over
continents and vast expanses of wasteland, looking for a King, a Divine
King.
It was a star that guided their
course, that helped them find their


King. Are you too looking for a
star? It may not be a star after all.
God, you know, acts in his own mysterious way. If you look at my
hometown for example, and the people who live in it, why, they do not
glitter like the big shining Star millions of nights ago. And yet, as you
enter the town and see the market to
your left, as you walk along the same
dirty gravel streets, you see beyond all
the swarm of people and the paper
lanterns, the heart of the town, as
simple as that stable in Bethlehem but
as rich in spirit as the people who were
in it. This is our Star, this hometown in which we somehow see the
Bethlehem of Christ, this hometown,
where we go home every Christmas.


Re-Birth
By LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A.B., '52
The cold November winds are here again,
And I feel old, for from the North is blown
A cheerless chilly note, a sad refrain:
How youth's green dreams so sere and gray have grown!
How dreary the dry patter of the rain,
Writing the weary pattern of my own
Frayed thoughts, recording all with one word: vain.
Dreams — vain, hopes — vain, vain wishes — what? Too soon?
Courage, heart, courage! Look you forward — there!
Behind these weary winds and rains shall come
The promise of rebirth on Christ’s own morn!
Recall the Star, the Babe, a Mother's hum
Of peace serenely floating on the air ...
Tis Christmas! Rejoice, heart, and rise — reborn!
“  "
30


Short Story Contest: Honorable Mention


Gift for a Goason
By SEBASTIAN B. SANTIAGO, B.B.A. '50


N
YLVIA . . . Junior . . . they
were always on my mind ...
E
 My mind raced with the
car...I hope the bicycle’s
tied on tight behind ... check! Junior
will surely love that gift. After all,
every boy loves a bicycle .. . Greg, he’s
the third ... but then he’s dead and
gone ... or is he? I can’t seem to forget him. Great pal, even if he stole
my girl... My fault for being a pagan—that was what Sylvia said when
she broke our engagement. Curse the
Huks that got Greg... hope the
M.P.’s got them...
The convertible purred along
smoothly, eating up the miles; but
the road seemed just as long as when
I started. My thoughts continued to
plague my confused mind. An hour
and I would be in Angeles with Sylvia
and Junior. But no Greg. It used
te be Greg who met me with his big
welcoming smile and hand. Death
had coveted that smile and that hand.
It'll be different now, I thought. But
for Syl I wouldn’t have made this trip
I wished she'd marry me ... I backtracked into the past again.
It all began ... yes, when Syl broke
with me. She found out that I went
to church merely to please her—that
I wasn’t a Catholic, that I was nothing
short of a pagan. “Ill be a Catholic
if you want me to, I’d said. But she
saw through me. Then there was
Greg, best friend a man ever had. I


used to kid him about the rosary in
his pocket. “Brother, he'd always
say, "the way you are now .. when
we meet in the other world, I’ll be
piaying a harp, while you dance over
hot coals.” I only laughed at him.
When I die, I’d always believed, EIl
rot like all other corpses ... that'll be
the end.
In the years that I knew Greg, I
saw him with a serious face only three
times. Once when he reprimanded
me for something; the second time
when he asked me if I still loved
Sylvia. I didn’t answer him at once.
Instead I turned my back on him and
pretended to look for an ash tray. I
didn’t want him to see anything in
my face which would betray whatever I meant to tell him. I asked him
why, though that was not necessary.
I already knew why. And as I expected...
“I’m in love with her.” he answered.
“Well, are you still in love with her?”
His voice, I noticed, was edged with
anxiety.
“You know me, Greg. She was
just one of those girls, I lied.
"Ah ... Did . . . that is, is she in love
with you, too?"
“Welll be married soon.
"No!"
“Yes, and of course you’ll be best
man."
The third time I saw him with a


DECEMBER, 1949


31


serious look was when he and Sylvia
were married.
A year later, though someone alse
was officially the godfather, I took
over sponsorship of Greg, Junior. It’s
true that I envied their happiness and
yet I felt glad that it was Greg and
not I whom Sylvia married. I knew
Greg would make Sylvia happy, and
Sylvia, Greg; a wonderful combination. Had Sylvia married me she
would have made me happy, all right,
but then my soul would have been a
burden on her conscience forever.
Another year and Greg was shot, a
victim of a Huk ambush.
Greg’s family, including Syl and
Jumor, moved to Manila, away from
troubled Angeles. Sylvia came to me
for a job. She wanted to keep herself busy so as to forget the happiness
she and Greg had been cheated of.
I went to see Sylvia often on the
pretense that it was Junior I really
wanted to see. I had grown fond of
the boy. Sylvia must have seen
through my pretense; women have a
knack for that, but she never said
anything. It was Mama Sylvestre
who cornered me onc day and asked if
it was Jumor or Sylvia.
'Mama,” she was Mama to all of
Greg’s friends, "I cannot lie to you.
Even if I did, it would be useless.
You know it; it’s Sylvia."
‘If she were my daughter I
wouldn’t hesitate to say yes. You remind me so much of our boy. But
then this is for Syl to decide. Have
you asked her?"
This I knew to be a sixty-four dollar
question which Sylvia would surely
answer with another sixty-four dollar
question: had I decided to become a
Catholic? So I never asked her.
In the two years that Syl and the
family spent in the city, I learned to
love Junior as if he were my own son.
I played with him, bought him toys,
32


told him stories, practically raised the
boy. Sylvia was grateful. I didn’t
want her gratitude though, I wanted
her love.
Angcles at last. The windows that
line the streets are gaily bedecked with
Christmas trmmings. Tonight those
lanterns and multicolored lights will
fully reflect the spirit of Christ’s
coming. There will be pcople in the
streets to attend the midnight Mass
and there will be singing and merrymaking. Families will gather around
the dinner table, children unwrapping
toys and young hearts treasuring tokens of love—for tomorrow is Christmas.
Now to the left, and there’s the
Sylvestre place. Mama is on the balcony. She has seen me coming. She’s
waving but her face is solemn...
Shades of Greg. There's Sylvia in
another window—she looks glad to
see me. Now into the driveway
and . .. "Daddy! Daddy!" That must
be Jumor. I wish he would stop calling me daddy ... it sounds too real ...
“JUNIOR!” I yell, swerving the car
right ... brakes ... too late!
I knew I wasn t able to avoid hitting the boy. I saw him crumple beside the car. Someone screamed. Then
I was speeding to the hospital.
Waiting for the doctor to come out
of the examination room was like
waiting for the dawn after a sleepless
night. Time after time I looked at my
watch. The hands crawled. An hour to
me was only five minutes by the
watch. I gnawed at my fingers,
smoked cigarette after cigarette, until
I remembered Sylvia. She sat in one
corner of the waiting room. She had
stopped crying. Supposing the boy
died ... and then I was accusing myself, calling myself a killer. I called
myself a fool for nourishing such
thoughts. The boy couldn’t die ... he
mustn’t die. I must have faith ... in
“  "


whom? the doctor? This, I realized,
was one of those moments when a man
looks for another man s shoulder to
lean on. The rustle of stiff starched
cloth cut short my reverie. A nurse
was leaving the examination room.
“Nurse, I called, "how much longer are we to wait?"
She looked at her watch, smiled understandingly and said, "In about
twenty minutes the doctor will be
through. The boy is still unconscious.
Have patience.
I thanked her and then I approached
Sylvia. “You have faith in God,” p
said, not knowing what prompted me
to say that. "I guess there’s nothing
more we can do but pray.” She looked
at me strangely. "I don t know how
to pray, Syl,” I continued, "but when
you pray, please say a prayer for me
too.
“I’ve been praying.” Sylvia said
softly. She raised her hand from
which dangled a silver rosary. So that
was why she looked so peaceful and
calm, I thought. She took my hand,
stood up and said, "We have twenty
minutes. The church is only a few
blocks from here. Come, let’s do our
praying there before Junior’s prize
crib. He jomed the crib-making contest in school and his crib won first
prizc. It’s on exhibit in the church
now Come, let’s hurry.” And she
led me by the hand to the house of
God where I was a stranger.
Others have likened as empty
church to a tomb. This church was
empty so I forced myself to think that
it was like a tomb. But my mind refused to acccpt the comparison. A
tomb was for the dead but this church
was filled with a living presence, something that could be felt but was difficult to comprchend. Sylvia led me
on to the altar. I stared at the red
flickering flame by the altar, and, like


a hand in the dark it beckoned me to
come ... come...
Sylvia stopped by the communion
rail. I stopped with her and looked
down. There was Jumior’s winning
crib—a simple affair of bamboo sticks
and straw. The image of Christ
nestled in the midst of straw, hands
outstretched, reaching out for — me.
Sylvia knelt and prayed the rosary.
I knelt beside her. My eyes strayed
from the crib to the altar. The altar
was comforting to look at, bathed in
a warm, soft glow The warmth
sceped into my troubled mind, indifferent heart and forgotten soul. To
me that soft light that bathed the
altar was like a lighted window in a
dark and stormy night, promising
warmth and shelter. And the sight
of this light stirred my soul from the
depths.
The thought of Junior jolted me
back to reality. Once again my mind
was gnawed with worry. I locked at
my watch. We still had ten minutes.
Sylvia should be worried too; I looked
at her. There was not a crease of
worry on her smooth brow. She
looked beautiful, as beautiful as the
statue of the Blessed Mother. The
light that struck her hair formed a
shimmering halo of light around her
head ... Lovely Sylvia. Her face was
serene and calm. I wondered if she
had forgotten Junior’s danger . . . No,
she couldn t have forgotten ... And I
envied the peace of her mind. Her
lips moved to form silent words of
prayer. Her eyes stared blankly into
space, overflowing with trust and
confidence in her Creator. I wanted
a part of that overflow to ease the
pressure on my mind. Maybe, if I
prayed...
"“Sylvia,” I whispered into her car.
She stopped praying, looked at me.
"Let’s go through the prayers phrase


DECEMBER, 1949


33


by phrase. You lead and I shall follow."
For a long time she held my eyes.
“Our Father... she began and I felt
her hand squeeze mine.


“Our Father... I echoed and I
knew that God had granted my prayer
that Sylvia be mine.
Back in the hospital: “Your child
just regained consciousness, the doctor was saying. “The worst is over.
It was nothing serious. Just shock
and a dislocated knee joint. Ah...
you’re relieved. You’ll find him in
room seven. He’ll be asking for you
now.
The doctor was right. As I opened
the door I heard Junior wailing,
“Where’s my Mommy? Mommy!
Mommy!!” He saw me enter and he
stopped ory ing.
Then he saw Sylvia
and his eyes lighted
—
up.
The nurse left the
E
room. Junior releasZ
ed his mother from
E
a tight embrace.
He turned to me. —
“Hello, Daddy, did .


you buy me a Christmas gift? Did
you see my crib in church? How
did you like it?
“Yes and yes and it was very nice."
I said, attempting to answer all his
questions at once.
“What is nice, your gift for me?”
“No, Junior, your crib.
and his face fell.
“oh...”
"No ... gift . . . Daddy?”
“Why, yes— I have a bike for
you, Junior. Whatever made you
think I wouldn’t have a gift for you?”
Mommy, did you hear that? A
bike! Oh boy, a bike!” Junior’s
voice filled the small hospital room
with joy. Then, at one blow, all
three of us remembered Jumior’s knee.
I avoided Junior’s eyes and so did
Sylvia. There followed a heavy silence. I expected a
sob from Junior or
Sylvia to break the
silence. But none
came. Just when
the silence was becoming unbearable
Junior blurted out:
“I guess that bike
will have to wait.


34


“  '


ATENEO, HERE WE COME
N December 11, the Sunday
Ohafter the feast of the Immaculate Conception, the paED
troness of the Atenco, loyal
alumni from all parts of the Islands
will troop back to their alma mater
vo re-live “those good old days. At
this writing, it is planned to highlight
this year’s homecoming by the inauguration of the new gym at the Balara site on December 3.
The Alumni Homecoming celebrations will start with the offering of
Mass in the College Chapel by Reverend Father Rector. After breakfast
a motorcade is to be organized to the
new site at Loyola Heights, Balara.
Awaiting the alumm will be the
new Atenco gym, one of the largest
ptivate architectural projects in the
rost-war Philippines. With a length
of 281 feet and a width of 213 fect.
this now completed concrete and steel
tructure has a seating capacity of
7 700 and contams a billiard hall,
bowling alleys, offices, storcrooms and
snack bars. A big billboard depicting
the general disposition of the entire
project will stand at the entrance,
while the sites of the various building soon to rise and the roads leading to them will be marked out for
mapection.
In the new gym basketball games
are planned between Atenco and La
Salle teams. As the curtain raiser, the
Atenco midgets are to take the floor
aguinst the La Salle youngsters. In


the second match the present Atenco
varsity will meet La Salles varsity,
both teams to be reinforced by alumni
players. The third game is to be between teams composed exclusively of
alumni from both schools. After the
tournaments the alumni dinner is
scheduled for the alumni themselves as
well as therr families and friends.
FROGS AND CANARIES
On the morning of October 16, Fr.
Paul Hugendobler, S. J., turned on
the switch of his radio receiver, leaned
back comfortably and listened. Into
his room at the Atenco de Naga the
inspiring melody of Bizet’s "Agnus
Del came soft and clear. The Atenco
de Manila College Glee Club, singing
tegcther with the St. Paul’s choir over
radio station DZPI, met, we hope, the
approval that Sunday of its former
moderator. After their rendition of
the Agnus Dei,” the singers rendered
Cesar Franck s "Panis Angclicus and
Francisco Santiagos “Ave Maria.
This radio program, which heralded
St. Paul’s College Mission Play “The
Kingdom of God, was concluded by
a brief message from Msgr. Gabriel
Reyes, Archbishop of Manila, and
from Msgr. Egidio Vagnozzi, Apostolic Delegate to the Philippines.
The present Glee Club is composed
of sixty members who practice everw
Tuesday and Thursday under the direction of Professor Antomio J. Molina.
With Father Harry Furay, S. J., as
their moderator, the "frogs and ca

DECEMBER, 1949


35


naries" are now busy rehcarsing Chrismas carols.
EYES RIGHT
Busy preparing too, is the Ateneo
Cadet Corps. The individual ROTC
cadet is being drilled for the annual
tactical inspection which will take
place in the early part of February.
Besides being called upon to act as
ushers during the NCAA games,
members of the Atenco Cadet Corps
formed the first group of honor guards
who kept watch over the
6
body of Archbishop Michacl
E
O'Doherty as it lay in
state at the Villa San Mi6
guel. They also formed the
first group of cadets that 
lined the route of the fuA
neral procession for the
late Archbishop of Manila.
Two weeks later, at the
2
ROTC parade and review at
the Luneta for President Quirino,
Captain Ciriaco Lucente, the present
commandant, received commendation
for the Ateneo participation and performance.
REMEMBER THE POOR
As we go to press, the yearly Christmas Package Drive is on the point of
launching another campaign for the
poor at Christmas—and from past
experience we can prophesy its success.
This year the Drive, started by Fathers
Raymund Goggin and George Willman
back in 1924, celebrates its silver jubilee. We are sure that, if its founders could be present, they would be
pleased and happy, for their twenty.
five year old campaign to bring
Christmas cheer to Manilas poor has
truly borne fruit and has become an
inspiring tradition and an integral part
of the Ateneo spirit. The Christmas
Package Drive benefits not only the
needy of the city but the students as
well, for this contest affords them an
36


opportunity for displaying cooperation
and an excellent outlet for their bubbling enthusiasm, their generosity and
spirit of sacrifice.
"GOING, TEACH ALL NATIONS'
The Ateneo Catholic Instruction
Lcague has genial Father Martin Cascy for its present moderator. Father
Casey contemplates a program of gradual expansion and hopes to see in the
near future a catechetical center established in every metropolitan district,
even if residential houses,
back yards, and vacant
sheds have to be utilized for
the purpose.
When Father Leo MCGovern sounded the clarion call
for ACIL volunteers during
the first week of August,
the response was somewhat
disheartening. During the
carly meetings only a few
of the seats in the assembly room
were occupied. But the ACIL was
striving not for quantity but for quality in its members. Although only
one half of last year’s members had
reported, the majority of this year’s
members had at least a year’s experience as catcchists. These veteran
catechists had carly jomed the organization because they were willing to
make the sacrifices, large and small,
demanded of them as they bring the
light of the Catholic Faith to the underprivileged children of Sta. Mesa.
Every Wednesday afternoon a brief
efficiency meeting is called in which
the lesson to be taught is discussed,
and ways and means of making the lesson lively, clear and interesting are
proposed and adapted. Then the volunteers set out for Sta. Mesa where a
total of fifteen hundred public school
tots eagerly await religious instruction.
The ACIL is proud of the fact that it
15 now in full charge of the Burgos
Elementary School center which last
“  "


year was a joint project undertaken
with the Sta. Rosa catechists.
At the termination of the Christmas Package Drive when the fever of
excitement has died down, when the
individual class scores have been tallied, when the winning class has been
cetermined and congratulated, the
members of the ACIL will still be absorbed in the arduous task of sorting
the canned goods, the clothes, the
toys and the thousand other commodities, of packing them neatly into


bags and distributing them to the
needy families of Manila. As its former moderator remarked, "Where there
is love for work, there is no labor.
With Christmas a few days off, these
men who bring Christ to the ignorant
and the needy, will enjoy the happiest
Chnstmas. For God is their paymaster and one’s pay in happiness can be
multiplied only by dividing.
ENRIQUE L. ESQUIVEL, JR.,
A.B. '51


IIf


Poetry Contest: Honorable Mention
Christmas
Ly PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B., '52
There is a silence
As the listening earth —
Princes and lowly-born
Awaits the King’s birth.
Mist covers the meadow,
Mist covers the mart;
But all songs of Christmas
Sing through my heart.
Stillness is deep on
This world tonight ..
But ob, the still glory
Of one star's light!
Dear star of Christmas,
Shine softly when
In the blessed manger
He is born again!
So may the beavenly
Choric voices sing
So may the stars shine
For our infant King!
So may we as pilgrims
Seek where the King lies,
All the love of Christmas
Starring His eyes.


DECEMBER, 1949


37


Looking Back
By JOSE TUASON, JR., Litt. B. '51


—HRISTMAS is so close that
UI can hear it breathing down
my neck. Christmas will
ED
bring with it the usual crop
of usual resolutions that are not intended to be fulfilled and the usual
zany antics people are wont to perform during this time of the year. Almost everyone indulges in lunacy now
and then, but why, of all times, must
people choose the end of one year and
the beginning of the next to do all
the things they want to do all the
year round? It’s probably because
Christmas brings with it the spirit of
joviality, kindredship, and lightheartedness among other spirits.
Signs of Christmas appear everywhere. There’s that cold, not so biting wind, injecting into us Christmas
generosity—with an unlicensed hypodermic. At the rate the days are
passing, we’ll soon run right smack
into the twenty-fifth, and it will leave
us dumbfounded, flabbergasted and
broke. If there’s one thing I don’t
like about Christmas, it’s gift-giv...
Did I hear you say anything? Yes,
on all sides one sees sure signs of impending catastrophe. The cool refreshing wind, the stores with their
ornate and usual Christmas decorations, the hiking of prices.
But at this time of the ycar, people
like to get sentimental, to reminisce
and look back. I don’t want to be a
k. ¡., so go ahead and reminisce.
While you’re busy, let’s us others
take a look at the gift list. In the field
38


of music, inventors have finally come
out with pegless violins. This is so
you can buy them with no strings attached. An agcless gift, of course,
we owe to Edison who invented the
first talking machine that could be
shut off.
But let’s come to the more philosophical side of life. Is it not true that
man has, from time immemorial,
striven to berter himself? But is it
not also true that man has not always
tried to better the lot of his fellow
man? Why do you think the Communists have been able to get a hold
on the world? Though a Communist
is a fellow who’ll share his nothing
with everyone else (if they'll pay the
price in freedom) you cannot deny
that their doctrine has something enticing and alluring to the common
man who’s downtrodden by the capitalist—the charitable capitalist, of
course, who belicves in low wages so
he can make enough to support charities for ncedy workers. So we work and
toil and toil and work to pay for the
last war and finance the next. And
from the way things look, the Bataan
veteran’s kid brother will soon be off
to fight a war to end peace, succeeding his other brother who went off to
fight for a peace to end war. So, let s
wake up to the present state of things.
It does not augur well.
I wanted to end on a scrious note,
but it seems to me, I can’t, because
there’s no such thing. Do-re-mi-fasol-la-ti-do!
“  "


ON MARLOWE'S DOCTOR FAUSTUS


PART from the interest always provoked by the preternatural, the ecrie
Aland the horrible, The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus has a more
permanent and profound attraction based on its moral and aesthetic
elements. Written by Christopher Marlowe, the brightest star in Elizabethan drama before Shakespeare’s rise, Doctor Faustus presents the most
dramatic stuff of conflict that can ever be found in life: the universal struggle of the soul in choosing between Christ and Mammon.
Written and dramatized for the Elizabethan public, Marlowe’s play is
mcaningful also to the twentieth century audience. Its purpose will be realized if it puts some check on modern man’s wild pursuit of intellectual debris
and holds before him the fearful exampic and tragedy of Doctor Faustus who
undertook the same unholy quest. Men of the twentieth century will sec in
Doctor Faustus a learned man, not so much unlike themselves, disdaining the
limitations placed on the human mind by the Divine Mind (modern man in
turn contemns restrictions on sensual indulgence), flinging his non serviam in
God’s face, and selling his immortal soul to Lucifer for a paltry twenty-four
years of profane, devilish knowledge. They will see in Doctor Faustus the vanity of exchanging one’s birthright for a mess of pottage: vanitas vanitatum et
omnia vanitas.
Although it possesses sublime moral fiber, yet Marlowe’s play is strikingly
weak in dramatic structure. Indeed, the only unity it can claim as drama is
that which flows from the tragic person of Doctor Faustus and his powerful
soul-conflict in embracing or rejecting Christ. If this is removed, we have
merely a desert of secluded, disconnected cpisodes in which Faustus flings himself about in unearthly feats, necromancies and satanic exploits. In this desert
one may discern only two oases of dramatic value: first, Faustus signing with
his blood the bond wherein he barters away his soul and body to Lucifer;
and second, the final settlement of the bond by which Lucifer triumphantly
drags his trophy, the lost Faustus, into hell.
Yet the greatness of Marlowe, as a dramatist, and his Docfor Faustus, as
a drama, does not depend on dramatic structure, for the playwright was not
especially concerned with concentration and inevitability in plotting (as was
Sophocles in his well-knit tragedy Ocdipus Tyrannus) nor with the clearly-defined parts outlined in the Aristotelian concept of drama. Rather, Marlowe,
the dramatist, should be remembered for his superb handling of the blank verse
in tragic drama. From a weak, dull and rigid line which characterized the
Elizabethan drama of his time, he cvolved a form vibrating with vigor, varicty,
flexibility and majestic swecp—thus injecting into his characters poetic elo

DECEMBER, 1949


39


quence, sincerity and dramatic power. We hear, for instance, from Doctor
Faustus' lips a sparkling gem of heroic verse revealing his thirst for beauty and
a “heaven" when he bcholds the Mephistophiles-evoked Helen of Troy:
Was this the face that launched a thousand ships,
And burnt the topless towers of Ilium?
Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss."
Exploiting the dramatic possibilities of blank verse with a deft and delicate touch, Marlowe paints the surging emotions of his characters in vigorous
lines. We witness a portrayal of this kind in Mephistophiles’ speech, and we
are led with him to feel the painful loss of God:
“Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it:
Think’st thou that I, who saw the face of God,
And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
Am not tormented with ten thousand hells,
In being deprived of everlasting bliss?
O Faustus, leave these frivolous demands,
Which strike a terror to my fainting soul!”
But certainly, Marlowe’s blank verse came into its own in tragic drama
when he rendered his Docfor Fanstus immortal by writing the trenchant last
scene of the play. Few lines in English poetry can excel, both in imagery and
cloquence, the last lines of Faustus when he is about to be dragged into hell;
"Mountains and hills, come, come, and fall on me,
And hide me from the heavy wrath of God!
No, no!
Then will I headlong run into the earth:
Earth, gape! O no, it will not harbor me!
You stars that reigned at my nativity,
Whose influence hath allotted death and hell,
Now draw up Faustus, like a foggy mist,
Into the entrails of yon lab’ring clouds,
That, when you vomit forth into the air,
My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths,
So that my soul may but ascend to heaven!”
It was Marlowe who bestowed on the Elizabethan drama the august prestige and luster that it had lacked before him. The granduer of dramatic diction instinct in his pentameters was a heritage by which Shakespeare certainly
profited. Even lofty Milton, in his rambling, rolling Paradise Lost, is indebted
to Marlowe for some of his epic power and stateliness.
- MARIO C. REYES, A.B., '50


40


“  "


Bathos
By ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B., '51


When Jesus was born on that first Christmas day
Magic melodies drowned the whole world, they say.
Silver seraphs with lyres all erystal and light
Strummed the first waking note in the songs of that night.
And newly-serubbed cherubs flew flapping their wings
To hum where a blue-veiled Madonna sweet sings.
E'en the littlest star perched on Night's diadem
Strained to sing with the big Star of Bethlehem.
And the songs of the wind that are always so sad,
That night 'round a stable were wistfully glad.
And the lambs did sing and the donkey did too
To the beat of the bass of a lone cow's moo.
But 1 think that the angels, the Lady in Blue,
And the mules and the stars and the lone wind too
Stop their songs for awbile to bebold on their King
A new smile everytime little children may sing.


DECEMBER, 1949


41


NINETEEN STORIES


By GRAHAM GREENE
Viking Press, 1949
(Bookmark P5.80)


RAHAM Greene’s explanation of these stories is that they "are merely
(yIthe by-products of a novelist’s carcer.” Written at long intervals between 1929 and 1948, most of the nincteen stories in this book have
appeared previously in various periodicals. For readers already acquainted with Graham Greene’s novels, Brigblon Rock and his more recent
bestseller, the controversial Heart of the Matter, the present volume contains
little of the author's gift of presenting the human weakness of disillusioned and
frustrated characters lost in their own confusion. Yet some of these tales reflect Author Greene’s favorite theme of modern man’s spiritual crisis, which
theme is handled more to advantage in his novels. In these short stories this
theme has little place for effective development, a fact admitted by the author
when he says that the short story is "an exacting form which I have never properly practiced."
Three of these stories stand out as representative of Greene at his best.
The first of these, entitled A Chance for Mr. Lerer well exemplifies his peculiar
type of moral conflict. A fortyish man, having suffered heart-breaking reverses, attempts to reshape his life by venturing on an expedition to Africa for
a certain patent office in London. His duty is to report the results of a new
invention being tested by a certain Mr. Davidson, which promises to revolutionize mining. In spite of his prayers that his job may be successful, he discovers that Davidson has died from a tropical discase and that the invention is
a failure. At what seems to be the culmination of his defeats, Mr. Lever
chooses to sacrifice self-honor for material gain.
The second story, The Hint of an Explanation, is a probing account of a
freethinker’s tormented struggle between irrational adherence to his own convictions and his furtive—and unsuccessful—inquiry into the Catholic Faith.
Nurtured by a decp-rooted envy in his hatred of Catholics, he evolves a horrible scheme to induce a boy of ten to commit sacrilege. The ending of this
affair in the freethinker’s crushing defeat and in the boy’s spiritual awakening
might influence many to vote it the best story in the collection.


42


  '


The last story, The Other Side of the Border, is an intended novel which
Greene abandoned to write Brigbton Rock. It draws together four interesting
characters against a backdrop of the African West Coast — Hands, Morrow,
Colley, and Father Billings. These men have faced profound disappointment
and, embittered in their outlook on the world, they seek after something to
save themselves. All four behave like despairing automatons, except perhaps
for Billings, who appcars to be the only one near to overcoming his own weakness. Loosely constructed, this story is the least impressive in plot, but as a
character study of the lives of weak people, it is convincing.
Although most of these stories strike little depth, nearly all provide a certain amount of “thriller-style” entertainment, mixed with the horrific to stir
readers who enjoy this kind of reading matter. Among the best are The Basement Room, recently made into a movie called Fallen Idol, which tells of the
tragic involvement of a small boy in the affairs of grownups; The End of the
Party, a terrifying story of a child’s abnormal fear; Proof Positive, a macabre
story of a spiritualist’s decay; and A Litfle of the Edgware Road, guaranteed to
make the flesh crawl.
Taken as they arc, these tales are typical of Greene’s relentless portrayal
of weaklings. One may rightly call onesided a presentation of characters exclusively as victims of adverse circumstance in a sick world gutted in matcrialism and shoddy illusion—a “drab empty forest . .. where it is impossible
to belicve in any spiritual life, in anything outside the dying round you.”
Some readers, like TiMe’s reviewer, find these stories representative of the
author’s religious faith amid the paradoxes and atrocities of reality. One cannot dismiss as irrclevant the moral and religious implications, for Greenc here
explicitly involves his characters in moral struggles and stresses the significance
of sin and salvation, though not so emphatically as in The Heart of the Matfer.
That is why these stories are in a sense Catholic; that is why they are points of
discussion too. Like Dostoevsky, Green seems to have worked out a negative
approach to the realization of God and the problem of eternal salvation. His
peculiar type of tortuous and paradoxical portrayal is hard but stimulating
reading.
EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B. '55


THE MASS OF THE FUTURE


By GERALD ELLARD, S.J.
Bruce Publishing Company, 1948


-fHE rites of the Mass have undergone numerous modifications on ac*Icount of the needs of the passing years. Such partial changes are to
be expected also in the future. Thus Father Ellard says, "Every single
LEs
period in the Church’s history has contributed to enrich those rites, and
the twentieth century will want to go on making its contributions.”
Before considering what the Mass of the future will be like, the author
informs us of the origin, the history, and the present condition of the Holy


13


DECEMBER, 1949


Sacrifice. With this in mind he then forecasts various changes and indicates
present tendencies which may influence possible future modifications of the
Mass.
From the beginning, however, the author makes it clear that the basic element of the Mass—sacrifice—cannot change. Only the outward ceremonies can
undergo modification, as they themselves have evolved from various Christian
customs of the past.
This book can well serve as spiritual reading and as a guide for all interested in the origins of the ceremonies of the Holy Sacrifice. The reader will
find in the examples and illustrations many interesting sidelines on the historical
conflict between the Church and its attackers. In the main, Father Ellard’s
purpose is not to prepare us for any future change but to increase devotion to
the Mass through a better knowledge of what is going on in the sanctuary.
This book, however, presupposes on the readers’ part some previous understanding of Catholic liturgy.
FELICIANO JIMENEZ, JR., A.B. '53.


CARDINAL MINDSZENTY SPEAKS


Introduction by AKOS ZOMBORY
Longmans, Green, 1949


 TAY by day it is becoming clearer that mighty evil forces are abroad
lin this world, plunging nations into the "abyss of a new Dark Age.”
One does not understand indeed how these evil seeds take root and
E
grow in the hearts of men; one merely feels they are there, just as
strong as the love for truth, liberty and justicc.
This book is a timely, absorbing—if grim—revelation of how these two
forces—the Good and the Evil—struggled for supremacy in Hungary, and of
how the latter eventually triumphed by sheer brute force. Yet that is only
a part of the story. Somchow in its perusal one also becomes aware of a personal drama: the courageous but nonetheless frustrated attempt of a man to
champion law and order and the ideals of democracy in the spirit of the Gospel.” This man, whom the entire world now acclaims as a hero, is Joseph
Cardinal Mindszenty.
The Cardinal’s stand on the “human freedoms" and religious liberty was
no sudden inspiration. Like most great men, he was born a fighter; like them,
no doubt, when the need arises, he will also die a fighter. What he has done
for Hungary during her most turbulent period is now part of history.
The year 1947 was a year of double significance to Hungary. In that
year, Joseph Mindszenty, till then the Bishop of Vezprem, was made Cardinal
and Primate of Hungary. In that year, too, Hungary held her first national
elections since the War. The anti-Communist Small Holders’ Party won by
an overwhelming majority. But it was a shallow and shortlived victory, as


44


  


events were soon so prove. The Communists, protected by Russia, were given
the most important posts in the new government and almost immediately they
started their pernicious campaign against the Church.
Backed by the Red Army, Communist quislings began a reign of terror.
Church property was illegally confiscated. Catholic schools were closed down
and Catholic priests and nuns were persecuted for instigating so-called "Fascist
conspiracies" against the government. Arrests were made daily and false confessions were extorted from innocent victims. Following the disclosure of
these alleged plots, religious processions were prohibited and Catholic associations were dissolved. During this enslaving of Hungary Cardinal Mindszenty
protested vigorously and fearlessly. When the Communists finally chose as
their target the education of Hungarian youth, Cardinal Mindszenty stood his
ground and would not compromise. It was his last stand. In December,
1947, he was arrested, tried and found "guilty."
Shortly before his imprisonment, however, the Cardinal, foreseeing what
was about to happen, arranged for the publication of this book in free lands
outside the Iron Curtain. It is a careful collection of important documents
and pastoral letters whose purpose is to let the world know of the evil menace
that lurks in the Russian slave states and of the Church’s stand against that
menace. But it is also the eloquent testimony of a man condemned to the dungeon because he saw injustice and fought it. Lastly, it is an inspiring tale of
defeat turned into the most glorious of victories—the victory by faith of a
great man before perjured judges and traitors to Hungary.
RICARDO A. HENSON, Litt. B. '52


LAND OF MILK AND HONEY


By W. L. WHITE
Harcourt, Brace 8 Company, 1949


O Vasili Kotov, it all seemed very strange. At the hotel where he
* Ifirst stayed in America, he laid out his papers, seven documents in all,
before the clerk for inspection. From experience he was sure that they
E
would be handed over to a NKVD, as is done in Russia, and would be
carefully checked. Instead, this lady clerk just asked him to sign a card and
handed back all his documents without even reading or checking them. That
night, he couldn’t sleep. Maybe that lady clerk was just careless. Maybe it
was a deliberate trick of the American NKVD so that they could pounce on
him at midnight when he would be worried and nervous. But nothing happened that night—nor in the days following. Other things puzzled him during his first days in America: the man in the cafe loudly criticizing the President of the United States, the finely dressed lady driving a car, the long rows
of stores in the business section where anyone could buy all the things he needed
just for money, the piles of newspapers on the newstands with people taking


DECEMBER, 1949


45


them and always leaving money in the box, whether watched or not, and, most
incredible of all, bottles of milk left unguarded at doors in the early morning,
and this not at just one doorway, but at many.
Indeed none of these things would happen in Sovier Russia. To men and
women like Vasili, who have risen out of the bubbling cauldron of the Revolution, and who, since childhood, have been taught an entirely different set of
values in life and another sense of right and wrong, the ways of freedom are
indeed very strange.
To picture the new Soviet man, what he is like, how he reacts, what he
thinks and why, and to explain why Russia is not the land of milk and honey
that some few Americans think it is, but that America is such a land for millions of Russians—these are the aims of W. L. White in his book, "Land of
Milk and Honey.” And through the medium of one typical Russian boy who
is of the New Soviet generation, author White accomplishes his ends masterfully.
Vasili Kotov is a child of the Revolution. Together with his girl friend
Galya, he grew up in an atmosphere of constant plodding, where everything is
done and sacrificed for the System. To them, the days before Lenin and the
times of old Russia were just senseless legends related by the old folks who were
dissatisfied with the new System. Like true children of the Revolution, Vasili and Galya were idealistic and had high hopes for the new Soviet state. They
closed their eyes to the imperfections of the System. They refused to see the
harm being wrought by the overall collectivization of farms, by the uneasy
minds of the "Kulaks" or rich landowners from whom large tracts of land and
huge numbers of cattle were taken. They refused to see the total lack of spirit
of the people in their work, the somber atmosphere that pervaded the towns
and the absence of laughter in the homes. They knew that all were being sacrificed for the System. “They suffer now so that tomorrow they may prosper.”
But as Vasili advanced slowly into manhood, small but significant questions began slipping into his mind. His first doubts rose at the University
where his best friends were arrested on a charge of conspiring against the government. Why were they sent to Siberia when they, like all children of the
Revolution, had the welfare of Russia in their hearts? Was it because they
proposed changes in the System when they knew such changes would banish
so much misery from the people? Why was it that a man could not talk confidentially to his friend for fear of being arrested by the omni-present NKVD.
Was there really need for such a police force? Then, during the war, when the
advances of their army gave him his first glimpse of the outside world he
asked himself: Why do these Rumanians, these Hungarians, live more prosperously than the Russians, when back home we are told that these people are
dying from hunger and exhaustion? Why were their streets lined with stores
where everyone, and not merely a chosen few, might buy anything? Was
there any reason for lying about their condition? What of the other Western
countries.
Slowly these questions began to disturb Vasili. In his youth he used to
dream of equality. He did not mind being poor, for he knew that someday
all would live prosperously. Yet, maybe this equality had been a childish dream,


46


  


possible only when he and the Revolution had been very young. Then he
thought of the sacrifices he and Galya had made for the System. What government in all human history had been given a decper trust than that which
all his young Soviet generation had proudly given its leaders? How had this
been repaid? Then he remembered that night on furlough when he had seen
Galya for the first time in ycars. He remembered how this girl, who had had
such high hopes for happiness when they and the Revolution were young, had
told him of the arrest of her father who had nothing but concern for Russia,
of how her spirit had broken down and given way to this new System. He remembered the curious way she stared at him, as if he were some distant memory, and he remembered the despair in her voice as she bade him goodbye.
Had they been justly repaid?
This is the new Sovict man as author White pictures him. His hopes, in
spite of the new mold into which they have been cast, are much like our own.
If war should come, we must not confuse him with the real enemy who rules
and oppresses a helpless suffering pcople.
ELADIO ALDECOA, JR., A.B., '52


DECEMBER, 1949


47








A
prlzo
TOJRAD
E
lime I, Te. 
Taick, 1950


AML ARANED QUARILRRA


THE CONTENTS


EDITORIALS
Quo Usque ........... .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... S. K. R.
The Why and the Wherefore....... A. P. G. M.
Cursing the Darkness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M. V. S.
ESSAYS
Art Built on Sand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Antonio P. G. Manuud
The Champion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Onofre Pagsanghan


The Future of the United Nations .
The Ideal of Beauty in Modern Art ....
Contributions of the UNO to World Peacc
The Parade ............ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Heaven .......


... Enrique Esquivel Jr.
. . . . . . . Hector Hofilena
. . . . . . . Hector Quesada
. . . . . . . . . Arturo Tanco
. . . . . Salvador Gonzalez


SHORT STORIES


Late Summer, Violent Summer .........
Woman, Thy Name Is Happiness .......
The Mountain Climber ...............
Pedro.
Dawn of a New Day .......... . . . . . . . .
The Witch ......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


... Gregorio Brillantes
 . . . . . . . . . . Victor Diaz
. . . . . . . Fernando David
.. . . . . . . Sixto K. Roxas
.... Roberto Concepcion
. . . . . . . Ricardo Henson


VERSE


Haunted House ......... . . . . . . . . . . . . .
On Hearing Wagner .......... . . . . . . . .
Thoughts ...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A Mountain Echo ............. . . . . . . .
Shadow Lines ........... . .. . . . . . . . . . .
Quest..........................
Heart Song ............... . . . . . . . . . . .


Ricardo Nepomuceno Jr.
.. Carmelo P. Quintero
Ricardo Nepomuceno Jr.
. . . . . . . Percival Olarte
. . . . . . . Leonides Benesa
. . . . Maximo V. Soliven
. . . . . . . Percival Olarte


FEATURES
Drama—Florencio Tamesis, Antonio Quintos, Mario C. Reyes, Ramon Bagasan, Gregorio Brillantes, Andres Bautista, Rex Redhouse,
The Campus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Enrique Esquivel Jr.
Books—Manuel M. Cuenca, Ricardo Henson, Mario C. Reyes, Emmanuel Torres ............................
The Arena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Robert Wilson


Page


3
5
7


15
21
26
34
45
51
56


8
23
30
47
58
60


14
22
53
29
36
52
53


37
54
65
74


STAFF


Editor-in-Chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . SIXTO K. ROXAS, A.B. '50
Managing Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '5 1


SECTION EDITORS


Rodolfo Olivares, A.B. '5 1
Onofre Pagsanghan, A.B. '5 1
Florencio Tamesis, A.B. '50
Antonio Manuud, A.B. '52


Enrique Esquivel, Jr., A.B. '51
Robert Wilson, A.B. '52
Jose Tuason, Jr., Litt.B. '51
Norberto Marchadesch, A.B. '5 1


ASsOCIATE EDITORS


Mario C. Reyes, A.B. '50
Hector Quesada, A.B. '51
Francisco Borja, A.B. '51
Gregorio Brillantes, Litt.B. '52
Hector Hofilena, A.B. '51
Ernesto Gorospe, A.B. '53
Emmanuel Torres, A.B. '53


Business Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . JUANITO ORDOVEZA, A.B. '50
Circulation Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . MANUEL ROXAS, JR., A.B. '52


  , a literary magazine supplement to The Guidon, is published
four times annually by the College of Arts and Sciences of the Atenco de Manila. Its editorial
offices are at the Atenco de Manila, Padre Faura Street, Manila, Philippines; its publication
office at Carmelo & Bauermann, Inc., 2057 Azcarraga, Manila. Subscription rates are four
pesos yearly, single copies one peso.
This publication was entered in the Post Office of Manila as second class mailing matter on
Scptember 10, 1949.


2


“  "


QUO USQUE...?


WIIS Excellency Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippine
* a (Republic, has decided to support his Cabinet in the appro val of the Palma biography of Dr. Rizal as recommended
supplementary reading for second year high school students.
I can almost hear the silent applause rising from the Communist ranks like a malignant mist. Our Government has dealt
a slap in the face to the Faith in this “Catholic country. And
every slap in the face dealt to the Catholic Church anywhere in
the world is a pat of encouragement on the back of Communism.
More and more now, it has become evident that the two
struggling forces in the world are not really the
Two
U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A., but two religions: ComReligions
munism and Catholicism, the religion of Satan and
the religion of Christ. Underneath the “cold war" is a raging
struggle between spiritual forces. The stakes are eternal spoils:
human souls!


Even sincere non-Catholics who desire vigorously to fight
this monstrous creature of Western sin unconsciously resort to
Catholic weapons: faith and morals. Men who glorified in independent search for truth admit that the greatest truths they discovered are merely pages torn from the book of traditional Christianity.


Considering this, how will the Communists fare in the Philippines? I wonder. The unpleasant hue and cry that was
aroused by the Palma book has been very revealing. It has shown
that there are very active anti-Catholic groups in the Philippines
groups which, though otherwise divergent, can easily be united
in a cause where religious intolerance can be disguised as zeal for
liberty. Also it has revealed a great number of "retired Catholics" and "liberal Catholics” within our ranks—some of them occupying top positions in our Government. They are the men


MARCH, 1950


and women who preface what in effect are cowardly denunciations of their Faith with “I am a Catholic, but ...


The Enemy
Within


The Communists are masters of satanic strategy. Recognizing the Catholic Church as her greatest enemy, CommunismListon Oaks tells us—is quick to exploit existing
animosities against the Church. And she will find
plenty of allies in this country: Masons and ill-informed or insincere Protestants, as well as renegade Catholics.
These groups have been most vocal in their denunciation of Catholicism the past few months. They have unearthed the old
musty accusations fabricated by the enemies of the Church in
the dark ages of the "enlightenment," and long since discredited
by both Catholic and non-Catholic historians.


An ironic thing about these attacks is that many, particularly
the young, bring them up in order to be “revolutionary, daring,
shocking. But actually, to attack the Church is no more revolutionary than it is for a woman to wear last year’s fashions. It is
just as dull, as drab and as boring. To attack the Catholic Church
is to demand that men follow the leanings of lower nature and do
the ignoble thing. It is an act that links its author to the prejudiced reactionaries and hate mongers whose opinions have been
discarded by impartial, critical scholars.
It is the Church that is revolutionary, that is daring and
shocking to selfcomplacency. She declares that man’s intellect
and will are weakened by original sin and, if followed in all that
their weakness suggests, will degrade their owner below the brute.
The Church dares to say that the normal man is born with tendencies that pull him below normal morality, and that the way to
balance and reason lies in controlling human desires.
The Christian A man can regain his noblest nature only by the
Revolution
supernatural help of grace. That is how revolutionary the Church is, how daring and shocking—so shocking, as a
matter of fact, that its Founder was seized by men, tortured and
crucified. But I am digressing.


The Communists will find many allies here in our country;
but how strong will they find the opposition? The question may
be put this way: how Catholic is the Philippines?
The answer is not too encouraging. We have acquired Western culture. But with it, we have absorbed the disease that has
been eating at its heart. The disease has not grown here to the ex

4


  "


tent it has in the Western nations, but it is growing—and its effect is commonly called secularization. More accurately, it is a
return to a new paganism, a paganism that has already inflicted
grave wounds on humanity: Fascism, Nazism and now, Communism.
Instead of infusing our Catholicism into this rotting civilization to stop its decay, unconsciously we have begun to drink in
its putrid secretions—its fashions, its art, its attitudes.
How long are we going to suffer this to go on? Not for
much longer—we cannot. Already, on our northern doors, perdition is knocking. And in the very heart of our country, there
are rumblings of disaster, growing louder with maddening constancy like the footsteps of fate.
S. K. R.
THE WHY AND THE WHEREFORE


column of togata, quite self-conscious and excited, will parade before happy parents, the Faculty and the Dean to accept beribboned sheepskins and congratulatory applause. And truly, even
now, our Seniors nervously await their launching into what is
known in hackneyed language as "the sea of Life.
As their waiting draws nearer to its end, a series of questions
may rise in the mind of undergraduate: "Why all this fuss about
graduation? Why all this excitement about getting a diploma?
In fact, why all these years of schooling? Why do
A Question
I go to college?"
of Aims
There was a whole encyclical written in answer to these questions— and many more books both before and
after Pius XI. But we need not go into all that. Suffice it to
say that we go to college for an education.
What is tbat education for?
Well—many things, we say. But we go to college primarily
(and this is not calculated to surprise) to start—or at least, learn
how to start—a revolution. This Revolution is the be-all of
Catholic education. It is the root and the beginning, the ultimate
cause and the final reason for all these years of eloquentia and
scientia.


IN just a few more weeks—perhaps the most turbulent of
Ithe entire school year—a platform will be erected on the
Ateneo patio. There, amid blue and white bunting, a


MARCH, 1950


Today, no one doubts that The Day is so near that people pretend to be no longer awed by it. The Day may
Which
Revolution? soon stare Philippine Social Order in the face, and
say, "You need a major face-lifting, comrade, and
by my glass of vodka, you’re getting it now!” And then—the
revolution of force.
Catholic education concerns itself with an altogether different type of movement—the Revolution of Love. That is the revolution college is now preparing us for—a change in the social
ideals of the Country. For if we do not want a nation subordinated to the tyrannical decrees and manifestoes of Antichrist, then
Christ’s ideals have to become the Philippines’ ideals. The country—its people, its system, its whole social make up—must be won
over for Christ. The Day must be Christ’s Day.
Wherefore college becomes the training ground for Heaven’s
revolutionaries. And a man should go to college realizing this.
A man finds himself in college not merely because he wants
to save his individual soul. (For that end, he need only know his
catechism and observe the Ten Commandments). A man is in
college because he has come to the realization that after submitting to its four, five, or six-year grind, he will find himself better shaped to fit the cogs of society, with the result that he more
easily and more positively hastens the sparks of ReThe Individual volution in his particular field of influence. His
and Society
concern is not only his own soul, but the souls of
thousands; and though he may never succeed in the fight to win
eternal happiness for a single neighbor, he will nevertheless have
made his contribution if he has thrown himself into the good fight
with stout heart and great soul.
And thus it is that the Catholic college exists. A diploma
of a Catholic college is not simply sheepskin and india ink and
ribbon; it is an order from the highest High Command charging
the Catholic graduate with the duty of victory—victory in the
Revolution to be accomplished by living Christianity, victory for
heaven, victory for Christ.
A. P. G. M.


  "


CURSING THE DARKNESS


A Helpful
Force


ECENTLY, a writer in the publication of a Catholic college severely criticized the College Editors' Guild. He
took it upon himself to call it some unpleasant names.
We do not seek to defend the mistakes the College Editors”
Guild has committed. But we have this to say: we believe in the
Guild. We believe that it can rise above what it
has been in the past and what it is now. We believe that it can become a powerful and helpful
force for shaping student opinion, for bringing student readers to
think constructively. We believe finally that through the Guild
we can some day make the student voice heard and respected.
All these are reasons why we cannot praise the conduct of
those who petulantly desert the Guild. We Catholics know that
we have the Truth. Can we who have the Truth impart it to
others by keeping away, by washing our hands, by saying, "I won’t
have anything to do with you”? This is no time
“Holier Than to adopt a “holier-than-thou” attitude and withThou"
draw into a shell. If we are ever to win a battle we
must be willing to fight and fight and fight. We must not lose
heart even if our victories appear little as against seemingly great
defeats. Remember the words of Father Keller’s famous quotation? “It is better to light one candle than to curse the darkness.


M. V. S.


MARCH, 1950


7


First Place: Short Story Contest


Late Summer,
Violent Summer


NDRES, in the crowd, listened
Ato the man speaking on the
platform. He is a great leadES
er he said to himself; he has
a good voice...
The man speaking to the crowd was
tall, dark, powerfully-built. He cut a
bold, commanding figure as he stood
on the make-shift bamboo platform
upon the weed-grown field, in the
fierce sunlight, speaking in his clear,
resonant voice to the silent crowd gathered about him, his eyes burning intensely with a strange, deep fire.
He was Modrado, the Supremo of
the People's Army.


It was a motley crowd, the people
gathered around the bamboo platform
in the midafternoon sun. They were
mostly farmers, from San Luis and
Masanting and Sapang Maragul and
the village of Malagu, in the hills; the
men carried long-bladed bolos at their
hips and wide-brimmed buri hats
shielded their faces from the sun.
They wore frayed cotton shirts and
tattered camiseta that revealed broad
chests and dark-brown, muscular arms.
There was a sprinkling of women in
black patadiong and striped tapiz
thin, wrinkled, their lips bloodred with
buyo stains. They all stood patiently


8



  "


in the hot sun, around the bamboo
platform, listening intently to the man
Modrado speak.
A number of men in khaki and maong walked about at the outer fringes
of the crowd, their lean fingers wound
tightly around therr guns, their faces
haggard, unshaven, their eyes sweeping
the horizon beyond the summer fields,
their movements slow with a calculated somberness.
Andres listened to the man Modrado
speak, and a strange sensation of being
lost, of being carried away helplessly,
came to him. It was very hot in the
sun; he could feel himself sweating
copiously; already his head was beginning to throb with the heat, and he
was aware of the strong, stifling reck
that rose from the sun-heated ground.
Modrado raised his voice suddenly
to an almost shrill pitch. He was coming to the end of his speech and now,
he gestured furiously, dramatically
shaking aloft a clenched fist and then
swinging wide his arms and turning
his face to the sky: the ringing consonants of the dialcct tumbled out of
his mouth rapidly, angrily, like the
floodwaters of the Malapad River in
the season of the rains.
“We shall no longer starve! Our
children shall no longer cry in their
hunger! Comrades, the hour to strike
has come! Let us all rally bencath the
banner of the common cause! The
plains and the mountains and the
towns and the cities shall be ours! We
shall hold our heads up to the stars,
we shall walk proudly in the sun!"
From the crowd arose wild, impassioned applause. They clapped their
hands and strained their voices with
shouts of “Mabubay!" against the
cloudless, summer sky.
With a mental start, Andres realized he was not joming in the cheering, in the clapping of hands. He
began to clap his hands as he watched


Modrado descend the bamboo platform
and disappear beneath the milling
heads of the crowd. The strange feeling of being lost, of being swept away,
returned again; a sudden helplessness
came upon him, and he closed his eyes
fiercely to steady himself.
The shouting and the clapping of
hands died down; the crowd started to
break up. Andres stood there uncertainly: he saw his neighbor Terio coming towards him with a smile on his
flushed, sweat-drenched face.
“The last of the meetings is over,"
Terio said, his voice excited, his eyes
strangely alive with a ficrce, desperate
look.
“Tomorrow night—" Andres began.
“Tomorrow night, we march,” Terio said, Arc you not glad, Andres?
Are you not glad the waiting is over?"
“Yes,” Andres said. His own voice
sounded strange to him, and suddenly.
he was afraid Terio had noticed the
strangeness.
“We must belicve in the Supremo,"
Terio said, suddenly gripping Andres
arm tightly. "We must have faith in
him. He is our last hope.
Andres said nothing. He turned his
face away from the dark, intense look
in Terio’s eyes that he found hard to
incet; the lostness, the confusion
mounting in him, he stared at the
mountains of Tarlac, far away, beyond the summer fields, their individual outlines blurred in the shimmering heat of midafternoon.
“Perhaps we’ll camp in the hills,
Tenio said.
Perhaps, Andres said. He saw
Modrado and his men walking away
towards the clumps of bamboos that
grew thickly at the far end of the
treeless field. Modrado was patting
one of the men on the shoulder, and
laughing, and gesturing with his other
hand.


MARCH, 1950


9


“Do you think we’ll have enough
guns?” Terio said.
"I—I don’t know,” Andres said.
He watched Terio s eldest son Miguel
detach himself from a group near the
bamboo platform and walk with long
awkward strides to where he and Terio stood talking in the sun.
“It’s very hot here, Miguel said,
fanning himself with his buri hat and
wiping the sweat off his brow with
the sleeve of his faded cotton shirt.
"Let us go now."
Andres and Terio and Miguel
walked in silence down the trail that
lay like a strip of dirty abaca rope
Aupon the scorched, brown land.
Through tall cogon grass, and bamboo
brakes, and open fields rough with the
stubble of dried rice stalks, the threc
men walked on in the countryside
silence, each alone with his thoughts,
the dead leaves that carpeted the trail
rustling dryly bencath their unshod
feet.
It was a hot, windless day. The
fields were brown and ycllow with late
summer: the time of the rains had not
come, and this was yet the season when
the sun beat down fiercely upon the
land from clear, blue skies, when it
withered the falabib that grew on the
banks of the Malapad River, and dried
up the ditches and the carabao wallows, and cracked the stubborn earth
of the villages, and burned the grass
of the pasture lands..
Andres remembered his wife Lucing
suddenly, and he grew weak and hollow inside him with the remembrance.
Last night she had said, Andres, let
us go away to Santa Maria, and there
was fear in her voice, and he had answered harshly, "Sleep now—you arc
like a child," and then he heard her
weeping softly on the sleeping mat,
in the darkness; he had lain unsleep
ing, and even long after the first rooster of dawn had flapped its wings and
10


crowed from a nearby tree, he was still
awake, listening to the faraway barking of dogs, thinking of Modrado and
rice and death and the far-off village
of Santa Maria, beyond the mountains
of Tarlac, where Lucing’s brothers and
sisters were. . . . He recalled all this
now, walking down the trail with Terio and Miguel. And the voice of
Modrado, resonant, persuasive, cut into
his consciousness like a crack of thunder; he saw again Modrado shaking
aloft a clenched fist, his eyes aflame
with a strange, decp fire; he saw again
the crowd in the sun listening intently to Modrado speak of rice and slavcry and freedom; he saw again the
shallow grave of Mang Ramon, the
teniente del barrio who had raised his
voice openly against the People’s
Army; he saw again the men in mgong
and khaki, haggard, ruthless, desperate.
But the thought of Lucing remained
in his mind, insistent, demanding, and
he felt lost and helpless and confused...
“There is no more rice in the vil")
lage, Terio said abruptly, breaking
their long silence. The sun now
touched the rim of the mountains in
the west; the trees cast their lengthening shadows across the trail.
Our rice will not last another
day, Andres said. He felt too weak
and confused to raise his voice.
“They have started the fighting in
Candaba, Miguel said after another
moment of silence.
The trail had ascended a high rise
of ground, and spread as far as Andres’ uncertain gaze could reach were
the fields of late summer, brown and
yellow in the sunlight of late afternoon.
“Tomorrow night,” Terio said, his
voice hard and brittle, "we start for
Sapang Maragul. We will be given
our guns there. After a pause, he
said, "Andres“  "


“What is it?” Andres said.
“I wonder how Don Carlos would
look with a bullet through his head,"
Terio said. He laughed bitterly.
Don Carlos was the hacendero who
owned all the niceland that stretched
for kilometers from Masanting to
where the Malapad River curved like
a snake in San Luis...
Andres remembered now the day
two weeks ago when he and Terio and
Miguel and the men of the village had
gone in their carabao-drawn carts to
the town, to the house of Don Carlos,
to borrow grain. Don Carlos had gone
to the city, and it was the Senora who
looked down upon them from the
ezotea while they stood awkwardly on
the cemented driveway. He remembered now the flat refusal, the bitter
disappointment, the humiliation, and
he felt helpless and beaten, remembering....
It was long ago, and in another land,
it seemed, when the young men strummed their guitars and sang in the
moonlight, when the laughter of children at play rang in the river, when
the farmers and their wives went to
the poblacion for the April ficsta.
This year’s harvest had been poor—
the poorest since the big flood, the old
men said—and the trucks of Don Carlos had long driven away with the palay in the granaries, and the rice bins
now were empty. The farmers lay
awake in the night, listening to the
barking of the restless dogs, thinking
of Modrado and rice and bearded men
in tatters dying in the swamps and
helmeted soldiers in olive-green riding
heavy armored-cars..
When the three men reached the
village, it was twilight; the smell of
cooling sun-heated earth was in the
slow wind that whispered thinly
through the creaking bamboo trees.
The village was unstirring in a strange
kind of silence: the women and the


children at the windows of the frail
nipa houses stared wordlessly at the
three men as they passed; the dogs
eyed them sullenly and growled but
they did not bark.
Andres had lifted a leg over the
broken-down fence into his yard when
Terio said, Andres, wait— He saw
again the dark, desperate look in his
neighbor’s eyes, the fierce, secret intensity he had seen in them at the
mceting, earlier in the afternoon.
“Tomorrow night, before the moon
nises, Terio said, his voice hoarse as
he strove to speak quietly. His son
Miguel stood waiting for him in the
yard, unspeaking, his lips a thin, expressionless line. "Tomorrow night,
Terio said again. Andres could hear
him breathing hard.
When Terio said nothing more, Andres turned to go and climbed over
the fence and walked to his house,
fceling again settle upon him the immense weariness, the lostness, the confusion.
Andres stood uncertainly in the
room, staring blankly at the shifting
leaf shadows that the thin stream of
sunlight through the western window
cast upon the split-bamboo floor,
vaguely aware of the creaking of the
rattan cradle that hung suspended in
the room by two strands of rope to
the bamboo posts, where his child, his
first-born, lay unsleeping, sucking at
its infant’s thumb and whimpering.
Tonight, he said to himself, tonigbt,
before the moon rises'You must not go, Lucing said.
“You must not go with them.” She
sat on the floor, gently swinging the
cradle, her legs drawn to one side,
and when she spoke, she looked up at
Andres, and Andres saw the fierce
anxiety in her eyes.
He said nothing. He went to the
window; the mottled sunlight fell on
his face. He breathed hard to case


MARCH, 1950


11


the tightening in his chest; disordered
thoughts whirled in his mind, and he
could feel coming again, the confusion,
the strange sensation of being swept
away.
"Andres— Lucing said. Andres
—let us go away."
He stood unmoving at the window,
looking down upon the hard, cracked
earth of the yard. Yes, Santa Maria
.. another beginning, another life
. . away from this village of fear ...
riceland there . . the trail across the
fields, and then the concrete highway
.. . supposing . . . The remembrance
of Modrado came again, lashing his
gonfused mind; he saw again the shallow grave of Mang Ramon, the teniente del barrio; he saw again the crowd,
and the men with the guns, ruthless,
desperate. He closed his eyes and
tried to shake off the memory. I am
 coward, I am a coward, he said in
his heart over and over again. In his
confused rage, in his weakness, he suddenly wanted to drive his fist against
the window sill and feel the tearing
of his skin.
"I—I must go, he said, turning
around to face her. He clenched and
unclenched his fists in an effort to
steady his voice. “I have to go with
the men. Tonight.
“No!” she gasped as though she had
not heard rightly. "No!” She was
on her feet suddenly; she went to him
and held on to him desperately by the
arms. “We must go away, Andres,
For the child. For us. But why
can’t we go away? Why? Why?”
He looked away because he could
not look into her eyes where the tears
were beginning and see the sadness
there, the anxety there. “I have to
go, he said lamely.
You are afraid of Modrado!” she
cried fiercely. “You are afraid to disobey him! You are afraid, Andres!
You are afraid—


“Stop it!” he shouted at her, the
weakness, the confusion, taking on the
shape of blind anger now. "You talk
like a madwoman!"
“Go away then, go away!” she
shrieked wildly, beating her little fists
against his thick-muscled shoulders.
Go away and never come back! The
soldiers will shoot you down like a
dog! You are fools, all of youSomethuing snapped inside him. With
a furious, unuttered cry, he struck her
on the face with the back of his hand.
The blow sent her reeling and as she
staggered and fell, she knocked violently against the cradle where the
child lay whimpering. The cradle
began to swing drunkenly and the
ropes that held it to the bamboo posts
strained and twisted; the baby in a
spasm of fright ¡erked up, tilting the
cradle; the baby fell to the floor with
a sharp, painful cry.
Slowly, tenderly, her shoulders
shaking with silent weeping, Lucing,
on the floor, lifted the screaming child
in her arms. The child began to sob
weakly, piteously, losing its breath and
gasping and then sobbing agai. A
cut across its brow began to bleed; the
thin, infant blood etched twisted lines
on the little brow and wetted the
young, sparse growth of hair.
Andres stood over his wife and
child, his face twisted in anguish, the
fear and the confusion mingling with
a searing onrush of shame, and it
seemed the world was hushed deeply
forever but for the sobbing of the
mother and the pained gasping of the
child.
“He is hurt, Lucing sobbed, holding the child to her breast. "He is
hurt.
The child heard its mother’s voice
and it broke out into crying, throaty
and piercing and alive.
He heard the baby’s crying and the
sound engulfed the tensed silence of


12


  '


the world, ending it, filling the vastness of it with the wild, strange music
of crying, and great love, deep tenderness, surged up in his heart, flowing
with the infant’s crying into the aching emptiness inside him, sweeping
away the fear and the ugliness and the
confusion, cleansing him, and the feeling was so sharp, so sudden, that it
was like a knife-wound. Mother and
child . . . mother and child . . . mother and child....
It was like the end of a long, frightening dream. He was upon one knec
on the floor, beside her; he felt the
tenseness easing in his chest when he
saw that the cut on the child’s brow
was small, was shallow; the crying of
the child, throaty, alive, was exultant
music ringing in his ears.
“Lucing, he said, and he bent low,
his lips brushing her disarrayed hair,
so that he could heart him above the
crying of the child. "LucingShe looked at him through her tears;
she bit her lip bravely and tried to hold
back her sobs as though weeping were
a shame.
“We'll go away, he said quictly.
“We’ll go away—now.” He wanted
to say more but it was as though he
had said everything: the love, the tenderness, the triumphant music. And
the beating of his heart was a thousand
thunder hoofs riding across the plains,
over the mountains and the hills, cutting a path, secure, impregnable, to
Santa Maria, where there was hope,
and warmth and clarity in life, and
the fecund earth again.
Andres, Andres, she sobbed weakly....
He strode out of the room, the fear,
the confusion, gone now fecling
strong wine inside him; he was like
a man who could smile now because
he had found the lost faith in all
things good and beautiful.


He half-ran to his carabao feeding
hungrily upon the zacate at the far
end of the yard. As he led the animal towards the house, he heard the
rumble of faraway thunder. He
turned his gaze westward and he saw
the dark masses of clouds that cloaked
the mountain-tops. The afternoon sun
shone with a sickly glare through the
overcast that curtained the sky. He
stood for a moment in the yard, aware
now of the wind that blew from the
summer fields with a hint of rain....
He worked feverishly, cleaning the
bottom of the cart of dried grass and
leaves with his bare hands; while he
worked, he could hear the crying of
the child and the sound of Lucing’s
feet on the floor as she hurried about
in the house and prepared their things.
The carabao stood by quietly, twitching its tail and licking the liquid of
its nostrils...
He had hitched the carabao to the
cart and he was righting the jute sack
over the animal’s warm, broad back
when he heard his neighbor Terio calling to him from across the yard.
Andres! Andres!"
He whirled around, startled. He
stood beside the carabao, tense, waiting,
while he watched Terio and Miguel
and a man he had never seen before
climb over the fence and walk towards him across the yard.
"Andres, let us go now, Terio said,
his eyes flashing with their strange,
desperate look. He turned to the cart,
the carabao. "Arc you going somewhere?” he said, his eyes narrowing
dangerously.
'No, no, Andres said. His voice
trembled; the old fear, the sensation
of being carried away, came on now,
rushing on him like a wave of nauesa.
This is Barajas, Terio said, turning to the stranger. "He’s one of the
Supremo’s lieutenants. He came over
from San Luis to pick us up.


MARCH, 1950


13


The stranger, the man whose name
was Barajas, was tall and broadshouldered. His hair was thick and
long like a woman’s; a scraggly beard
failed to hide the thin, cruel mouth.
A Thompson sub-machine-gun was
slung across his shoulder. He said
nothing; he just looked at Andres with
his slit eyes and said nothing.
“It is yet early, Andres said for
want of something to say, and—and
I—I thought we were going before the
moonrise—" The immense helplessness had settled upon him now, choking his new courage, the singing in his
blood. It is too late now . .. too late
ow: the words screamed in his
whirling brain. “It is still early
and"I know, I know, Terio said impatiently. “But there has been a
change in the plans. The rest of the
men are waiting for us across the
river.”


“Let us go,” Miguel said tersely.
The stranger, the lieutenant of the
Supremo, had folded his arms across
his chest and looked at Andres with
his slit eyes and said nothing.
Lucing, who had heard the voices
of the men in the yard, looked out the
window. Andres saw her silent, openmouthed terror. And in her eyes that
were red with weeping, there was the
knowledge of something dark and
huge and terrible. And the something
hung over the house, the yard, the village, like an unseen, evil presence; it
was in the growl of faraway thunder,
in the wind that blew from the summer fields with a hint of rain.
Andres suddenly wanted to tell
Lucing, to reassure her, that everything, everything, was going to be all
right, but it was as though the dry
tightness in his throat were an impenetrable wall that held back the
sound of his voice.


Haunted House
By RICARDO G. NEPOMUCENO, JR., A.B. '53
Forgot! Forlorn! Forsaken! Thus it stands
Amid the empty darkness of the night,
Amid the wide-eyed silence, by the sands
Of frigbtened brooks that burry in their flight
From some unseen pursuer! Dark ecrie tales
Still hang like cob-webs on its moist, damp wall,
And on its empty floors with mournful wails,
Its slowly dying mem'ries crecp and fall.


14


“  


Art Built on Sand


By ANTONIO P. GELLA MANUUD, A.B. '52


—E may not have known it
Hl himself, but when in the early 1900’s, Marcel Duchamp
E
painted his angular, confused,
and diagrammatic “Nude Descending
a Staircase, he placed upon canvas
much of modern art’s confusion and
irrationality. For Duchamp’s nude is
an apt symbol of
modern art itself—nude in its
vitiating of reason. The nude’s
descent of the
staircase too, not
unfittingly de
picts the general
decadence that
cha ra cter
—
izes non-objective movements.
Art today is
S,
revolutionary and chaotic.
It evinces a cultivation of the
abstract rather
Sa
than the conAS'SI
crete; it manifests a reaction—anticipated by skepticism and agnosticism—against tradition. Failing to find security in
creeds, men have looked to psychoanalysis and have, in so doing, transferred
this groping and searching to the realm
of art.
Representative of modern art movements are Surrealism (or Super-Realism) and Exaggerated Symbolism.
The first movement is an outgrowth
of avant guarde-inspired Dadaism,
which incidentally, draws its name
from a child’s first vocal efforts. It


is interesting to note that the Cubists,
who reject fidelity to nature as onc
of the guiding principles of art, also
trace their roots to the Dada school.
Now the relation of Exaggerated
Symbolism to other art movements is,
unlike that of Surrcalism, "universal"
rather than genealogical. For it is
common knowledge that most,
if not all, recent
trends in art
make extensive
use of the power
of symbols to
suggest. This
power, however,
is exploited to
an exaggerated
o
extent in Surrealism.
Why then, it
is asked do
modern painters
paint as they
do?
Why, too, do
modern writers
write as they
do? For any set of trends — in
literature as in all fine arts — has its
ultimate basis in a mental attitude proper to its advocates.
The answer to the above question,
which we shall undertake to prove in
what follows, is simply this: both
Super-Realism and Exaggerated Synbolism have their bases ultimately in
Skepticism. Our age is a skeptical
age, and that single fact may well account for all the disconnected blobs
of color and pieces of polished stone
and unreasoned cadenzas that today


MARCH, 1950


15


pass for masterpieces in painting and
sculpture and poetry.
To understand, however, precisely
how that is so, it is necessary bricfly
to renew acquaintance with Immanuel
Kant’s theory of cognition. Kant, the
dean (so called) of modern philosophy, divides the world of external
reality into noumena, or things in
themselves, and phenomena, the appearances of things. Noumena, according to him, may or may not actually exist, but we can have no
knowledge of them; our knowledge is
limited to pbenomena, and as such has
only subjective value since the mind
of man can know only its own internal states and cannot go outside and
beyond the limits of consciousness.
The outer world, Kant is led to conclude, offers at most only the matter
of sensation, and he further reasons
that our concepts of things must be
due to certain mental apparatus called
subjective forms.
If, therefore, we were to accept his
theory as truth, then these "subjective forms,” with which our cognitive
faculties are supposed to be endowed,
would make us add something of our
own to whatever we knew. Knowledge would not consist in conformity
of mind to reality, but in the filtering
of reality into the mind through these
mental forms which would qualify
and shape it. The nund’s forms would
become the ultimate criterion of truth.
We would say (as we do now), for
instance, that two and two are four,
but only because such is the structure
of our intellect. According to Kant
two and two might equal five, if only
we had a different intellect.
It is not difficult to see how such a
theory necessarily leads to Skepticism.
For if our cognitive faculties or their
subjective forms" positively changed
reality so that we could never be sure
what in our cognition was due to the
16


thing outside us and what to our own
subjective process of perception, formal certitude in any department of
knowledge would be an impossibility.
But what has all this to do with
Surrealism? In the beginning we said
that Surrealism was based on Skepticism, and it is our purpose to relate the
Surrealist movement to the philosophy
of Kant. It is, however, necessary first
to define Surrealism (at least nominally), and to consider the origins of
its artistic tencts. In his book, A
Short History of Civilization, Henty
S. Lucas writes, "Surrealists paint
combinations of all manner of impossible and illogical objects realistically
and as if they are dreamed. The result, they claim, is more than real—
it is super-real, or 'surreal'” To explain further, Surrealism (which is
indebted also to Freudism) believes in
the expression of thought without the
control of reason and sceks by any
means to paint dreams and states of
mind. Followers of the movement
seck to suggest the mystery of the
subconcious by translating ordinary
objects into grotesque, sentimental
forms. John R. Tuttle, discussing the
motivation of Surrealism in his article,
"Surrealism, in the Encyclopedia of
the Arts says:
A relatively uncontrolled imagination reigns supreme. Subconsciousness is the well from which
creative activity is considered to
draw its inspiration. The dream
is exalted above waking thought,
pathological states above the normal. Surrealists feel a close affinity
with primitive art and with the
spontaneous, untutored art of the
child. Symbolism, to a great extent
sexual in character, is prominent.
Surrealism is thus highly impressionistic in the sense that it is not concerned with reality but with the expression of the unconscious thoughts
“  "


of artists ... these thoughts being
wholly free from reason or morals, as
can easily be seen from the objects depicted.
That the Surrealist object is absolutely useless from the practical and
the rational point of view is, as a matter of fact, the belief of no less a celebrity” than Salvador Dali, today’s
best known painter of the Surrealist
movement. He is quoted as having
expressed this opinion in Milton S.
Fox’s article, "Object, in the Encyclopedia of the Arts. The objects indeed are not ordinarily regarded as artistic (e.g. sanitary fixtures, pieces of
driftwood), but, as the Surrealists are
primarily interested in objccts as the
occasions and objectifications of fantasy (particularly of the Freudian, fetishistic and obsessional kinds), the objects are taken from their non-artistic
contexts and incorporated into a single, new, supposedly artistic structure
which in turn represents a kind of potpourri of the phenomenal, cognitive,
imaginary, and the symbolically fantastic aspects of the physical world.
There are two branches to this
movement in the field of paintingThe first, led by the Spamard, Salvador Dali, concentrates on the Freudian
aspect of Surrealism. Joan Miro holds
undisputed leadership of the second
group—painters who strip themselves
of all logic and mental activity, and
who allow the forms and lines of their
paintings to spring spontancously from
some inner, psychologic urge.
Surrealism, then, manifests certain
typical symptoms that connect it with
Kant’s theory of cognition. For Surrealism directs its efforts to reduce
and finally dispose of the contradictions between dreams and waking, to
discredit the world of reality, to "systematize" confusion. Even in poetry,
it welcomes the dissolution of form,
the desirability of automatic responses,


and the "law of incongruity.” Briefly, its amm is to express unrelated and
disorganized dreams stemming from
what Freud calls the unconscious or
subconscious. In the belief that a
rich, new reality will be found, the
Surrealists are trying to tap these new
t"
fields of the subconscious. “They are
tired of reason. Two and two equal
four in a rational world, but not always to them. They say, five, twelve
-anything fancy dictates.” Such,
according to the Encyclopedia Americana article entitled “Surrealism, is
the belief of the artists of the movement. In other words, Surrealists implicitly maintain that we do add something of our own to whatever we
know, that our cognitive faculties
have the peculiar structures called
subjective forms. They, therefore,
follow Kant’s teachings to the letter,
and even advance beyond their master’s theorizing to say that it is fact,
and not mere possibility, that the
structure of our intellect can be made
to change at will, in such a manner
as to enable one to add two and two
and make five at one time, and to add
the same numbers but to get twelve at
another time. Even in the Surrealist
passion to portray dreams, the influence of Kant is marked. For, as Kant
did, the artists of the movement confound logie with psychology. Now,
logic deals with the objective aspect
of our intellectual processes, and psychology, with the subjective. Though
both aspects are present in all cognition, they nevertheless are not to be
confounded, else we have psychologism—the bane of present day philosophy.
To obtain a more adequate understanding of the importance of dreams
in Surrealism, it may be profitable to
examine .the school of Dali. These
Surrealists assert that their work is
based on the dialectical materialism of


MARCH, 1950


17


Karl Marx and the psychoanalysis of
Sigmund Freud. Actually, however,
their work gives evidence of dependence on Freud rather than on Marx.
Freud founded the school of psychoanalysis, the fruit of his interest in the
personality factors producing genius
and talent. Believing that the libido
or emotional craving is mans strongest motive, he regarded the contributions of genius as substitute activities
resulting from a frustrated sex urge.
He further believed that there are ideas
or motives which quite resist any recall under ordinary circumstances duc
to their strong incompatibility with
—the individual’s conscious thoughts and
ideals, and that such ideas and motives
are ordinarily repressed and relegated
to an obscure recess in the mind called
the great unconscious.” This portion of the mind, according to Freud,
is not in the direct focus of consciousness but may be called into direct conciousness by the proper stimulus—and
it is this stimulus that Surrealists aim
at reproducing. Invariably our dreams
reveal a hidden meaning in their symbolism, says Freud, for they are the
result of our repressed motives and
ideas. Thus, he argues to a rational
explanation of the disconnected, confused and irrational data of dreams;
he maintains that, when their symbolism has been interpreted, the data of
our dreams may have objective validity. Dali’s Surrealists, stirring into
this speculation their own ingredients
of extreme subjectivism and psychologism, have completely confused
dreams and waking thought, so that
they now maintain that dreams, as
such, have objective validity. Such
tenets, needless to say, are in utter
conflict with reality, for, to dispatch
the matter briefly with A.C. Cotter
in his manual, The A B Cof Sebolastic
Pbilosophy, "The world we see in our
dreams, is unconnected, without order,
18


irrational... not so the world we see
when awake.
The school of Miro is fundamentally the same, but this second group of
Surrealists lays much more emphasis
upon an ideal method of artistic activity which they call automatism"
letting the hand of the painter move
freely without conscious control or
letting the poct’s pen record the free
flow of images which spring up from
the subconscious or unconscious. The
method employed by these Surrcalists,
according to Andre Breton (quoted by
Jacques Schmier in Sculpture in Modern America), spins an infinitely
precious substance which, though perhaps not all convertible, nonetheless
appears charged with all the ardor
stored within the poet and painter at
a given moment.” The conclusion we
arrive at, in such a case, is that Surrealists paint and write to satisfy an
urge, an obsession, a feeling. One
might imagine a Surrealist as saying,
'I feel that I must paint a watery
clock on a broken leaf; therefore, I
am certain that something in reality
will correspond to my painting.
Reality is thus made to conform with
the mind, not vice-versa. Certitude,
however, is not based on blind instinct,
impulse, or personal satisfaction. These
cannot be intelletcual motives of assent, and though they may have psychological importance, they do not logically assure us of objective truth.
Exaggerated Symbolism, on the
other hand, though perhaps not directly related to Kant’s teachings, is nevertheless born of skeptical thinking.
Strangely enough, its aim was originally not debased. Symbolists once essayed to serve up realism in a classical
form, to see contemporary life in the
eyes of the past. Their artistic aim
was faithfulness to reality; but, as one
kind of certainty after another was destroyed, they were pushed back to
“  "


momentary states of being as the sole
realities left to them, so that now they
'arrive at something approaching a
sheer intellectual vacuum... such is
the result of divorcing Iart) from
rational purpose and reducing it to a
quest of sensation; for it is the quest
of sensation that is at the bottom of
the whole movement. What remains,
however, as the raison d'etre of the
Symbolists is the necessity, so they say,
of communicating images unadulterated by the limitations of convention
and language.
The movement is indeed widely manifested in the fine arts today, and
chiefly in Poctry. The Symbolists
openly avow that thought is the bane
of poetry and that the movement’s supreme object is to excite the thrill of
sensation. They develop distinctive
attacks and technical innovations,
substitute rapid allusions for definite
relations, proceed from one image to
another by inference and association
rather than by natural sequence. Reason, as a result, ceases to rule; it i5
often carelessly disdained, sometimes
consciously discarded. Some extremists go so far as to assert that not
even fecling should violate the purity
of images. T. E. Hulme (originator
of the Imagist school in Symbolism)
somewhat confusedly opines, "Poetry
is no more nor less than a mosaic of
words ... Gertrude Stein, in her theory of aesthetics, shares the view She
says that nothing counts but the word
pattern, and the greatest thing in life
is the nursery jingle.
The Symbolist technique is, howcver, still governed by the faithful expression, so called, of the poet’s whole
inward "state of being” (when intensified by some stimulus), which
expression necessarily abandons communication on the level of intelligible
discourse. Instead, recourse is had to
symbols which are intended by some


kind of magic to suggest feeling to
the reader. Ordinarily, however, such
a use of symbols results in the sacrifice of intelligibility and even of communication itself. Says Robert Shafer
in the fourth volume of From Beowulf
to Thomas Hardy:
Much of the world’s finest literature which is worth handing on
from one generation to another requires explanatory comment, and
patient study, but all successful literature is self contained at least in
the sense that study will reveal
what the author has been driving
at... Modern poems fall into a
different category. In these poems
the author is talking, muttering, or
singing to himself in a private language or private adaptation of our
language, about nobody knows
what. In some instances not even
the poet himself knows what he
sings. He obeys a "voice,” coming, as he believes or hopes, from
something decper within him than
conscious thought or feeling.
Consider one of the poems of Ezra
Pound, Imagist poet and champion of
Symbolist art. This poem is entitled,
"In a Station of the Metro, and is
only two lines in length:
The apparition of these faces in the
crowd;
Petals on a wet, black bough.
Again we are led to ask why it is
that Symbolist poets write in such a
manner. Perhaps the briefest answer
that can be given is that Symbolist
poets have lost belief in everything except their own states of being. They
have arrived at Skepticism, however,
by a most peculiar train of reasoning.
They say that everything expressed
through language is relative, not precise. When one says, for instance,
that the sky is blue, one does not statc
clearly the exact quality of blueness.
And even if one were to say the sky is


MARCH, 1950


19


azure blue, still one would leave a variety of azure blues to pick from, and
so on, and so on, ad infinitum. One is
almost tempted to say, “Blue as
blazes, but then, one could still run
the gamut of emotions trying to describe blue and not make the least advance in accuracy. It is the necessary
vagueness that results from trying to
translate reality into language that has
led Symbolists to lose their belief in
everything except (as we said before)
their own states of being. This frustration, in like manner, has made the
Symbolists conclude that that which
portrays the neurotic and defeated in
human nature is closer to truth than
that which reflects the higher inspirations of men. This quest of the Symbolist for sensation and the resulting
belief that nothing is true save what
the individual himself feels or senses
are reducible in the final analysis to
Kant’s theory of cognition.
Poetry, however, is not the only medium of this movement. Father Daniel Lord, S.J., in this pamphlet, Armchair Philosophy, tells the story of a
modern art enthusiast who pointed to
the futuristic interpretation of some
misshapen pieces of marble, and ex
claimed, They are not really statues;
they are musical compositions in
stone!” Father Lord gocs on to say
that, in such a case, we can only conclude that these musical statues" presuppose but one thing: a properly
trained eye can be made to hear! And
therein lies the basic error of Exagge
rated Symbolism in sculpture and
painting. It demands too much of
one sense; our eyes, apart from seeing,
must also hear. If they do net, we


condemn them ... they deceive us.
We forget that there are such things
as proper and common sensibles.
But if our senses (upon which we
are ultimately dependent for all
knowledge of the outer world) deceive us, then how can we ever be
formally certain? This the Symbolist
fails to answer, and the inevitable result is, of course, Skepticism.
It is, therefore, our conclusion that
both Super-Realism and Exaggerated
Symbolism have their bases ultimately
in Skepticism, and as such, have absolutely no worth from the epistemological point of view.
These movements, finally, are an
attempted "justification of failure to
deal with the actual and difficult
world, they are one big plunge into
fantasy, they are expressions of the
fear of reality, the denial of logic, the
triumph of unmeaning.
The effects of these movements on
the philosophical thought of the age
are those of an opiate, for many have
been deceived into accepting the products of Surrealism and Exaggerated
Symbolism as true works of art.
Worse still, some have begun to imitate the standard bearers of these
movements, and soon, wild lyricism in
other fields may follow. Surrealism
in art would then become surrealism
in philosophy, and in consequence “the
time Iwould not bel far off when
philosophy would completely abandon
all claims to truth, would deny an absolute, and in an orgy of relativism,
like Pilate, would ask 'What is Truth?”
and then turn its back on it. Indeed, says Monsignor Fulton J. Sheen,
The penalty of lyricism is heavy."


20


“  


The Champion
By ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B. '51


—RANDMA was one of those
gentle-voiced, silver-haired
G
creatures to whom bargainPOI
ing has become a favorite outdoor sport. She was the champion of
bargainers in our ever-expanding family and she gloried in that. In the
evening after supper, after an afternoon of shopping for odds and ends,
when all were gathered together, she
would bring out her old green shopping bag. Then, like a magician picking queer things out of a silk hat, she
would draw out one by one the articles
she had bought and would start the
whole family guessing about the price
of each. I can still hear her low and
carefree chuckle as father would price
an article a peso too high. I can still
see the light in her dimmed eyes as the
whole family wondered how she had
got an article for an amazingly low
price.
One afternoon, last summer, she
caught me doing nothing and before I
knew it I had her elbow in my right
hand and her shopping bag in my left.
Then we were entering Quiapo. She
looked excited and happy, almost as
a child would look upon entering a
toyshop or a playground. Before an
hour passed, I knew what she meant
when she said that shopping was an
art. She loved this art for its own
sake.
That afternoon with her taught me
part of her repertoire of shopping techniques. It happened that my sister


had asked her to get a certain fragile,
water-blue material for an evening
gown. Entering a Chinese dry goods
store, grandma fingered the very material Sis wanted. The price tag was
three pesos per yard. The Chinese
salesman hovered about her praising
the color and texture of the material.
To my surprise Grandma expressed disappointment and said she needed a
flame shade (the only shade the store
did not have). The salesman kept insisting that the water-blue shade was
very becoming. Grandma shook her
head and started for the sidewalk. At
the door of the store, she paused dramatically. Disinterestedly she remarked, "I might consider the color if you
gave me a slighe' discount. Rumor
had long since made Grandma an actress in her day, but for the way in
which she lifted a bored eyebrow as she
spoke, I would have given her an
"Oscar.
The salesman tried to hide his resurrected hope but was too inexperienced
for my grandmother’s discerning eye.
He eagerly re-escorted her in. Grandma asked for his final price. “Iwo
ninety,” he said.
Two ninety!” Grandma’s exclamation was a studied mixture of surprisc
and ridicule. Then she said luringly,
“I need twenty yards.” The Chinaman’s eyes opened a little wider. Then
emphatically, "Give it to me for onc
fifty a yard.” The Chinese eyes narrowed again.


MARCH, 1950


21


“But, Senola,
2
certainly y on TETEPTE
know that this
ELEI
E
material costs
much, much ME
NOR VIn k ESTUSTP
is the only ...

"All right, all
right—" Grandma interrupted
the Chinaman’s
eulogy of the
hapless waterblue material. A
pause. T h e n
Grandma threw

2
in her dramatic
forte. “This is
my last price.
I will pay no
more than two pesos per yard." And
she marched haughtily out of the


store to the sideETE
1ay
walk. The poor
A
salesman was in
 
a quandary. He
EE
looked like a
S!man hemmed in
2
2
on all sides.
IL P
Grandma and
I were about a
store away when
we heard him
coalIin g.
My grandmother
pretended not to
hear. Then I
heard running
footsteps behind
us. I looked
MEGa back. It was
the salesman.
He had surrendered—completely,
unconditionally. Grandma had conquered—again.


On Hearing Wagner
By CARMELO P. QUINTERO, A.B. '53
Oft have I sped beyond the lonely stars,
To seek the rapture that in deatbless hymns
Is shrined, and down the gloomy wrecks of dreams
I shot from quests that leave but soulful scars.
From star to star I listened still but none
Replied, and coldness sealed my soul’s desire:
Till I heard Wagner sing of love and dire
Torment with passion-fire that tamed the sun.
Then like some eagle on his flight, I roam
God’s desert blue with firelight on my face;
Across the purple hills, past pearly foam
Of seas, through wand'ving stars I ride in grace,
To sense the music of the spheres at Home
Where hearts of heroes bask in Sun's love-rays.


22


  


Second Place: Short Story Contest


Woman, Thy Name Is Happiness
By VICTOR DIAZ, A.B. '52


ANG Gorio had finished for
MI the day. He felt very tired
 as he tied his carabao to the
dubat tree and reached for
the blue-gray camisa that hung from
a lower branch. Sitting down at the
foot of the tree, he donned the camisa and reached into a pocket for
buyo and chewing tobacco. For some
time man and animal chewed placidly
and in silence. Then Mang Gorio
raised his head and let his eyes roam
over the field he had just plowed. It
is good land, he thought with satisfaction, and I have plowed it thoroughly
and well. It won’t be long now before the bare brown carth will be covcred with the cool green of growing
things, corn and camotes, squash and
beans, food to feed four hungry
mouths, to put bones and tissues on
four young growing bodies.


Mang Gorio was a tall man, in his
early thirties. He combined the build
of an athlete and features, broad,
weather-beaten, but not unhandsome,
with a manner not often found
in a farmer. Neither appearance nor
speech marked him as a man of the
soil, as his neighbors had often wonderingly observed. Indced, as Tandang Lcon, the barrio patriarch, often
said, you could put Mang Gorio into
city clothes and, but for the marks
of toil on his hands and face, easily
mistake him for a senator or a lawyer.
Mang Gorio had long known of these
and similar remarks, in a roundabout
way of course, for he was not a man
to whom one made such personal observations directly. He could have
told them—if he had chosen to—that
he had once studied in the city and
had pursued studies that in the na

MARCH, 1950


23


tural course of events would have
made him a lawyer. But something,
was it reticence or shame, held him
back.
Man and beast ruminated while the
afternoon sun sank lower and lower.
Inevitably, as on past afternoons like
this one, when the day’s work was
over, Mang Gorio s thoughts wandered
back to the past, that past now so remote that it seemed part of another
life. He was a student then, beginning his first year of A.B. in one of
the city’s exclusive schools. He was
young, fired with the ideals of youth
before it acquires the cynicism of age
and disillusionment. He had often
pictured himself, a famous lawyer,
fighting and winning battles in the
courtrooms, slowly winning fame and
popularity until one day the people
would elect him to the legislature.
His father had shared his dreams and
ambitions and, that he might devote
all his time to his schooling, forbade
him to work while studying. His sister had given up all thoughts of higher
education because there was not
enough moncy to send them both
through college. All had gone well
for a time. He studied hard and obtained excellent marks. Then Fatewriters call it Cupid—intervened.
He had met her quite casually, but
because the liking had been mutual,
there was nothing casual about the
friendship that followed. Before long
she was calling him George and he
was calling her Lucy. Lucia was her
name and she was a student like him,
in a girls' college. He remembered
his first bashful declaration of love and
her eager response which, like all
young lovers, he had never expected,
and their hasty, ill-considered decision
to marry. It was a clandestine marriage, because both feared the disapproval of their parents. But the thing
had somehow leaked out, and he soon
24


found himself facing the anger of his
father and the reproaches of his mother. His father disowned him and
cut off his allowance. Her parents
had, however, taken it quite well, but
that was probably because she was but
one of many children and they did not
expect of her what his own parents
expected of him. They even offered
to continue supporting her until she
finished her course, but he was too
proud, he would not permit that. So
she had to give up her studics and he
set himself to look for work. He
would study nights and she would
keep house for him. It had seemed
so simple the way they planned it.
But he had reckoned without the difficulty of finding work in the city.
For a full month he tramped the
streets, climbed stairways and tried
innumerable offices. The answer was
always the same. There were no
openings for men without the desired
qualifications. She scanned the want
ads. But pcople were not hiring typists or office help or janitors who
knew versification, Latin and the
sciences. At last they had to face
reality. Their money was running out
and there were no immediate prospects
of getting any sort of job.
She had a piece of land situated in
a far-off place. It was a legacy from
an uncle of hers. They had tried to
sell the place, but no one was interested in buying. It now became their
only hope. So it was that one bright
morning in June man and wife repaired to the small village that was to
be their home perhaps for all time.
Farming, he learned, was not easy.
He literally had to tear a living from
the soil. His house he contrived to
put up with his own hands and some
help from their neighbors. The hands
that he had dreamed would one day
wield a gavel now accustomed themselves to the plowshare, the axe and
“  "


the hoe. Life did not spare her either.
She cooked, washed, scrubbed, mended,
and helped him with the farm work.
She bore and raised his children, four
of them now uncomplainingly. It
was as if she tried, by these sacrifices,
to make up to him in some way for
the death of his dreams and hopes.
Slowly the years passed. Twelve
years of labor with nothing to show
for them, he thought, not without
bitterness. He remembered his former classmates with envy. Many were
now successful lawyers and businessmen—he followed their careers in the
newspapers which he borrowed from
Kulas, the barber. They were now rich
and famous while he, once the best
of them, remained poor and forgotten.
Mang Gorio sighed wearily. It was
no good thinking about such matters.
No amount of thinking would make
a change in his life. He was destined
to live and die here obscure and unknown.
He spat red betel juice on the
ground at his fect and stood up. Untying the carabao, he swung himself
onto its broad back, bent down for
the plow which he
slun g over one
shoulder and nudged the beast with
his calloused heel.
Mario, his eldest
child, met him at
the gate and, as he
dismounted. took
the tie-rope and led
the carabao to the
well. Mang Gorio
went up the bamboo steps into the
batalan and washed


his feet, sluicing the cool water on his
knees and legs. The odor of steaming rice and cooking adobo smote his
nostrils. He went inside, past his
wife who was bent over the kitchen
fire, into the room that served both as
sala and bedroom. His two younger
children were quarreling over a broken
toy pistol. He pacified them, took
one of them on his knee and kissed his
curly head.
Suddenly all the bitterness drained
away. It is after all a good life, he
mused. It has its compensations. He
had a loving wife and four lovable
children. They had a roof over their
heads and abundant though simple
food. He had nothing to complain
about.
Obeying a sudden impulse, he put
down the child and went into the kitchen. Lucia, busily engaged in ladling
the adobo onto a tin plate, found herself enclosed within two brawny arms.
He kissed her with all the ardor of a
schoolboy. They had been rare, these
moments of tenderness. Life out here
had been too hard and exacting. They
had come to take cach other for granted. Man and wife
were silent, treasuring the moment.
The fire burned
t
low and with the
lamp unlighted, silence and shadow
filled the house.
In the duyan the
sleeping baby woke
up and cried. Find2

ing itself unat4..
tended, it subsided
and began to suck
HE
its thumb hungrily


MARCH, 1950


25


Awarded firit prize is the astiosal college-ssivenily
Usited Natiost Eney Content.


The ruture of the Onited Nations
By ENRIQUE L. ESQUIVEL, Jr., A.B. '51


S the representatives of the
Idifferent nations solemnly affixed their signatures to the
ES
United Nations' Charter, universal rejoicing seized mankind. Victory was in the air, though its revitalizing rays barely dispelled the atom
cloud that lay like a death pall over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. A warracked civilization slowly crawled out
of its air raid shelter and, supporting
itself on unsteady limbs, cried with one
voice its approval of the United Nations, the harbinger of peace. The
shout that came from those parched
throats was weak and hollow, but it
was vibrant with hope. For at last a
savior had come to deliver the world
from the folly of self-destruction.
To a race forever threatened by the
spectre of war and famine, the creation
of a world tribunal was symbolical of
the peace that was to come. Now,
after a six-year deluge of blood and
tears, the UNO would banish past
grievances and unite men once more in
the common task of world reconstruction! To a civilization almost despairing of peace, this new organization offered a panacea for the world’s ills; it
was a nurse, a judge and a builder all
in one. Optimism was almost tangible
then; its presence was heralded by victory celebrations in all the free capitals
of the world; the people had only to
wait awhile and lasting peace would be
established.
26


When the UNO celebrated its first
birthday, the peace that seemed to be
within the arm’s reach of all was still
as remote as it was when the Stars and
Stripes was hauled down at Corregidor.
The lid of the boiling pot in Palestinc,
Indonesia and India blew off, spewing
the contents of armed conflict upon
neighbor nations. The UNO stepped
in and made recommendations; it sent
mediating teams to the troubled arcas,
but the fighting flared up with greater
intensity. The threat of international
ostracism was not sufficiently effective to quell an actual war. The world
then sadly realized that the United
Nations Organization, if not provided
with an adequate police force to enforce its decisions, would be no better
than a debaters’ forum.
The picture of the UNO today is
not greatly different from that it presented four years ago. Ahead of it
looms a dark, uncertain future. It
stands in need of all the determination
and good will, all the diplomatic acumen, all the brilliant statesmanship
that the nations can contribute, to navigate the shoals of ideological differences and reach the haven of international harmony. Why is the prospect
of the UNO so bleak and so foreboding of disaster?
The UNO, despite its efficient social, economic and educational organizations, does not and cannot hope to
rebuild in four years what the Jugger“  "


naut of Mars was ten years in crushing. It does not hope to mend within
that short time the broken arteries of
trade and commerce nor to stabilize
completely a shattered international
economy. It can hope and does hope,
however, to perpetuate the peace by
removing the basic causes of war and
by promoting international amity and
cooperation. But even in the accomplishment of that amm the UNO faces
an uncertain future. It is doomed to
failure unless something is done to oppose the cynical political philosophy
and international opportunism that
have developed to full maturity in the
last three decades.
The UNO was born in a gencration
whose unspoken axiom in international
relationships was "Might makes right.
The countries that endured the cruelties and humiliations of a hostile occupation had been governed in accord
with this doctrine in its full and painful reality. In the period between
1918 and 1947 men saw mass deccit
inculcated at rallies where armed
troops compelled attendance; they saw
consent effectively obtained at the
point of a gun; they heard the doctrinc
that the more brazen and unjust the
lie, the more effective it was as propaganda. Mars was then the all powerful deity; millions were sacrificed at
his armored fect. Salvation lay in
might; in power lay security.
The UNO was, thercfore, planted
in an environment adverse to its fruitful development. In circumstances
where license is identified with liberty, greed with desire, national self interest with selfishness, diplomacy with
deccit, might with right, the Organization can never attain its aim of promoting social progress and of establishing conditions under which justice and
respect for law can be maintained.
It is faced by a world that has lost
most of the vestiges of objective mo

rality. A century ago, the breaking
of a free pact between two nations
caused universal horror and anathema;
such an offense was then considered
the vilest crime, a sacrilege supreme
among sacrileges commissable by a nation. But the era is past when diplomatic agreements backed up by moral force were decmed more binding
than those backed up by military
strength. In the last half century legal and moral norms have been deprived of any absolute binding character and have assumed the instability
of shifting opinion and passing convention. Mere utility has been made
the criterion of both truth and morality, while personal convenience and
profit have come to determine the
binding force of a free contract. But if
promises are made to be broken, if
marriagc contracts bind only as long
as the attraction between the spouses
lasts, if agreements between labor and
management are violated with impunity, if men in their personal lives arc
schemers and cquivocators, then there
can be no guarantee that agrcements
reached at the councils of the UNO
will be observed by the contracting
nations. If personal or national advantage is the only norm and if treaty
violations appear profitable, what nation will scrupulously observe a treaty
that hampers its national interests?
How can the UNO "establish conditions under which justice and respect
for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international
law can be maintained"? It is clear
that the UNO as the tribunal of humanity cannot function as an ethical
force in a word that has cast off all
traces of objective morality.
The forces that guide and determine
the destiny of the UNO arc seemingly leading it to the brink of failure.
These forces must be countered by a


MARCH, 1950


27


universal recognition that man is possessed of reason and an inviolable conscience and by a practical acknowledgement that all men as members of
one human family have a dignity as
persons equal before the law and that
they are endowed with rights that may
not be trampled on by any state without eventually preparing its own ruin.
Only by action in logical accord with
these convictions by all member states
can the UNO hope to accomplish its
lofty. aims.


Today when the atom bomb sits and
dictates at the head of the conference
table, nations must agree among themselves or else risk total annihilation.
To live in peace with one another as
good neighbors demands the abandonment of policies in conflict with the
interest of humanity as a whole and a
recasting of fundamental concepts of
human dignity. Only when these
steps have been taken will the horizon
of the future brighten for the United
Nations' Organization.


Thoughts
By RICARDO G. NEPOMUCENO, JR., A.B. '53
Thoughts! breathing thoughts! They are forever with me
Amid the lazy grasses moist with dew
And in green contentment; by the groaning sea
Bencath the fired sky bathed in sunset buc.
In the frozen silence of an empty hour,
WhisP’ring into my ear, they waft the air
Of music strange from some enchanted bow'r
Filled with the fragrance of nymphs' perfumed hair.
They are forever with me, for the playful bees
May bring back the joys of some forgotten year;


ABGM


28


“  "


A Mountain Echo


Fell from the horn a feeble blast
Unskilful in its art;


By PERCIVAL OLARTE
A. B. '52


Of all melodious grace bereft
It smote the mountain's heart.
Lo! 'mid the pines that fringe the lake
What full-voiced music broke,
In patbless glen, on fire-searred crest,
A far-off sweetness woke.
Tuned by the mountain's harmony,
The trembling notes grew strong,


Filled the wide silence of the sky
With music lingering long.
So fall, I thought, our human prayers
Against our Father's breast -
A pityful, uncertain sound
Of little grace possessed.
Caught by the faithful saints that gird
The steps of God’s great throne,
The wavering note from their true hearts


Wins swecter depths of tone.
In the soft silence of our hearts
The cry comes back again -
The uncertain strain grown music strong
Grown praise the note of pain.
Tuned by the touch of steadfast souls
And depths of God's great peace,
The carth-cry dies in echo sweet


Of heavenly song of grace.


MARCH, 1950


29


Third Place: Sbott Story Contest


The Mountain Climber


A.B. '52


ANG Fabian recalled his first
MI climb. He was seventeen then,
just becoming a man. He had
been sent for wood and he had
gone to the hills, for he knew the best
firewood grew there and he had promised his mother a very fine bigkis.
All day after lunch he combed the
ipil-ipil growth, hacking down the best
—those dry, round, mature sticks that
would kindle easily. He did not mind
the distance he had traversed, for the
deep shade pressed on him closely,
shutting out the sun’s progress and the
abundance of good wood ever engrossed him. But soon the air was
getting to be markedly chilly and a
little beyond, he remembered, he saw
the shimmer of uncertain light and
with a few more steps he suddenly
came out on a summit, breathless, into
the free air. Thereupon he threw
himself down on the moist grass and
inhaled hard, feeling renewed and relieved after hours of being hemmed in
by gloom and twisted trunks and overshadowing boughs with their opaque
foilage.
The hill he was on was the smallest.
On both sides he could see the others
rising on top of another’s slope like a


chain that never quite ended. And
some were covered with cropped grass
and they were mellow bright in the
westward sun. But the others were
a decp green, their hcights silhouetted
by enormous trees. Behind was the
tallest hill, much like a huge shecred
curtain falling from heaven, the
mountain which men called Maubat.
It was six times higher from where
Mang Fabian stood and its top had
trailing clouds, like wisps of cotton
which tear loose in a strong breeze.
He rested there for a long time,
exulting in his loftiness, toying with
a blade of grass, watching the unmoving picture below—the fields
laid out in squares, looking very even
though he knew the paddies were
crooked in places; the nipa huts lining
the dusty cart roads of Barrio Linang;
and farther off, the other barrios, the
similar thatched roofs, only more tiny;
and to his right the sharp flash of a
town’s iron roofs. He saw smoke rising from some mother’s evening meal
and he watched it vanish as it rose and
he wondered where it went. But when
he saw the sun way down and the sky
beginning to color, he hurried down
though he knew the sunset would be


30


“  "


beautiful, for he feared to lose the
way. The bundle of wood was very
light, he thought, for his heart had
been high up among the hills.
In Maubat, Mang Fabian had
found what he had expected. But the
Japanese brought war, and with their
guttural commands and arrogant
marching had driven away peace
from the land—city and country, including Barrio Linang. There they
often came with dirty mules and commandeered carromatas, and they would
haul away sacks of rice, lead off plow
carabaos and rudely gather carly ripening fruit and vegetables that had been
so carefully tended. Even the redoubled effort of experienced farmers
could not stem the growing barrennes;
of the fields and hunger crecping on.
After awhile the suffering and the sacrifice grew beyond endurance and
nothing was left but to resist for every
grain of rice, for their own lives. Most
of them, like Mang Fabian himself,
left the place, except a few who cooperated with the Japanese and those
who never would forsake home and
farm no matter what happened.
Now when the war had passed
and the Huks had come, people
said, “Can you hear those cannon
in the hills? There is war there,
no peace. Mang Fabian would reply that noise could not take away
peace, as men could not lay low
the mountains and what is in them.
And he would ask them with all his
feelings whether they who heard the
war-like rumble ever beheld Maubat
closely and realized how it reared in
the air—a high mass of undisturbed
grandeur and how inside it was a great
heart of good that only few men knew.
He would ask, "Did we not flec there
for safety from the Japancse? I say,
there is great peace there. But you
must look for it, just like here or any

where, to find it. The matter is, you
have not reached Maubat’s top and
seen what I have seen and felt like me.
There a man is really on top of the
world—everything. He is next to
heaven.” And always they would be
seriously intent for awhile and believe,
but afterwards someone would inevitably say, "But you’ll see, Fabian, that
you’re wrong.
As the days passed, the dispute grew
sharper. Mang Fabian began to loathe
the verbal arguments. He saw no end
to them . . . dull, senseless pratings, and
disquiet seeped into him more and more
and he wished for the peace he had
tasted in the past. It had been a long
time since the Japanese had surrendered and he was no longer satisfied
with merely gazing up at Maubat.
He was conscious of his limbs beginning to feel the feebleness of age and
already he had removed with a palay
grain the first white hair to appear on
his head. So one evening when the
rice had been planted and the rains had
just abated and there was not much
to do except to wait, Mang Fabian decided to climb Maubat for the last
time and quench his longing, perhaps
convince the people ... as in years
gone by.
Mang Fabian had been traveling for
three days and was making good headway where Maubat’s mass was thinning away towards its apex. Roughly
a day more of climbing lay before him.
The way gradually became steeper, the
air hurid, but far from daunting the
man’s spirit, the ascent was giving vigor to his frame, and delight prodded
him on as he sensed once more after
so long a time the coolness of grass and
shade, and smelt the persisting tang of
drying leaves mixed with sprouting
foilage, and heard the occasional cry
of a wild bird or the shrillness of the
cicadas.


MARCH, 1950


31


Mang Fabian plunged onward. He
could hear water making noise among
pebbles. He knew it for the deep furrow that spilled from Maubat’s top
and went down to its base. Hurriedly he made for it. His knees nearly
buckled under as he ran down the incline. Near the brook’s edge he lunged
flat and plunged his face full into the
water with his hands before him and
his hat was all wet and his shirt dripping. For a long time he held his
breath and felt the water laving his
head that was begrimed and hot with
sweat. He did not wipe his face anymore. With wet hands he swung his
knapsack nighter on his shoulder and
with head bent down he climbed back
the furrow’s slope. Nearing the edge
he lifred his face—a face flushed with
smiling serenity.
Then suddenly Mang Fabian halted
and the expression fled from his face
with incredible swiftness. Astonishment made his mouth gape wide. For
he saw two men in dirty dungarees,
holding carbines with muzzles pointed
at him.
The two marched him to their former guerrilla encampment and there
to his surprise were many huts and
tents—not as it had been left. A
number of men walked about—their
fatigues unwashed, their faces bearded.
As he passed they looked at him with
expressionless cyes. Mang Fabian was
brought before a comfortable looking
hut and presently a stocky man with a
shoulder-holstered 45 strode out and
without looking at him asked one of
the men.
“Where’d you find him?"
“At the sapa, sir.
"A spy?'
"He was drinking, sir.
Then he faced Mang Fabian, wantonly flicking a half-burnt cigarerte.
For the first time the mountain climber felt fear.
32


“Where'd you come from?'
Im a farmer from Barrio Linang.
I’m going to Maubat’s top.
"Why? To spy?'
“No, no! I came here because I like
to climb mountains and find pea—
Melchor!"
From the hut a man had stepped
cut, a man not unlike the rest—lonhaired, a neglected stubble of hair on
his chin. At the cry of Mang Fabian
he wheeled about and recognition set
his face in a smile.
"Fabian! What are you doing
here?"
“You know Melchor. Remember?
I always went to the summit when we
were guerrillas. Today I’m going
there too. But these men led me
here.
“You know the man, Melchor? the
stocky one asked.
Very well, sir. A former guerrillero. He’s no P.C. He likes to
wander here. Knows Maubat well."
"May I go now, Melchor?"
Melchor and his superior looked at
cach other. Then the stocky man

said, Yes. But you are to come back
here. You’re one of us.
“No! That cannot be! My family... my farm...!"
There was no answer.
‘I will never stay here. You cannot force me.
“We will shoot you. But if you
join us you will see your family.
Sometimes. At night. With your
comrades.
'But I am too old to be a soldier.
“Your chest is broad. You were a
good guerrillero.
Mang Fabian looked deep at Melchor
but his friend avoided the gaze.
“But there is nobody to fight.
“There is discontent and injustice,
the stocky man said.
"A man can be contented and find
justice in his own self."
“  


Shut up! Do you want to go to
the summit?"
"I will accompany you, Fabian.
It was Melchor.
Together the two, companions again
by fate, trudged upward. Mang Fabian was slow, very slow There was
weariness both in limb and spirit, but
he climbed on persistently, determined
to see whether what he was thinking
was true. When they reached the top
Mang Fabian was elated for a moment, for there was the same view,
just as he knew it would be—the glorious sight that no man indeed could
wreck. But little by little, seeing the
man whose staring unconcern seemed
a mockery to all the beauty, he sensed
something gone, snatched away by fellowmen. No longer was there the
exalted feeling of freedom from space
and time, and that instant he realized
that the barrio folk were right and,
after all, there was peace no more in
the shining crests of the mountains.
"It’s gone! It’s gone!” he gasped,
his eyes wide with despair.
Mang Fabian looked at his compamion who must have had heard him,
but Melchor’s face remained blank. He
must be trying hard to delve into my
trouble, thought Mang Fabian, but he
knew the attempt was futile. Melchor, like so many others, could never
understand the force that drew him
to Maubat s top. In their guerrilla
days, he had often accompanied him
here and agreed that the view was
nice. But that was all there was in


Melchor’s heart. Mang Fabian was
positive.
"Oh, it’ll come back, Fabian.
There was nonchalance in the remark. Words of useless comfort and
they rang hollow in Mang Fabian’s
ears. He eyed Melchor and there was
scathing scorn in his face. What did
he know of peace, of quiet, he who
lived by trouble, who destroyed?
What right had he who inflicted sorrow to offer soothing speech? What
did he, Melchor, know about another
man’s feeling, he who snuffs out life
from men? What? . What? ..
What?
It was uscless. Mang Fabian checked
his silent anger. He looked harder at
Melchor, at his half-inquiring, half
dumb countenance, at his small figure
standing mutely insignificant before
the background of a whole countryside that seemed to extend to infinity.
At first, seeing the view with the man
in it, Mang Fabian was unconscious of
the thought. But soon he found himself muttering, "It is still there all
around. I see it. Maybe it is I that
am lost. Yes, I and Melchor also.
But can we not find ourselves again?
Find myself? And he too?”
Brokenly, not so much in answer to
Melchor, but comforting and setting
aright his own self, he whispered back.
“Yes, that’s it, Melchor. It’ll come
back. It’ll come back—to us. Someday.
It was Mang Fabian who led the
way downhill.


MARCH, 1950


33


The Ideal of Beauty in Modern Art
By HECTOR HOFILENA, A.B. '51


RT has been traditionally reAgarded as providing norms for
the skillful expression of beauES
ty. In the common understanding of men it is associated with an
intelligent and intelligible basis for
noble emotion, for, if beauty is to have
any appeal to man as man, the emotion
it arouses must be based not merely on
sense, but also on intelligence. Twentieth century art, however, seems in
many instances to have neglected such
a commonly assumed fundamental.
Many of the “art for art’s sake"
schools announce that art is an "inexplicable urge”; that “the artist is not
concerned with communication"; that
the most a spectator can get from a
work of art is an 'aesthetic echo',"
since art “cannot be understood
through the intellect, but is felt.” It
is not surprising then, that, as a result
of these standards, a guidebook has become a need if one is to find the images
in a Picasso or a Dali creation.
Since, however, all artists agree at
least in their concern with the beautiful, it may be well to compare the traditional notion of art with the twentieth century standard from this viewpoint.
What, then, do men commonly
mean by the beautiful? Why is an
object called beautiful? Maritain
gives us a clear answer when he says,
The beautiful is that which gives joy,
not all joy, but joy in knowing; not
34


joy proper to the act of knowing, but
a joy abounding and overflowing from
this act because of the object known.
If a thing uplifts and delights the soul
by the very fact of being granted to its
intuition, it is good to lay hold of, it
is beautiful.” From the phrase "joy of
knowing,” we can gather that the faculty for percciving beauty is chiefly
the intellect itself. That it and not
the senses is the principal agent in discerning beauty is a common teaching
of all philosophers and was accepted as
a basic truth by the artists of past centuries. That is why their creations
have hit the spectator with full aesthetic impact, not with a mere aesthetic
echo. This too, is the reason why their
productions have endured the test of
time.
Since the intellect is the faculty that
grasps beauty, it is clear that beauty
itself contains some supra-sensible elements. To be sure, like all beings, a
beautiful thing is one, true and good
but it is not beautiful only because it is
such. Philosophers from Aristotle’s day
to the present agree that added to these
attributes must be the elements of integrity, harmony and clarity. The
first element means that no essential
part may be wanting to the beautiful
object. Harmony demands that there
should be due proportion of parts, and
clarity is had if the work of art yields
its significance quickly and casily.
Further study of the philosopher’s
concept of beauty will yield some con“  


clusions profitable for all art. The
fine arts aim at the production of
things beautiful, that is, of works
which by their order, symmetry, harmony and splendor will give such apt
expression to the human ideals of natural beauty as to elicit aesthetic enjoyment. Art is an expression. It is
the artist’s speech. Being a form of
expression, it should concern itself
with communication, the communication of the artist’s interpretation of
nature.
The great artists of the past ages
took this principle as a fundamental
truth. They sought to communicate
their ideas of beauty, and so they employed their medium of expression in
such a way that they could be understood by the average man. But some
modern schools of so-called art refuse
to concern themselves with communication. True, their adherents like
to feel that their work is being understood, but if it is not, they claim to be
equally satisfied, for they consider
communication only as accidental.
If, however, it is agreed that art
should strive to express the beautiful,
then it scems that the fault of surrealism and similar decadent schools is
their failure in this regard. Certainly
to the average spectator there is little
harmony or proportion of parts in a
modern cubist or surrealist painting.
For this reason too, clarity is conspicuously absent from such productions.
A truly beautiful work yields its significance quickly and casily; "it does
not obtrude itself, as a work of art,
between its meaning ... and the person who would appreciate it. Even
if integrity and harmony are present,
the object of art leaves the onlooker
or reader unmoved unless the beauty
that is in it shines out perceptibly.
Clarity is so important to art that
Plato and the other ancient critics of


beauty considered the beautiful not
merely as order but as the splendor of
order. It is not surprising, then, to
hear Sigmund Spaeth give this homely
advice in regard to the appreciation of
painting: "Heed with utmost care
the picture that at first glance gives a
single clear impression.
How is clarity achieved in art? Its
chief manifestation must be in the
images that the art in question portrays. According to Prior, "when the
spectator of art finds pleasure or satisfaction in an executed work of
craft, his mental exaltation comes in
seeing what the creator has imaged and
recognizing its fineness. It is worth
noting that clear perception is regarded as a requisite to appreciation. If
the image is not clear, if it is not seen
readily, how can one recognize its fineness, how can it be appreciated? The
order that is present in beauty adds the
note of predominant unity amid variety, but clarity is brought about by
the degree of expressional power in the
artist, by concord and discord in music and by unity and rhythm in poetry.
How then, is this clarity manifested in the various fine arts? In music,
it seems to be found in the principles
of form. Harmony, balance and
rhythm bring it out in painting. The
perfection of a painting is increased if
its lines and colors are visible without too much strain, if the unity amid
variety is perceived without too great
an effort and tension. In poetry clarity is manifested in the emotion expressed by the combination of the
images and rhythm of the poem.
Modern degenerations from true art
have sinned in destroying the proper
arrangement of the elements of beauty so that what they wish to portray
is not perceivable without undue effort or, if perceptible, awakens no


MARCH, 1950


35


worthwhile response in the audience, admission of the “decadent” schools
Art without clarity and harmony is themselves, art for them has become an
art that has lost its meaning. By the "inexplicable urge.”


Shadow Lines
By LEONIDES V. BENESA, A.B. '52
The moon smiles full, fresh-airy comes the eve,
And yet my brows are feverisbly burning,
My mind in a maze of tangled thoughts is turningFor you. Verses for you tonight I weave.
Verses? Are these all that 1 can give?
Poor inked lines, pale shadows of a yearning
Enmeshed in silences for fear of spurning?
I am tired of dreams! Why, am I afraid to live?
Am 1? ... I am. 'Tis better so by far:
Far better to drcam and wake up none the worse
Than to live, love—and languish. 'Tis enongh
Merely to look at the mcon, or evening star,
Spin some skeins of its beauty into verse,
Sigh once, twice, without sighing one's heart off.


36


“  "


HAMLET AT THE ATENEO
A Summary Review
HE stage and setting of the play featured a distinct type of
A Vartistic expression: a combination of modified formalism
and plasticism. It has evolved out of an experiment which
not only proved both pleasing and effective but practical as well.
Since the production of Hamlet was an attempt to restore the
original Shakespearean medium of presentation, an outdoor platform was set against a natural background of brick wall and three
massive arches. The absence of a proscenium clearly reflected
this return to classicism.
This use of the same neutral background is an imitation of
the Greek stage of severe simplicity and, in present-day parlance,
is referred to as Formalism. In a way this neutral background of
brick wall served as the central decorative piece without obtrusively engaging attention. To block in playing space, a unit-set
of castle-effect wings was employed. These unit sets were adjustable so that they could be arranged to represent jutting castle
walls (for certain scenes) and served as walls of an interior hall in
other scenes. By careful manipulation, these same walls with a
few drapes, were used to block in a small space to portray the
Queen’s private chamber. Movable platforms and stairways were
used to add variety to various scenes.
The power of light to create aesthetic distance and atmosphere, and to control attention was utilized to the full. Special use
was made of the darkened space stage with strong spot-lights focused upon narrowed fields of acting. In this way only the significant action was reveeled. This device of plasticism was especially effective in the soliloquies of Hamlet.
The novelty of having to watch a show under the cool shimmer of moonlight seems to have put everybody into the proper
mood for a fuller enjoyment of the play. It was indeed a relief
from the conventional cramped quarters of a regular play-house


MARCH, 1950


37


with its stuffy atmosphere and distracting interior decoration.
The decision to stage the production outdoors, though first looked
upon with distrust due to the uncertainty of the weather, proved
to have been well taken.
Aside from a few minor characters the casting was excellent.
What to us seemed the one and only one defect of the production
as a wbole was the need of a little more polishing. Individual
scenes were acted remarkably well but smoothness in the sequences of scenes, actions, cueing left more to be desired. We are of
the opinion that another day or two of polishing would have done
just this.
Some thought that the tempo of the whole play lagged a bit,
that the dialogue could have been speeded up or that some signifficant lines lacked point. These indeed are justified criticisms
and the Guild would do well to note them for future performances.
With regard to the acting, all the men who appeared on the
stage each night acquitted themselves in the highest tradition of
the Ateneo Player’s Guild. And yet, in the veritable galaxy that
sparkled on the stage on each of the three nights, there still did
seem to shine a few individual stars who by their superlative acting drew particular audience attention, and at times acclamation
to themselves.
Immediately we rivet our eyes on the "first" thing in "Hamlet": Hamlet himself. How was he portrayed? And how well?
Who was the best Hamlet? On which night was the best performance given?
All three Hamlets, Teofisto Guingona, Carmelo Quintero,
Jose M. Manalo, so exhibited excellent individual scenes that to
answer this question of questions decisively without running into
conflicting opinions would indeed be impossible. Only by looking at the play as a whole, as edited, as a welding of every scene,
situation, action with the proper subordination of characters, into
the finished play that is "Hamlet, can we offer our “reasoned
opinion" as to which "Hamlet” was the best. Our choice goes to
rhe Saturday night performance and to Teofisto Guingona as
Hamlet.
The January 28th (Saturday) performance evinced a closer
spirit of cooperation and support than the other two nights. The
gradual and steady progression of the action from the opening
scene to the last lines of the play was manifested more clearly.


38


  "


The cueing, though not perfect, was better; pauses were more
properly spaced, and slip-ups in memory were covered with more
art.
The qualities which seemed to shine brightest in Teofisto
Guingona were his sincerity and manliness. The contact he established with his first line, . . . I am too much i'the sun,” was
electrifying. The microphone in picking up the low register of
his cool voice evoked a wave of murmur from the audience. His
face, voice and gesture conveyed a Hamlet of suppressed emotion.
In him one saw more of the spirituality of Hamlet. Especially commendable were his delivery of the “What piece of
(t"
work is a man" speech, the To be or not to be” soliloquy and his
dying scene which was indeed bis best, as well as the best of the
three dying scenes. He displayed a sharper contrast between the
sane Hamlet and the "antic” dispositioned Hamlet. Perhaps it
is primarily because of this that our choice goes to him. Carmelo Quintero and Jose Manalo’s interpretations of certain soliloquies
and scenes were delivered and acted with more force and emotion
but Guingona’s consistency to the role of Prince Hamlet was certainly more remarkable.
Carmelo Quintero’s acting was careful and studied. His was
a scholarly and passionate Hamlet. He possessed a keener sense
of vocal and bodily freedom demanded of Shakespearean roles and
might have easily been the more outstanding Hamlet had it not
been for one defect—staginess. His gestures were in themselves beautiful pictures of grace but it was precisely these unnecessary gestures that did so much to distract the audience’s attention not only from the speech he was delivering but also from the
action going on, with the result that, although most of his specches
and soliloquies were matchlessly delivered, they did not register
the same impact on the audience as did the deliveries of Guingona and Manalo. His “Now I Am Alone, soliloquy showed
his ability to express variations of thought. Indisputably, his
chamber scene with Gertrude and his sword play with Laertes
were the best. His speech to the players deserves especial mention.
It was certainly a much improved Carmelo Quintero we
saw as Hamlet (we are told this is his, second appearance on the
stage) in comparison with the blistering Col. Sastre of "Magdalena’s Son" and, without reservations, we predict that he may yet


MARCH, 1950


39


be the brightest star among our local stage talent here at the Ateneo. We look forward to this day.
Jose Manalo’s Hamlet was one of feeling and passion. .He
gave the audience the impression of having enjoyed his part immensely. Of the three, Manalo probably exhibited the highest
degree of finish regarding controlled emotions. An actor may
feel his part most intensely and may be carried away by this feeling. But the good actor knows that in his portrayal of this feeling he must control his actions, maintaining a proper sense of balance with the action of the scene as a whole. This comes from
coolness and Manalo showed it to full advantage. His main disadvantage was his build but it did not in anyway prevent him
from giving an excellent interpretation of the melancholy Dane.
He had the gift of varying his voice in pitch, tempo and force
and he exploited this fully to express the various moods demanded
by the role. This was most in evidence in the “Get thee to a nunnery” scene with Ophelia and in the repartee between him and
the king during the play scene. His “O! that this too too solid
flesh would melt" soliloquy was exceptionally good.
Unquestionably, the best performer was Onofre Pagsanghan
for his Ophelia which was a perfect portrayal of youthful innocence, tender love and pathos. The world of Ophelia is solely
built around three persons: Polonious, Laertes and Hamlet. For
all these three, Pagsanghan’s Ophelia faithfully expressed a youthful, sincere, fearmingled love. He wept indeed "like a young
noble lady” at Hamlet’s assumed disinterestedness in her. The
tragic events that rapidly affect her leave her completely desolate
and ultimately cause her insanity and untimely death. Pagsanghan built this into a profoundly touching effect of pathos in the
madness scene that will ever be remembered in Ateneo’s history
of dramatic interpretation. Ophelia’s madness was Pagsanghan s
great opportunity for dramatic feat and he did not let it slip by:
it was a triumph of his studious efforts amply rewarded by the
spontaneous ovations he received during the performance.
The Claudius of Francis Moran and Luis Lorenzo were both
sufficiently villainous in aspect, speech and gesture. Moran gave
the more polished performance but Luis Lorenzo (though more
of a star athlete) was surprisingly good. Claudio de Luzuriaga
Jr., as Gertrude, was queenly and dignified. Through all five
acts, he was able to sustain the unhappy appearance of a woman
weak and reluctant to leave her dead husband’s brother and of a


40


"  "


mother, torn with love for her son. However, he should have
added that feminine grace of action so well conveyed by Pagsanghan’s Ophelia.
Victor Diaz who portrayed Polonius was a marvel for gesture, facial expression and voice inflection. He seemed to interpret but one trait of Polonius—his self induced folly, to the exclusion of other chief traits. Horatio—Florencio Tamesis Jr.—
was excellent. Never once during the entire play did he distract
the audience from Hamlet to himself, but rather, he was able to
make his part complement that of the principal actor.
Antonio Manuud showed versatility in playing Ophelia. His
madness scene, too, was powerful and well merits the applause
accorded his performance. He displayed convincing grace and
delicacy of treatment of the mannerisms of a woman. Like Pagsanghan, he had the power of inducing the right emphatic responses in the audience. Manuel Cuenca’s Gertrude was very well
portrayed. His display of sustained emotion won for him the
admiration of the crowd. Hilarion Daez, as the young Laertes,
deserves credit for his interpretation, although, at times, he failed
to show the sweep of speech and gesture required of the role. He
evinced consummate artistry in the swordplay with the three
Hamlets—a feat which was perhaps the most tiring, physically,
for any single character of both casts.
Tomas Tancinco left an impression of a faithful comrade and
friend though nonetheless loyal subject of Prince Hamlet. Without intending any humor, both ghosts—Victor Silayan and Francisco Icasiano—were convincingly out of this world. Both lent
the proper support by setting the mood and atmosphere of the
play. As expected, Osric—Francisco Gaa, Amando Mirasol—
pleasingly provided the comic relief (aside from Polonius) to ease
the tension of the play.
All these men should be heartily congratulated for so fine a
production. They are the richer for the experience, not only for
having appeared on a stage but for the vocal power, physical
grace, sympathetic understanding and the spirit of close cooperative effort that such an endeavour can not but cultivate. For
the producer and director—Father Irwin, the brightest leaf yet,
in the laurel of his "great" productions.
FLORENGIO TAMESIS, JR., A.B. '50
ANTONIO QUINTOS, A.B. '50
Mario C. ReYEs, A.B. '50


MARCH, 1950


41


MOLIERE'S LE MISANTHROPE


)O my mind, Moliere agrees neither with Alceste nor with
IPhilinte in their quite opposed philosophies of life. The
two viewpoints portrayed are equally extreme—Alceste’s


being sharp disgust for the follies and affectations of the time, and
Philinte’s the pliant view that tolerates mundane corruption. One
can side with Alceste in his contempt for bootlickers, for fops and
for hypocrites, but one cannot accept his consequent determination to hate man in general. To assume that man is a creature
completely and hopelessly corrupt presents no answer to the universal problem of man’s moral weakness. Must one be content
merely to criticize man’s failings and leave the solution to the
winds? As a matter of fact, Alceste himself falls short of his
own standards, for he could not help loving Celimene, the very
personification of the things he loathed. Clearly, his prudishness
and heroism, if you will, are sadly misapplied. In the finale, Alceste finds this out and makes a bitter decision. On the other
hand, Philinte’s vain diplomacy is coupled with caution and a certain amount of psychological tolerance which is pardonable, but
certainly he is not portrayed by Moliere as the ideal man.
On the whole, then, neither Alceste nor Philinte is a type
worth emulating, but Moliere hints at the ideal path to treadnot that of the blunt, self-centered, vain idealism that was Alceste’s, nor yet that ruled by the loose, hypocritical, foppish code of
the worldling, but the wise and prudent middle way—a sound
Catholic thought.
RAMON N. BAGASAN, Litt.B. '52


I like to think that when Moliere wrote the Misantrophe, he
was tired and bitter, frustrated, disillusioned, and suffering from
the toxic effect of the vicious system that made possible the society built about the throne of Louis XIV. Moliere was the comic dramatist of his time, and one finds strange and disconcerting his writing a play, the story of which is tragic (like forced
laughter) in its attempt to present a picture of court society by
sugar-coating the truth with comedy, unless he had broken down
from the pressure of the forces that undoubtedly determined the
character of the piece. Charles Eggbert writes, in his study of
the Misantrophe, that when Moliere wrote the play, “he was no
longer young, and advancing life was gradually disenchanting
him" and that “the wrath and contempt he heaped upon the class
was . . . due to experience he had with individuals. It must be


42


"  


noted, too, that his wife then was definitely estranged from him.
I like to think that Moliere was in this frame of mind when he
wrote—and the result was a play born not out of sheer inspiration, but out of bitterness and disillusionment. Great writing
must spring from an inspired, singing heart, like love, like faith.
There is something artificial about the play. The unfolding
of the story is strained and mechanical: for instance, in Scene V
of Act III, when Arsinoe visits Celimene, we are not furnished
with a sufficient motive for the former’s call, and we are led to
conclude that the author contrived the scene to give himself opportunity to further his characterization, sacrificing grace and
art for this sole purpose. Somehow, one receives the impression
that Moliere forced the words into the unwilling mouths of his
characters: they must ridicule one another, for it is the purpose
of the play to ridicule.
Alceste, the chief character, is made to appear ridiculous; he
is mockingly pitied, instead of sympathized with. I believe he
is a heroic figure, for in spite of the pressure of the society in
which he lived, he remains loyal to his ideals to the uncertain end.
Other readers find Alceste amusing in his exaggerated idealism,
but I must confess I could not reconcile myself to the idea of so
noble and so well-meaning a character being made the butt of
ridicule to provide entertainment for an audience!
GREGORIO BRILLANTES, Litt.B. '52
I do not believe that Moliere had the least intention of portraying Alceste as a comic, hoplessly impractical character butting
his head against the established conventions and abuses of society;
nor do I believe that Moliere believed that the character of Philinte stands as more worthy of admiration than that of Alceste.
For when I think of the uncompromising Alceste, I cannot help
but remember the lives of so many great men.
Though Moliere is long dead, this play will live to expose the
disgusting sham, the hypocrisy, the shallowness of society. It is
a play that can be most righteously applied to any society, as long
as a rotten society exists, as long as Celimenes and Arsinoes and
Orontes live within us. And the more one realizes the striking
likeness of Louis' Court to that of our present age, the more one
feels the power of this play that has been so fittingly called by
Belloc one of the two chief creations of the human spirit.
Such a play stands at the very peak of greatness.
ANDRES BAUTISTA, Litt.B. '52


MARCH, 1950


43


With whom then does Moliere agree? With Alceste or Philinte? An answer to this requires some knowledge of Moliere’s
own life and the circumstances surrounding the composition of
“The Misanthrope. Celimene is reflected in his young, vain
wife Armande, and Alceste in his own person. But he does not
necessarily agree with Alceste in the solution of his (Alceste’s)
problem. He considered Alceste a tragic figure because of his
rigid stubborness. Nor does he agree with Philinte who solves his
own problem by a compromising attitude, by giving ground to
the foul society of Louis XIV that Moliere detests and satirizes.
In my opinion, neither Alceste’s or Philinte’s solution is correct.
One must indeed fight those rotting social conventions but not
by retreating from life or by compromising, but rather by living
a Christian life and radiating that life in one’s immediate vicinity.
It may be called action—social action or, in our own Catholic
tongue, Catholic Action fortified with Christian optimism.
“With God I can do everything, without Him nothing is possible.”
MARIO REYES, A.B. '50
The gradual disillusionment of Alceste arouses in a reader a
certain pity. He vainly tries to battle against the established social conventions single-handed. As a just, rightous, well-meaning man and an idealist, he is much out of place in a rotting social
circle. He tries to justify his position, but only appears more
and more ridiculous. Though a misfit socially, he still is a man
of principle. Sanely he says of one of his rivals, "You see what
an unworthy passion can do, and I call you both as witnesses of
my infatuation. Nor, truth to say, is this all, and you will see
me carry it out to the bitter end, to show you that it is wrong to
call us wise, and that in all hearts there remains still something of
the man. Moliere is teaching no reform, but is simply indicating that, regardless of how idealistic and upright a person may be,
he will react according to the established conventions of society.
I believe that his bitter personal experience, on which this play is
based, tends to edge him toward the side of Alceste, more than
Philinte. He wants Alceste to go into exile so that he may not
be contaminated by corrupted society.
REX REDHOUSE, LITT.B. '53


44


  '


Awarded second prize in the national college-anivenity
United Nationi Enay Conteit.


Contriputions of the UNO
to World Peace
By HECTOR QUESADA, A.B. '51


ITHIN the past two ycars a
Acloud of pessimism seems to
have engulfed the peoples of
E2
the earth. Each night men
take to bed with the fear that on the
morrow a devastating war may be in
progress. Daily reports from the
council halls of the United Nations
tend to confirm their belief that a
third and final war is incvitable, and
that civilization itself is rapidly plunging to ultimate self destruction.
And yet four years after the last
shot of World War II was fired, there
is still peace; the petty wars and civil
disorders that have arisen as a result
of the major conflict are slowly but
surely subsiding. Much has been said
about the exasperating inefficiency of
the United Nations and yet that organization has been responsible for tremendous strides in world peace and
government.
To appreciate the achicvements of
the UN, one must remember that,
when it came in to being, there was
no peace to maintain. When it was
organized, unlike the League of Nations during the First World War, the
major peace treaties had not yet been
signed; furthermore, threats of World
War III were apparent in Java, China,
Palestine and Korea; but the greatest
handicap that the UN had to face was
the tremendous ideological chasm between the western allics and Soviet
Russia who were co-victors in a war
of uncommon ends.


Today the explosive situation that
once existed in Korea has been settled
through the UN even though in 1947
both American and Russian occupation
troops were prepared to fire at the
slightest provocation. In India and
Java the decisions of the UN commission, even though not always strictly
obeyed, were of great importance in
the final settlement made. The tension that existed between Grecce and
the governments of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania was cased when the
UN intervened, much as the tension
between the plaintiffs abates in the
presence of a judge before whom both
may be seated to arbitrate their differences. In Palestine, where racial
hatred flooded the streets of the Holy
City with blood, peace was purchased


MARCH. 1950


45


with the life of the UN representative,
Count Bernadotte, but there is peace
once more.
One may object, however, that these
successes are small when set against the
major problems of peace and world
federation that still remain unsolved,
while insecurity still haunts the peoples of the world. Strong words and
stinging insults have been hurled across
the council tables of the United Nations until every delegate is now
agreed on nothing but the fact that
the UN is anything but united.
But precisely in this lies the great
achievement of the UN. In spite of
the vicious wrangling and angry
words that filled the council meetings
the organization has remained intact.
Russia, despite several walkouts, shows
no sign of deserting the council permanently. Like a spoiled child the UN
has cried and bellowed and kicked
until the governments of the world
have come to realize that they
cannot do without her. Like a family
of healthy and opinionated boys, the
assembly has let off steam in family
squabbles and yet has remained a whole
family. Even by merely providing
means of airing grievances, the UN
has, like a huge town meeting of the
universe, exerted vast influence upon
the peoples and governments of the
world; it has become a place where any
nation can at least make known to the
world any injustice done and seek just
redress. In the words of John Foster
Dulles, “Every speaker is acutely
aware of the fact that many millions
of people are watching and judging ...
That is a fact of great moment.
True, this falls short of what the
ideal world union should be. Like
immature and irresponsible children,
nations have for the most part thought
of nothing but acquiring immediate
advantages, and have thus failed to


manifest that farsightedness that sees
in terms of international instead of
merely national good. Many schemes
and plans for improvement have been
offered, noteworthy among them being the Chicago plan, proposed by the
University of Chicagos Robert Hutchins and G. A. Borgese. This plan
seems thus far the best deliberated attempt to draft a one-world constitution; it provides for a World President,
a one-chamber world legislature of
ninety-ninc members, a Chamber of
Guardians to control and use the armed
forces, a Supreme Court, a Tribune of
the Pcople, and various other elements.
This plan proposes radical departures
from the present organization of the
UN. It seeks not merely to revise the
UN Charter but involves the surrender of some sovercignty to a world
government. As its preamble states,
“The age of nations must end and the
era of humanity begin.
This plan, brilliant as it is, may be
still too much in advance of the present concept of a world government
and premature for existing international relationships. It should, nevertheless, be our ultimate ideal and
goal. For the present, all nations
should unite in seeking international
rather than merely national benefits.
United action of this kind would entail the development of national responsibility and international morality.
But the foremost need of today is
faith—the faith of every individual in
the United Nations as the one practical
means of realizing world peace. To
this faith must be joined confidence
that man, as a moral and responsible
being, is free to create the world he
chooses and to work for his personal
and collective salvation. In the words
of Dr. Evatt, “It must survive and
mature and become wholly effective.
It is all we have.”


46


  


PEDRO
By SIXTO K. ROXAS, A.B. '50


—HE long red passenger bus lumbers along the
TIstony highway leaving clouds of dust in its
wake. At its front, just above the windshield,
ED
its destination is announced in bold, black letters: San Vicente.
Inside is a motley assortment of drowsy passengers.
There is an old fish vendor surrounded by an aroma that
strongly advertises her wares. Beside her is a big fat
Chinese merchant holding on solicitously to a large box
from which protrude packages of macaroni, wooden
ladles, bundles of noodles, and all the odds and ends that
form the varicgated stocks of sarisari stores. A couple
of seats in front are two barrio teachers trying to carry
on in stumbling English some sort of discussion in
which neither seems interested. The monotonous hum
of the motor, the dust and the sultry noonday heat are
not condacive to high spirits. The faces of all the passengers are stamped with a look of irrepressible tedium.
All, that is, except one.
He is an old man of about sixty. The furrows of
age are decply graved in his face. His hair is hoary and
he sits with a perceptible stoop. But there is a strange
glow in his cyes—almost as if there were lurking in them
some burning remnant of youthful fire. His eyes arc
fixed on the surrounding countryside. The distant
cloud-topped mountains, the brown farmer’s sheds, carabaos lolling in the mud, the rice fields, occans of green
dancing to the rhythm of the wind—all these he takes
in with avid thirst. Like a little child on his first trip to
the country, he sits there gripping the window frame,
mouth hanging open and tears forming in his eyes.
His soul seems to catch fire as his eyes glow brightcr and brighter. A wave of remembrance sweeps him
back through the years and ... be is young again.
*


MARCH, 1950


47


It is morning. A little boy of
twelve is running across the rice paddies. He wears a pair of short trousers fastened at the waist with a piece
of string, and gleamuing a gaudy red in
the morning sun. On top of this a
yellow undershirt much too large for
the boy flaps in the breeze as he runs.
Hung around his neck is the inevitable
weapon of youth, the sling shot. The
boy is running after an old man on a
carabao.
E
1atay! Tatay! I will go with you
to the river!"
The old man pulls his carabao to a
stop and turns to his son. "O
come here! Hurry up!
The boy runs up and scrambles up
the carabao behind his father. The
quaint trio wends its way across the
rice fields through a wooded grove,
and down a tortuous path to a ravine
where, cuddled among thick bamboo
brushes, a narrow river flows. From
somewhere come the familiar warbling
of the thrush and the low whistle of
the yellow oriole.
At the banks a group of women are
beating the dirt out of some baggy
dresses while they exchange little bits
of barrio gossip (for women are the
same everywhere).
“There’s Aling Juana, Pedro.” The
old man tells his son as they stop at the
edge of the water. "Go and play with
her daughter while I water the carabao."
Pedro clambers down the carabao
and moves uneasily toward the group
of chattering women. Aling Juana, a
buxom woman in a gay patadiong,
looks up to greet him.
"Oy, Pedro. Come here.
Pedro advances with shuffling feet.
He catches a glimpse of Aling Juana s
daughter, Maria, on the far end of the
bank. She is spreading out some
clothes on the rocks.
48


Naku! how big you are already.
Soon you will be a young man." There
is a giggle in the crowd. "O you, go
already and play.
Glad to get away, the boy runs to
where Maria is laying out the clothes.
He stops before her and says: "You
want to catch crabs?”
The little girl turns to him with
wide eyes. “Crabs! Where?
“There where the river begins.
Come with me, I will show you.
"Wait ba? I will just finish laying
these out.
Maria spreads the rest of the clothes
on the rocks. And soon the little boy
and the little girl are running hand in
hand to catch crabs under the stones
at the head of the river. And in the
trees above their heads, the thrushes
are warbling their song, and the yellow
orioles are whistling their low whistle.
It is evening. The lovers’ moon is
smiling coyly over a little village. But
it seems to be beaming especially over
a tiny nipa hut standing slightly apart
from the rest and set under the protecting branches of a towering mango
tree. For there at the window a lovely lady sits gently braiding her long
black tresses. She is humming a plaintive kundiman. It is a sweet kundiman, for it is sad. It speaks of lovelove unexpressed, love unrequited.
A gentle step in the moonlight, a
slight rustle in the bushes and a young
man appears under the window.
“Maria.” It is almost a whisper.
The lady of the braided tresses
catches her breath. Her hand goes to
her bosom, and she looks out of the
window.
"Maria. It is I, Pedro.
"Pedro! What are you doing here?"
'Nothing. I wanted to talk to
you."
“But why now? It is very late.
“  "


“I could not wait. Tatay has arrived already from the city. He
received a good price for the harvest.
God is good to us. We can get married now—if—if you still want me,
Maria."
The lady of the long black hair does
not say anything. Her hand has gone
up to her mouth and she is biting her
thumb.
“Maria. Maria. You will marry
me?” The voice is tense with apprehension.
“But—but right now, Pedro?”
There is a laugh, a laugh breathed
out in relicf. “No—but—tomorrow
The day after. As soon as possible.
'I must tell Nanay.
“Tell her at once. Tomorrow morning. Pedro catches hold of himself.
He relaxes a bit and continues in a
softer, calmer tone. “Maria, I was
afraid. I dreamt something had happened to you. I dreamt that I had
lost you. That’s why I came tonight.
But now I see it was foolish.
An ominous dark cloud floats across
the moon and leaves the little village
in darkness.
It is twilight. The farmers are
coming back from the fields with the
plows on their shoulders. But it 1s
strange. The village is quiet. The
dogs that have been wont to meet
them with joyous barking are nowhere
to be seen. Only occasionally, from
somewhere a mournful howl rises.
As the farmers pass by Aling Juana’s
hut, they hear weeping and wailing.
Outside, the women of the village are
huddled talking in whispers.
"Ay it is terrible—the fate of a person, said one, "To die so young ...
"And not only that, broke in another, "she was to have been married
today to Pedro. They wanted to get
married last month in the Church of
San Narciso; but Aling Juana asked


them to wait only for Padre Gerardo.
You know, he comes here every
month.
“Very sad. Padre Gerardo comes
here to marry Pedro and Maria. Instead he arrives to see Maria die.
“But what did she die of?”
“I don’t know. About three days
ago she got sick and Aling Juana asked
me to call Mang Inti, the arbulario.
Mang Inti said it was just a stomach
ache. Then by and by she is dead
already.
‘It was really her time already—
Fate.
"Poor Maria.
"Yes, and pity also Aling Juanaand Pedro.
“Where is Pedro now?
“He is in there—with Aling Juana
and Padre Gerardo. They say he is
like a crazy man.
Inside the hut, in the fading light,
the lifeless form of Maria lies on a
bamboo cot. Beside the cot is Aling
Juana prostrate on the floor wailing
her heart out and tearing her hair.
Padre Gerardo is whispering gentle
words of comfort in a vain attempt to
assuage her grief. Pedro stands in the
shadows, dry-eyed and unbelieving, as
he stares at her who was to have been
his bride. His jaws are hard-set and
his fists are clenched so tightly that
his knuckles are white. Soon the last
streaks of daylight die out. And the
hut is dark.
The burial is over. On a hillside, a
short distance from the cemetery, Padre Gerardo stands with his hand on
Pedro’s shoulder.
"My son, do not be embittered. It
is the will of God."
“But why, Padre, why Maria? She
—she—" Pedro could speak no more.
“We do not question His way, son.
Come, you must have some rest. You
have had no slecp and hardly anything
to eat for three days now'


MARCH, 1950


49


The two make their way down the
hill toward the village. Just before
entering, Pedro stops Padre Gerardo.
"Padre, I cannot stay in this village
anymore. I— I would always see
Maria everywhere—in the river where
we used to catch crabs, in the rice
fields where she always brought me
rice cakes that she cooked herself, in
her hut by the mango tree. Padre, I
cannot stay here!"
“But where would you go, Pedro?
"Anywhere, Padre. With you, to
San Narciso or ... or to the city. Yes,
Padre, they say that in Manila, even a
poor farmer can make his fortune, now
that the Americanos are there.
I don t know, son. I should think
your place is here—with your people."
But I shall be of no use to my people like this, Padre.”
And your father?”
Tatay does not need me. He gets
the best harvest in the village. There
are many willing to work for him.
Then, go, my son, if your father
will let you. I shall give you a letter
to Padre Pelaez in Manila. He will
help you. But you will come home
again, Pedro?”


Pedro is staring into the distance,
out beyond the hills, to the river
where the crabs lie under the stones,
where the thrushes and the orioles singHis voice is hushed as he answers.
“Yes, Padre. I shall come back to
San Vicente. I should like to take my
rest here—with Maria. I shall come
back home—to die.
N * * *
The long red passenger bus lumbers
into San Vicente and rolls to a stop before the Plaza. The old fish vendor
excitedly hands her empty baskets to
a young boy who has been waiting for
her. The big fat Chinaman is unloading his motley bundle. The barrio
teachers have stopped their discussion
and given themselves to the less intellectual task of carrying their bags out.
All the passengers file out of the bus.
All, that is, except onc.
He is an old man of sixty, sitting
by the window, his head reclined in a
restful posture, his eyes closed, and a
faint smile frozen on his lips. The
conductor goes to wake him up.
He will not wake. Pedro has come
home to San Vicente.


50


  "


The Parade
By ARTURO TANCO, A.B. '53


N the morning of April 3,
I1950, at exactly six minutes
before nine oclock, the paOEDO
rade got under way. It
would, perhaps, be wrong to use the
phrase, for no reliable observer actually noticed it get under way. Let us
be meticulous and say that, at nine
o clock in the morning, the parade was
going up Rizal Avenuc.
All traffic was blocked and people
were crowding the sidewalks, vainly
struggling for a glimpse—early shoppers homeward bound with packed
basket and protesting fowls, vendors
and messengers, and all the others who
make up the everyday hurrying crowd.
It was unlike any parade Manila had
ever known. There were no bands;
there were no flags; simply column
after column of marching men who
strode in exact cadence. They bore
no weapons and wore no distinctive
uniform. Here could be seen men clad
in brown, faded khaki — oftentimes
whole regiments, it seemed — some
with helmets and boots on, others with
just a cap and worn-out shoes. Some
had papers and maps under their arms
and some had heavy packs on their
backs.
The strange part of it all was the
fact that, although their feet beat
against the pavement, they made no
sound—no noise at all.
The first unusual incident happened
as the parade passed the corner of
Raon street. An elderly woman, gazing fixedly at the faces passing be

fore her, uttered a sharp cry of amazement. "My God! It’s Totoy, my son,
it's you!” She called out, "Totoy!"
A tall youth in the ranks looked up,
gave a faint smile, and beckoned.
Hurriedly rushing out, the woman ran
into the midst of the ranks and
clutched the hand of the youth, anxiously gazing white-facedly into his
eyes. But, the parade marched on, and
she was stumblingly thrust back into
the pavement.
O, God! Forgive me for trying
to forget!” she dropped down on her
knees and sobbed, while the people
milling around moved away in quiet
respect.
News of the parade had spread and
the crowd was thickening; people
dropped whatever they were doing and
hastened to catch a glimpse. Soon,
men and women were breaking into
the ranks all over the avenue—peering
with awe at the faces, and tearfully
calling out once-loved names.
A man clad in the white robes of a
priest scanned the moving figures and
slowly approached another figure clad
in brown, with a small silver cross on
his coller. He walked a few paces
with bowed head, his lips moving as if
in silent prayer.
We have not forgotten you, Ed,
and all the others like you!” he murmured painfully. "We have tried to
carry on the work of Christ which you
and your kind died for!"
The stdoped, worn figure nodded
slowly and smiled. He waved his right


MARCH, 1950


51


hand and continued to march.
The parade had turned and was now
nearing the Quiapo church. It was
there that the head of the long column
stopped. There was no Commander
in front. In fact, there seemed to be
no leader at all.
By now, the plaza directly in front
was covered with silent, motionless
men who looked steadfastly at that
strange column. Even the birds had
ceased their cheerful twittering, as if
in the presence of some great Power.
A voice spoke:
“We come to you, amid your restless peace, as shadows of an hour—the


past come to haunt you! Was it an
idle dream that we died for? A dream
so quickly forgotten?"
Remember well that men have died
this year, last year, and thousands of
years ago for Liberty; and there were
always men who were left behind and
who forgot!”
“We come lest you forget that we
gave up countless joys, our loved ones,
our life itself for you—yes, for you
who have so quickly forgotten!"
It is strange, but even to this day,
people say that the parade disappeared
exactly as it had started—with no one
viewing it. There are even some who
say that they saw no parade at all!


Quest

By MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51
Bleak skies dark above me
And a sad wind shrieking by —
And yet I must stand in the midst of the storm
My face towards the sky.
Tempests raging about me,
Tempest within my heart —
But my feet must follow the winding roads
Where the tangled pathways part.
1 move in the gloom of nightfall
Alone with a sword and a song;
Yet my song was sung by my fathers
And my weapon was held by the strong!
Alone in the clutch of the storm-wind
I follow a faliing star—
Yet my guerdon, the prize of my dreaming
Is where the Angels are.


52


“  


Heart Song
By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52
What worth is the lute when its music hath fled?
What worth is the strain when its swectness is lost?
What worth is the heart when, its tenderness shed,
Its tortured aspirings are blasted by frost?
But Love knows not death. There is comfort in this,
That Love is eternal beyond passion's tolls.
And what, then, is heaven, with its glory and bliss,
But the union of hearts and communion of souls -
When saints shall be minstrels, and angels shall sing,
And lutes shall have never a broken string?


MARCH, 1950


53


SURPRISING THE PRESIDENT
——HREE members of the Jumor
A. B. class paced uneasily
about the thickly carpeted
HES
" floor of the Malacanan Social
Hall. On the long mahogany table,
half-hidden by the shiny trophies and
banners which the President was to
award to the most active participants
in the United Nations Day parade,
were the gold and silver President
Quirino medals. The nervous three
were the winners of the nation-wide
essay contest sponsored by the Philippines International Relations Association in conjunction with the UN Day
celebrations. Bulbs flashed and camcras clicked as the President pinned the
gold medal on Enrique Esquivel, Jr.,
and the silver medal on Hector Quesada whose essays, "The Future of the
UN" and “Contributions of the UNO
to World Peace respectively, were
adjudged the first and second best.
As the Chief Executive warmly congratulated Hector Hofilena who won
the third place with his essay “Contributions of the UNO to World Peace,
he smilingly remarked that he was surprised and pleased to know that the
Ateneo had monopolized all the awards.
The President would surely have
been more amazed and more pleased
had he known that honorable mention in that same contest went to Pedro Carag of the Ateneo College of
Law, that barely threc months ago,
Onofre Pagsanghan of Jr. A.B. had
won the UN Oratorical Contest, that
54


Meliton Salazar, a senior of the high
school, was the first prize winner of
the essay contest sponsored by the
New York Herald Tribunc, that Teofisto Gumgona of Sr. A.B. was
awarded the silver medal in the Civil
Liberties Union Oratorical Contest.
THE VISITOR
The new year was only a day old
when Fr. John J. MCMahon, S.J..
Provincial of the New York Province
of the Society of Jesus, alighted at the
Manila International Airport from a
PAL airliner after a four week inspection of the numerous Jesuit mission
stations in the Marshall and Caroline
Islands. For the Atenco this was the
first post-war visitation by higher superiors, the last having been in 1936
when Father Fahey, S.J., who was specially sent by the Gencral of the Society of Jesus in Rome, paid the Atcnco a visit. As Superior of the largest
province, Fr. MeMahon has under his
charge 1,611 priests, scholastics and
brothers. In the Philippines alone, he
has to visit four colleges, seven
high schools, two seminaries, the leper
colony at Culion and numerous parishes in Mindanao.
With the welfare of the Atenco always at heart, Father MeMahon, a few
months after he was appointed Provincial, sent to the Philippines Fr. Edward Phillips, S.J., who as Provincial in 1932 had made an inspection
visit of the Islands at the time the
Ateneo at Intramuros was burned. It
was with the help of Father Phillips
“  "


that the site of the new Ateneo at Loyola Heights was finally chosen.
E
SOCIAL APOSI LES
Before Father Provincial went to inspect the twenty-five Jesuit parishes
in Mindanao, leaving behind him a
school holiday, he had approved of the
Ateneos plan to conduct a special
'Institute of Social Action" exclusively for priests. Many Roman Pontiffs
ever since Leo XIII, whose encyclical
"Rerum Novarum" gave the world
the Christian solution to the vexing
labor problem, have repeatedly and insistently exhorted the clergy to concern themselves with the serious economic plight of vast numbers of Catholics. Because the number of priests
in the Philippines is inadequate to minister to the needs of the faithful, it
is almost impossible for zealous priests
to acquaint themselves sufficiently
with the manifold and complicated
phases of the Social Apostolate. This
Institute has for its primary aim the
giving of facts and techniques in approaching the social problem and hopes
to attain its objective by combining
regular lecture courses with field trips,
discussions and exhibits.
The Institute, which will start its
lectures in the early part of April, has
been especially devised for priests who
wish to be better prepared to assume
their key role as shepherds of the
"Flock.” Two or three such priests
from each diocese might form a vital
force about which the difficult task
of re-Christianizing the social order
will take place. Currently under
study also is the suggestion that regional Institutes of a few days duration be conducted in order to increase
the interest of as many other priests
as possible in the Social Apostolate.
CATHOLIC ACTION
FIRST CLASS
"My congratulations and blessings,


said His Excellency, Msgr. Gabriel Reyes, Archbishop of Manila, as he signed
the guest book after viewing the Catholic Book Exhibit. The ground
floor of the Ramona Apartments was
the site for the eighth occurrence of
this annual event sponsored by the
Campion Literary Guild. The oneweek exhibit, in which fourteen Catholic colleges were actively represented, was open to the general public
each day from 4 P.M. to 8 P.M. It
drew a crowd of more than five thousand.
Every phase of Catholic literature
was artistically presented to attract the
popular eye. For the serious thinkers
there were the booths on Philosophy
by the University of Sto. Tomas, on
Social Order by the Ateneo, on Communism by the Holy Ghost College,
on Education by Letran College, on
Marriage and Courtship by St. Scholastica and on Christian Apologetics by
San Beda; for the meditative, the Assumption booth abounded in devotional readings, while the La Consolacion
booth was well supplied with missals
and books on Catholic Liturgy; for
less speculative reading, choice biographies of noted Catholics were available at the Maryknoll booth, while the
St. Paul and the St. Theresa booths
were replete with the best of the novel
and drama and the pick of Catholic
prose and poetry. The role of the Catholic Press in the defense of truth was
the subject of the La Salle and Sta.
Catalina booths. Catholic newspapers
and magazines from all over the world
and pamphlets touching on many
current vital issues were displayed. In
addition Sta. Isabel College set up a
model home library, complete with ash
trays, table lamp and a radio.
The first week of February was a
hectic one for the members of the
Guild and especially for its moderator,
Fr. John Carroll, S.J., but their labors
55


MARCH, 1950


were worthwhile, for, as a joint venture of the Catholic Colleges, the book
exhibit succeeded outstandingly in
propagating knowledge of Catholic
literature. This achievement, in the
words of the Archbishop himself, is
"first class Catholic Action. One
gauge of the Exhibit’s success was the
remark of Fr. James J. Meany, S.J.,


who was the moderator of the Campion Literary Guild in 1940 when it
sponsored at the Crystal Arcade in the
Escolta the most successful boak exhibit up to that time, “Better than
pre-war!"
ENRIQUE L. ESQUIVEL, JR..
AB '51


Heaven
By SALVADOR R. GONZALEZ, A.B. '50
"Go, wing thy flight from star to star,
From world to luminous world, as far
As the universe spreads its flaming wall;
Take all the pleasures of all the spheres,
And multiply each through endless years,
One minute of heaven is worth them all?
Thomas Moore: Lalla Rookb


AN is by nature constantly in
MIpursuit of happiness. He
tries to find happiness in
wealth, but wealth will not
buy him happiness; he tries to find
happiness in fame, but fame will not
give him happiness; he tries to find
happiness in power, but power cannot
even give him peace; he tries to find
happiness in the company of his
friends, amidst bright lights and gay


music, but he learns, often too late,
that bright lights and gay music cannot give him happiness.
We are made for Thee, oh Lord,
and our hearts will never rest until
they rest in Thee. These are the
words of Saint Augustine. Man can
find real happiness only in God. Man
longs for perfect happiness, but the
world cannot give him perfect happiness. Everything here on earth is tran

56


“  "


sitory; nothing is permanent. We desire something which we think can
yield us happiness, but no sooner do
we get that object than we find enther
that it does not yield us the perfect
joy we craved at the beginning of our
quest or that our gladness is marred
by fear of losing the object—and we
are disappointed. The attainment of
happiness is the motive that underlies
cvery human action. But only in
Heaven can real happiness be had.
Without Heaven, life would be a continuous fraud. For God to have implanted in man a yearning after perfect happiness only to frustrate this in
the end would be the height of cruelty
and deception. Picture to yourself a
pale, emaciated girl slaving in a factory counting buttons or labeling cans
to gain a meager salary for the support of an aged mother and a crippled
brother, and tell me that there is no
Heaven. Recall the murderer and the
defrauder, the lustful and the malicious, who have ruined the lives of
others, and yet have enjoyed life while
the good suffer, and tell me, if you
can, that a just God will never balance
accounts.
Heaven, then, exists, but what is
its nature? This is one of those questions which has harassed the minds of
men for ages. The Epicurean believes
that Heaven is a first-class cafeteria
where the most delicious dishes are
served. The Moslem belicves that Heaven is a glorified cabaret where his
fleshy passions will be sated. The
Communist believes in a heaven on
carth when there will no longer be any
distinction between the rich and the
poor; where every man will equally
possess the things he will have to abandon at death. The pagan piano-concertist fancies that Heaven is a place
where one can listen for all eternity
to the greatest compositions played by
the greatest music masters. The
painter believes that Heaven is a place


of beautiful sunsets and landscapes
wherein one may paint along with
Rembrandt and Rubens and Raphael
and the other great painters that our
kind has produced. The growing
youth believes that Heaven is an hour
with his sweetheart. Some vague conception of Heaven haunts the mind of
all the disillusioned Buddhist who, suspecting that desire is the source of unhappiness, believes only in the annihilation of desire. Even the irrational
atheist can be imagined as secretly
wishing for Heaven — particularly
when he has reached his seventies or
cighties and has grown weary of his
empty philosophy. Thus, men fashion
all sorts of ideas about Heaven and all
of them agree (except, perhaps, the
Buddhist) that Heaven must be a
place of pleasure; the higher the type
of man, the loftier the type of pleasure. But man is not satisfied with
only passing pleasure, he must have
lasting pleasure if he is to have pleasure at all. He must have perfect
happiness. Man seeks for what will
satisfy his yearning for happiness and
satisfy it entirely. But nothing in
this world will satisfy him entirely:
it is not food that will satisfy him entirely; it is not gratification of sexual
desire that will satisfy him entirely;
it is not the material wealth of this
world that will satisfy him entirely; it
is not a piece of music that will satisfy him entirely; it is not a landscape
that will satisfy him entirely; nor is
it the suppression of his desires that
will satisfy him entirely. One has but
to look around in this world to see how
many men are wretched in spite of
(and often because of) their wealth,
in spite of their fame, in spite of their
power, and in spite of their friends.
Only God can satisfy man entirely.
Only in Heaven can that yearning for
perfect happiness be entirely satisfied.
Where God is, there Heaven lies!


MARCH. 1950


57


Dawn of a New Day
By ROBERTO CONCEPCION, A.A. '51


ANGUIDLY, Sylvia came out
Lof the engulfing darkness of
dreamland, as a voice said to
I.., Cst up. I i ainos sr
o’clock. The bull cart is already
hitched and waiting."
It was the soft voice of her mother,
kneeling beside her, as she tenderly
shook Sylvia’s slim shoulders. Slowly,
the clean cold wind of dawn seeped
into her mind and she remembered,
with a sudden jolt, what the day
meant.
She drew aside the old Ilocano blanket and opened her eyes. In the dim
light of dawn that wrapped the house,
she noticed that Remy, her younger
sister, was no longer beside her.
Her mother drew back, and holding her old knees, stood up with an
effort and headed for the kitchen.
'You might miss the first train and
I don’t want you to arrive at the city
after dark, her voice trailed off.
"Besides, you know how slowly Kiko
drives the carabao.
Sylvia got up and wrapped the blanket around her, went to the window
and rested her chin on the sill. The
moon hung low beyond the clump of
kapok trees that fringed the main road
to Calasiao and the stars dimmed slowly, then flickered out like fireflies.
Everything was still quiet except for
the intermittent crowing of the cocks
and the whistling of the farmers on
their way to the fields that spread in


the distance like a frayed buri mat
with mounds and splotches of trees.
She could also distinguish, farther on,
the railroad tracks, the small squat
railroad station, and the trail that led
to it. How often Sylvia had imagined
herself, in her younger days, starting
out there with her things, heading for
the big city. She would miss—Sylvia
remembered telling herself—the river,
in which she used to swim with Remy
in patajongs, where the children gathered snails, and, during summer,
plucked branches of camacbile and
bamboo ends.
She recalled too, in that brief instant, how much all of them had sacrificed to send her to school, because
they knew that some day she could be
the backbone of the family. She felt,
with a pang in the heart, that the days
when she climbed the guava tree by
the chicken coop in the back yard
would soon be buried in the past. Now
she knew her dreams were on the
threshold of being realized and she felt
the heavy responsibility she would
have to bear.
Only yesterday, she had helped her
mother pack and had asked Kiko to
prepare two bundles of good firewood
stored in the woodshed. She had
watched the sun set beyond the hills
of Calasiao. She had found it difficult to sleep the night before as she
restlessly lay in bed thinking and
thinking, until she could hear Remy


58


  "


snoring softly beside her. And she
knew that her sister too, had faith in
her power to meet the responsibility
now placed upon her shoulders.
Sylvia smiled and, slowly folding
the blanket, headed for the batalan,
where Remy was pouring the steaming water into a large galvanized iron
basin.
"7
have something for you, Manang, Remy said with some hesitation, when Sylvia had finished dressing. “You can use this too.
It was Remy’s savings in the old coconut shell which she had cracked
open. The silver coms were grecnish
yellow with mold.
“You may need them here,” she
said, but Remy insisted and pushed
her to the kitchen where breakfast
was set on the table. Her mother
wrapped nice, some fried fish and eggs
in a banana leaf wilted in the fire,
for she would need this meal during
the long trip.
Her father came up the creaking
stairs and told Sylvia to hurry, as the
train would soon pull in. Kiko had
already gone to the station with her
things: the bundles of firewood, the
sack of nce and the vegetables which
had been taken from the fields the
afternoon before.
“Be a good girl,” her mother admonished her, and try to get along
with your aunt Felisa and your cousins. Work hard, help them clean the
house, and obey your aunt in everything. Remember, she is your mother
in the city, and don t forget to be a
good gurl.
She hardly listened to what her mother said. She had heard it many
times since they had decided to send
her to school, with all of them at home
slaving like carabaos to pay her way.
Besides, she was excited.
"Remy,” she called, but there was
no answer from the room adjoining


the kitchen, and she knew her sister
couldn’t bear to see her leave, after
all their years together. Sylvia didn’t
call again.
Outside, past the broken gate and
the fence of gumamelas the sun shone
mildly and the air was clean and cool.
A gust of wind cooled her face and
her agile feet found the path that led
from the embankment of the main
road to the railroad station. She
looked back and saw her mother and
Remy by the fence waving at her.
Only a few people awaited the train
and most of these were going to the
next town to sell the contents of their
wide bamboo baskets. Her father
asked, "Do you have your money
where you won’t lose it?”
“Yes, father,” she answered. "I
pinned it inside my slip.
The train rounded the bend—a tiny
speck with a thick wisp of black
smoke coming from its funnel—and
blew a shrill blast into the fresh country air. Then it loomed bigger and
bigger until it hissed to a stop.
Kiko hurried with her things into
one of the coaches and her father went
up to see that nothing had been left
bchind. "You have seven bundles in
all, he reminded her. "Seven. Don’t
forget it.
The train made a ¡erky start and
awkwardly she leaned out and kissed
her father’s lean hand. "You will
be all right with your auntie, he
called out to her, as the hissing of the
engine half-muffled his voice. "Write
us as soon as you arrive and then study
hard. Be a good gurl.”
The train was now chugging steadily and her father stretched out his
hands and repeated, "Remember, you
have seven bundles, seven.
Sylvia smiled feebly, feeling a little
weak in the knees, now that she was
en her own, alone—so she loved to
think. She was going to school. She


MARCH, 1950


59


was going to have a career which
would cost the sweat and tears of all
the persons dearest to her—of Remy
slaving, of her father and mother toiling and saving, and of Kiko snorting,
but working just the same. And the
uncertainty of the future was dissipated. She took a last long look at the
familiar scene around her as she
slumped on the seat beside the window
unmindful of the other people going
around the train. She drank in the
rolling country side, the waving ledda
grass and the giant buri palms, like


stoic guardians of the rice fields; she
gazed at the house she had left behund,
now almost invisible in the eastern
distance; at her father and Kiko in the
bull-cart heading for it. And she
knew someday, she would come back
to all of this as others who had left
before. She would again swim in the
same winding river with Remy, share
the same buri mat with her and feel
the ringing laughter of father and
Kiko. Then, Sylvia knew, she would
not have failed them.


The Witch
By RICARDO HENSON, Litt.B. '52


HEN Enteng got sick, I knew
that Terio had something to
do with it. How else can one
E
explain this lingering illness?
He suffers no pain and yet he gets
weaker and thinner everyday. He eats
little enough, mostly soup and milk
now but even these he swallows with
some difficulty. It is clear that Enteng is very sick but his sickness is
something that no doctor can cure.
For Enteng has been bewitched.
I know this to be so because I can
tell by the signs. As a boy, Lola used
to tell me about witches and witchcrafr. “A witch, she once said to
me, is a friend of the devil. He is
very powerful. He can assume many
forms and beguile you in any one of
them. When angered, he is terrible
to behold. Woe to that man who
dares cross his path when he is angry
for he is doomed to a slow, lingering
death."


I was only ten years old when I
thought I saw a witch.
It happened during one of our barrio fiestas. There were many people
that day crowding the small bisitas
and not a few of them were beggars
who knelt on the hard earth outside
the church, praying, their dirty hands
outstretched for charity. Looking at
them closely, I noticed one who kept
herself apart from the rest. She was
an old woman, bowed and gnarled like
an old guava tree. She was dressed
shabbily and her camisa was almost in
tatters. The sight of her suddenly
called to my mind Lola s tales of witches and ghosts. My curiosity must
have overcome my fear because, before I knew what I was doing, I was
advancing towards her. I gave her a
five centavo com.
"Dacal a salamat ito,” she said.
I stood for some time in front of


60


  


her waiting for the spell to descend
upon me as Lola said it would. But
nothing happened. I was puzzled. I
could not understand what she was
waiting for. Shrugging my shoulders,
I turned on my heel and entered the
church. I had forgotten all about the
beggar until that night when I felt a
very sharp pain in my stomach. Immediately I thought of the old woman
again. Now finally, she had me bewitched. Fear gripped my heart and
sweat broke from every pore in my
guaking body. Crying, I ran to Mother and told her everything.
“Ay ing anac co, O my son, she
said kindly, patting me on the head.
“Who has been telling you these foolish stories?"
"Lola did. Why Mother?” I asked
in frank astonishment.
“Because they are not true, that’s
why. There are no such things as
witches, Carding.
'But Lola said there are witches,
I insisted.
“That’s enough, Mother snapped
almost angrily. "Lola just invented
those stories to put you to sleep.
She then led me to the kitchen and
gave me some medicine to drink. It
was a concoction of young guaya
leaves and manzanilla. The next
morning my stomach-ache was gone.
Slowly, the realization that the beg
gar was no witch and that Mother was
right and Lola wrong dawned upon
my growing mind. I cried bitterly,
whether from relief or disappointment,
I could not tell. Perhaps it was
both....
But this sickness of Enteng is altogether different. Even Dr. Castro
himself is baffled. Dr. Castro 1s
the town doctor, a stout, oldish man
whose tremendous appetite has triumphed over his advancing years. He
is also the compadre of Mang Kulas,
Enteng’s father, because, when Enteng


was comfirmed, Dr. Castro stood as
the godfather.
This morning was his fifth visit,
but still he could not tell what was
wrong with Enteng. He was in a bad
temper.
See here, compadre,” he said, drawing Mang Kulas aside, "there scems to
be nothing wrong with your son.
“But that’s impossible, exclaimed
Mang Kulas. "Why even a child can
tell that Enteng is sick just by looking
at him. If there is nothing wrong
with him, as you say, a ver how can
you explain his fever?"
"I don’t know, Dr. Castro admitted with hurt pride. “That’s what I
can’t understand about this ailment.
You see, his temperature is normal."
“Normal!” Then doubtfully, "Are
you sure?"
“Of course I am sure, came the
curt reply. Dr. Castro is one man who
has no patience with people who question his judgment on medical matters.
“You must do something quick,
compadre," Mang Kulas said impatiently, ignoring the doctor’s caustic
remark. "Anything. My son must be
saved at all costs.
“Ill do everything I can, Dr. Castro promised. "Here’s a prescription
for Enteng. In the meantime, don’t
worry too much, compadre. It’s not
good for your blood pressure, you
know And besides, worrying won’t
do your son any good."
When he left, Mang Kulas was a
broken man. His was a grief that we
could well understand, for it was the
grief of an old man whose only joy in
life was the son he loves. His wife,
Aling Tina, a beautiful woman in her
day, but sickly, died soon enough after
delivering Enteng. Mang Kulas never
married , again. When his friends
teased him about it he would just
laugh and say: “Women don t like
me anymore.” Of course that was


MARCH, 1950


61


not the real reason. We knew better.
He was afraid that the woman he
would marry would not love his son
as dearly as he did. And now Enteng is sick. It is a cruel fate for the
old man; for Enteng, it is a cruel way
to die.
When I told Lola about Enteng that
night, she shook her greying head and
said sadly, “The ways of God are
sometimes hard to understand."
I kept silent.
“There is only one way to save Enteng, she said finally. “The power
of Teno must be broken.
“But how, Lola?” I cried in anguish.
"Ay, that is no easy thing to accomplish, indeed. It would take a clever
man to outwit a witch without arousing his suspicions. A woman can,
perhaps. I know of one case where a
bewitched husband was saved by his
wife. But that is one case in a thousand, Carding.
Even that slim chance must be
taken, I swore silently in the dark.
There is one such woman who can
help me save Enteng—Nene.
The thought of Nene brought a
flood of memories. ...
Nene is the barrio school-teacher.
She lives in the same poblacion as Dr.
Castro, but every day, except on Saturdays and Sundays, she comes to
school riding the Pambusco. She 15
not pretty, but she has a good heart
and a friendly word for everybody.
She does not paint her face like most
women do, and she does not flirt with
men. On the contrary, she is quiet,
shy and modest. When Enteng saw
her at the last barrio fiesta, he fell in
love with her. At first Nene was
cautious, almost afraid. She had her
doubts about Enteng. She knew him
to be the son of a rich man while she
was poor. Enteng’s father, Mang Kulas, is the teniente del barrio. He is
the richest man in the whole barrio of
62


Sindalan. Aside from his big rice
fields, he also owns a bigasan, a sugar
plantation, and more than thirty carabaos, but his riches have never gone
to his head. He is ever kind and generous, and honest in his dealings with
the servants and casamacs. In all my
ten years with the family as a houseboy, I have nothing to complain of.
A more loving master and a gentler
son I will never sec.
In due time Nene accepted Enteng.
The news spread like a grass fire
throughout the whole barrio and for
days the people talked of nothing but
the coming wedding. It soon became
a common sight every afternoon after
school to see Nene and Enteng going
to the bus station together where they
both waited for the Pambusco that
would take her to town. Those were
happy days for the lovers.
But they didn’t reckon on Terio.
Terio is the school janitor. An uglier
man you'll never see, with his rheumy
eyes, his flat nose, thick lips and a
livid scar on his left cheek. Of this
scar, he is particularly sensitive. It
was said that he got if from a blow
dealt him by a Japanese with the back
of his sword when he carelessly collided with him in the public market.
Like Enteng, Terio fell in love with
Nene the moment he saw her. Only
he loved in silence.
Then one day it seemed that Terio
lost his head completely. He tried to
force his attentions upon Nene, but
the fates intervened. For at that very
instant Enteng entered the room. Seeing Nene in great distress, he grabbed
Terio roughly by the collar and with
one powerful blow, sent him sprawling
on the floor. Blood came from the
broken lips of Terio. Slowly, he stood
up, his face twisted in anger. But
he did not fight back. Wiping away
the blood with the back of his palm,
he looked hard and long at Enteng as
“  "


though he was surprised to see him
there.
“EIl make you pay for this, he
said. "You’ll see.
Then he walked away. That night
after supper Enteng got sick.
Five days have passed since that unfortunate incident. Now it is Friday.
There is not much time left for us to
save Enteng—every minute and every
second count. My conversation with
Lola last night was the very thing I
nceded to bolster up my confidence.
Nene must share this secret.
So this noon, as soon as I finished
washing the dishes, I went to see Nene.
The carabao trail that led to the
schoolhouse was deserted; the noon
heat brooded and quivered over the
fields and, as puffs of wind passed by,
the ripening grain shimmered like a
woman’s dainty silks. I found Nene
resting under the big acacia tree with
Mrs. Custodio, the only other teacher
in the school.
“How is Enteng?” she asked anxiously as soon as she saw me.
t
The same, Miss Dizon, I lied,
avoiding her questioning look.
There was an awkward pause as I
tried to think of how I should break in
with what I had in mind to tell her.
Mrs. Custodio must have sensed my
uneasiness because she whispered something in Nene’s ear and then strode to
the schoolhouse.
“You came here to tell me something, Carding, she said. "What 15
it?"
TN
You can help me save Enteng, I
blurted out.
"Please stop talking in riddles, she
said. “Tell me what to do and Pll
do it, whatever happens. You know
well I’ll do anything for Enteng even
if it costs my life.
Her earnestness and sincerity smote
my heart. So I told her everything.


She fell in with my plan, heart and
soul.
“But you must be careful, Miss Dizon, I told her after I had given the
instructions. "If Terio gets suspicious.
we are all doomed."
“I will be careful,” she promised.
As I took my leave, I thought I saw
her eyes glow with a new hope, a new
strength, new life. And I felt encouraged.
The next day after school, I hid
myself under a desk in Nene’s classroom. If worst came to worst, I
would have to protect Nene from Terio’s deviltry. Nene was busy arranging her things when Terio entered.
Slowly she looked up from her work
and allowed a flirtatious smile to play
upon her lips. Terio could hardly believe his eyes. "Why, only yesterday, he thought, she ran out of the
room as soon as she saw me come in
with the pail and mop, as though I
were the plague itself. I must be
dreaming.” Terio blinked his eyes
once, twice, thrice,—no, this was real.
Nene was still there. With new-born
confidence, he approached her. But
as he neared her table his old shyness
suddenly came painfully back to him
and he wavered, his face as red as a
ripe tomato. Nene artfully pretended
not to have seen his embarrassment.
Every now and then she would look
at him with love-sick cyes. Terio
gasped. He was beside himself with
joy. This was the very moment Nene
and I had been waiting for. I saw
Nene carelessly take out her powder
box from her handbag. She was about
to powder her face when her hand
stopped in mid-air. My heart skipped
two beats as I heard her say nonchalantly:
“Look Terio, there is a stain on my
mirror. Can you clean it for me?"
Without suspecting anything, Te

MARCH, 1950


63


rio took the mirror and looked for the
stain. Instead, he saw his own ugly
face reflected in it. A cold shudder
passed through his body as he realized
what he had done. He—Terio—had
broken his own power. With a savage
cry that sounded hardly human, he
threw the mirror against the wall
where it smashed into pieces. Then,
falling back, he beat his head violently with clenched fists and groaned
like a wounded animal. He was ter

rible to behold. His face was deep
purple and his eyes were red and inflamed. Then, as though he could
bear the agony no longer, he fled from
the room, screaming and crying like
one suddenly gone mad.
That was the last we ever saw of
Terio.
On that day Enteng got well. It
was the very day he finished the last
can in the case of surplus army soup
bought at a bargain four years ago.


4


  "


FRANCE PAGAN?


By MASIE WARD
Sheed and Ward, 1949


JUT of the materialistic and pagan atmosphere that has
Ostealthily penetrated into French life comes this book com plete in all its spiritual power. In its conviction that Catholicism is a glorious cause, in its attacking the problems of Catholic Action, in its solving of difficulties prevalent also in our
own country, it is the story of a man whose "word was quoted
with reverence and affection, a man who will grow on one
with something of the fascination, the personal magnetism he had
for his disciples, for the boys and girls and young couples whom
he so vividly depicted and in whose lives he lived so whole-heartedly.


The first part of the book is a portrait of Father Henri Godin, France’s apostle of Catholic Action, whose book France, Pays
de Mission? although shocking, outsold its contemporary bestsellers in France. Part two is an adaptation of the book itself,
France, Pays de Mission?, a compilation of the notes and observation of Abbe Henri Godin and Yvan Daniel. The third part is a
discussion of the questions asked of the Mission de France. Here
are answered the common doubts on penetration of the priests
into the proletarian milieu.
The sketch of Abbe Godin’s life abounds in such striking and
beautiful passages as "I had a mother on earth . . . Heavenly Mother, take her place. Instead of the thousand little pleasures of
carth... give me souls ... One J. O. C. workman writes of
him, "He was not a priest friendly to the people, he was simply
one of the people ... The Abbe’s character is well summed up
in the statement of his publisher, Marcel Muller: “What was it
that he had? Dynamism, the fire of an apostle, a passionate love


MARCH, 1950


65


for the masses. Yet the works of Abbe Godin have had and will
continue to have a marvelous circulation, for they are crammed
with vitality.” This was Henri Godin, a man whose ambition was
not to be a priest-doctor, or priest-lawyer, or priest-gardener, or
priest-businessman, but simply to be a priest—a good priest.
Abbe Godin found lasting joy in being of service to the workers, of whom he said, “Those are the people you can do the best
work with.” He studied the problems of the poor, and finally
“.
planned a new creation” — a mission for proletarian Paris. One
of his last ventures was the founding of the Mission de France of
which he was the first superior. On the morning the Mission was
to be launched, however, Henri Godin "went suddenly as if he
were answering a call.” But just as in the words of one of his
children, "He is not dead, he is more alive among us than ever.
Hold fast, for he is guiding our ship from up there.” Abbe Godin will continually serve as the fountain of inspiration to Frenchmen and to workers in the social apostolate everywhere.
France, Pays de Mission? analyzes present conditions in
France and concludes that it is no longer the Catholic country it
used to be, but instead has come to be a missionary area. Abbe
Godin poses the problems typical of French religious and secular
life, then broadly offers the solution to this modern paganism.
Part three is an enthusiastic summary of the Catholic Action movement. It should be of real interest to one who has any
concern over the growing tendency to paganism right here in the
Philippines. Entitled “The Bread is Rising,” this part of the book
also includes the various experiences of the apostles of Christ in
their effort to rebuild the Christian civilization France used to
have, and to win back abandoned souls to the arms of Christ.
MANUEL M. CUENCA, A.B. '50


THE CHOSEN


By E. J. EDUARDS
Longmans Green & Co. 1949


ERE is a tender, heart-warming and realistic novel of five
young Americans who accepted Christ’s call to the Catholic
priesthood. Coming at a time when books such as "Peace


66


“  


of Soul” and “The Seven Storey Mountain" are already enjoying
tremendous popularity, "The Chosen" will quietly establish itself
as an outstanding contemporary novel.
Rube Ward, Steve Kolesar, Dick Whelan, Joe McBride and
Martin Manning were all American boys, blessed in one way or
another with the good things in life—youth, talent, wealth and
love. They grew up in the Bronx. It seemed that they had always been together as long as they remembered. They had gone
to the same school, they had romped and sung together, and "a
similarity of fundamental likes and dislikes had banded them together in an intimate, exclusive fraternity of their own. Theirs
was that kind of rare friendship that began in boyhood days and
ripened with the passing of years. But more than friendship,
these five had something else besides, that linked their lives and
hearts together—a priestly vocation.
Following that "shining impulse, they entered St. John’s Seminary.
“The Chosen" is their story. It is a story of sacrifice, of
personal heroism and personal clashes, of eager aspirations and exuberant ambitions. It is a story told with drama, humor and suspense, with tender pity and deep understanding of the human
heart.

The Chosen" also gives a vivid and honest picture of seminary life. Here in this atmosphere of silence and seclusion, we
meet the benign Father Rector, the stern but nonetheless sympathetic professors, and the seminarians; here also we come face to
face with the rigid discipline, "the impersonal routine" and "intensive preparation" that surround the life of a student for the
priesthood, a life so different in its abnegation of spirit from the
one he left behind. The study for the Catholic priesthood is long
and arduous. As Father White, prefect of the Philosophers, ably
puts it: “The two eyes of the priest are learning and virtue. If
either of them is missing he is only half a priest. A priest must
be learned; he must also be virtuous; and habits of study and
prayer are the means to that end.” Small wonder, then, that although to many is given the hope and the dream, only a few have
the courage to make that dream come true.
By a remarkable coincidence, the author of this book is no
stranger to the Philippines. Father Eduard J. Eduards taught for


MARCH, 1950


67


three years at the various seminaries here in the Philippines until
he was re-assigned to the University of Peking, China. In 1935,
he was recalled to teach at the University of San Carlos where he
also supervised dramatics and the athletic department. In 1940,
he was sent back to the States on account of illness. At present,
he is devoting his whole time and energy to writing.
Many books are written to entertain; some, to instruct, and
still a few, to guide, but this book was written to inspire.
RICARDO HENSON, Litt.B. '52


THE GREATEST STORY EVER TOLD


By FULTON OURSLER
Doubleday. 1949


microscopic midge of planet He remained for thirty-three years.
He became a real man, and the only perfect one. While continuing to be the true God, He was born in a stable and lived as a
workingman and died on a cross.
“He came to show us how to live, not for a few years but
eternally. He explained truths that would make our souls joyous and free.
(t
‘This is the story of Jesus—the greatest story ever told.”
With this preface, Fulton Oursler introduces his book to both
Christ-lovers and Christ-seekers. That it has been whole-heartedly accepted is evidenced by the fact that The Greatest Story
Ever Told stands with Merton's The Seven Storey Mountain and
Monsignor Sheen’s Peace of Soul in the list of America’s ten national best sellers. For here is a life of our Savior rendered in the
warm, genial and alive American way. When a book paints
Christmas in moving words, such as, "Mary held out firm hands,
lifting up her son, wrapped in Grandmother Anna’s swaddling
clothes—lifting him up adoringly, the fate of the world reposing


OD, who had fashioned time and space in a clockwork of
billions of suns and stars and moons, in the form of His
beloved Son became a human being like ourselves. On this


68


“  "


in the chalice of her hands, or imagines the toddling little Jesus
at Nazareth “to lie in the field on a dewy morning, and press the
cool, moist grass against His cheek; to listen at the night window
as if the very wind spoke in whispers that only He could understand; to smell Mother’s hand, kneading the dough, and to taste,
in long, slow mouthfuls, the cool innocence of a cup of milk, or
when it depicts His death in soul-searching words as, "He took a
deep breath and spoke out softly, spoke as Mary remembered He
would often speak when He was a boy, falling off to sleep, on His
bed in Nazareth—softly and with a tone of surrender and relief:
"Father, into your hands I commend my spirit. And bowing His
head, He gave up the ghost, such a book is bound to "stir the
embers” in countless readers of good heart and will. Herein lies
the triumph of Oursler's The Greatest Story Ever Told as a best
seller.
As Oursler points out, "the story is completely faithful to the
literal statements of the (Gospel) text. The book opens with
the celibate Joseph, a quiet-spoken man, looking more like a
scholar than a craftsman, and ends after our Savior’s resurrection with Annas conjecturing, "I believe it is truth itself that we
nailed to the cross and then buried—and truth, as usual, rose
again. Throughout its seventy-two chapters, it presents Christ
as the Answer to the modern man’s quest for real happiness: the
Truth he is missing, the Peace he is miserably wanting, the Lover
he is dodging, and the Life he is dying to. In its compelling portrayal of Christ as the Modern Man Himself—in fact as the
“Eternal Contemporary”—the book bids fair to become a classic
“Life, while its author, Oursler, may perhaps take his place
among the other truly great "Life of Christ” writers as Lebreton,
Fouard, Grandmaison, Saint Bonaventure, Goodier and Mauriac.
Writing on leadership, Father Lord, S.J., says: “We have a
man, the world’s most attractive man—Jesus Christ. It seems
to me that our young people will be enthusiastic leaders in today’s
tremendous struggle for the future when they know their leader
as personally as the Communist or Fascist or Nazi youths know
their leaders. Christ must never be a remote and distant being.
He is the man we follow; He is the man who with flying banner
moves just ahead of us. He is the most real and the most alive
person in all the world.” If we are to love and follow Christ our
Leader we must know Him. The Gospels, the Word of God


MARCH, 1950


69


Himself, offer us His life to read and imitate. In his book, Oursler has this very thought in mind: “to induce readers to go to
the Gospels and hear the story at firsthand."
MARIO C. REYES, A.B. '50


CHAUCER


By GILBERT KEITH CHESTERTON
Farrar and Rinehart, 1932.


(O the layman, Geoffrey Chaucer is chiefly known as the
author of The Canterbury Tales. Some know him too as
a remote scholarly poet who has written numerous other
poetical works relatively obscure and uncommonly queer to modern readers. The world has honored this fourteenth-century
bard with a permanent niche among the great literary giants of
all times, but aside from this formal compliment, little is known
of the man who gave us a monumental landmark in the history
of English letters. In this biography, Chesterton diligently attempts to popularize the works of Chaucer and the man himself
-remarkable personality that he was.
In appraising Chaucer’s greatness, Chesterton focuses his attention at the character of the poet. Both a keen observer of
men and an optimist, Chaucer possesses a humor that is expansive,
candid, and "elvish” by nature. We feel "a halo of humor" about
everything he spoke, and it is baffling to know just when he is
being serious, because his curiously playful style often shrouds his
meaning. Important too in the character of Chaucer is the poet’s
simplicity. In the prologue to The Legend of Good Women, he
depicts himself as an intense lover of books which are his prime delight, but "whan that I here the foules singe, And that the floures
ginnen for to springe, Farwel my book and my devocioun!” With
these qualities of the poet in mind, one is prepared better to appreciate his works.
The age in which Chaucer flourished was an interesting one,
if tumultuous. In Europe Catholic unity was slowly disintegrating: The Black Death had decimated the number of priests;
moral breakdown, medieval heresies, and fanaticism followed the


70


"  


failure of the Crusades and the imprisonment of the Popes at
Avignon by the French monarch. In England there was discontent between Richard II and the nobles. An orthodox Catholic
and an urbanely sane man, Chaucer emerged as a cheerful contrast to the chaotic times in which he lived.
The son of a vintner influential in court circles, Chaucer
started as a page in the duke of Clarence’s household. After the
duke’s death, Chaucer found a potential patron in John of Gaunt,
son of Edward III. In a short time he became the king’s diplomatic agent to France and Italy. These foreign interludes—in
which he met the poct Froissart in France, then later Petrarch and
Boccaccio in Genoa and Florence—were to prove significant in
the development of Chaucer’s genius.
When Chaucer began to write, he was influenced by French
poetry, which then consisted chiefly of artificial allegories and
bold romances. These were seldom original; usually one work
was an imitation of another. Chaucer, then, appeared in literature out of a maze of "tangled traditions, translations, partial imitations ... like a figure emerging from that checquered and glimmering forest of dreams. One of his early works is an allegory
patterned upon the work of the poet, Guillaume de Guileville,
entitled An A.B.C., praising Our Lady. In this particular poem,
Chaucer breaks the meter of the French and effectively introduces his own sentiments. The resulting piece is an impassioned
outpouring of lines addressed to the Blessed Virgin, the singer of
the Magnificat, which far surpass the superficial French original.
His first important original work, however, was The Death
of Blanche the Ducbess, a clegiac poem lamenting the passing of
John of Gaunt’s wife. By the time he wrote Troilus and Criseyde, which Chesterton describes as a Christian story about pagans,
based on Homer and on Boccaccio’s versions of an unfounded classical myth, Chaucer was beginning to manifest greatness as a poet.
In The Legend of Good Women, his pleasant wit is at its brightest;
it was his first experiment in the kind of composite writing he
was later so successful at in The Canterbury Tales.
The greatest work of Chaucer’s creative career came in 1378
when The Canterbury Tales was first conceived. The aged poet
was then at the peak of his maturity, brilliant and more witty
than ever, and most original. The characters he chose for the
Pilgrimage were drawn from the familiar mileau he knew so well,
and are fresh, brilliantly drawn, and thoroughly natural. Here


MARCH, 1950


71


we notice with Chesterton the striking transformation the poet
underwent, for in his old age Chaucer was completely free from
the formality which characterized the earlier works of his more
vigorous days.
The framework of the story comprises independently narrated tales fitted into a main narrative. Each of the pilgrims
glows with his own personality as he takes his turn relating a story
while on the way to visit the shrine of Thomas a Becket: the Pardoner, the comically frank Wife of Bath, the Knight of noble
bearing, the timid Nun, the vulgar Miller, and the rest of the pilgrims, including the poet himself. The work as a whole has the
qualities of a novel, in the sense that “the story-tellers do not
merely exist to tell the story; the stories exist to tell us something
about the story-tellers. It is the first true novel in history,
Chesterton tells us.
The greatness of the work—apart from its splendid characterization and conception—is the symbolic unity the Canterbury
Pilgrimage shows to us today. Despite superficial differences
(the Summoner and the Friar are always at odds, the Clerk and
the Miller do not talk the same way), the pilgrims are kept together, all the way from Tabard to their destination because they
have a purpose. Chesterton ponders: “It is very puzzling to
look at the real society around us at this moment, and consider
whether it has a purpose.
In nine absorbing chapters, Chesterton reconstructs a biography which succeeds both in being an intimate account of the
famous medieval bard and an entertaining commentary upon
Chaucer’s works. His insight into Chaucer’s Catholicity, his religion, and the influences which shaped the poet’s views on life,
is the fruit of detailed and painstaking research.
But for a full understanding of Chaucer, one should read his
works. For this one must be ready to encounter lines filled with
odd spellings, strange words, and queer accents; but there is only
one way to read Chaucer, and that is in the original, or else one
cannot appreciate the magic music of the language he used. One
cannot translate these lines addressed to Our Lady without destroying the beauty and effectiveness of the language:
Virgin, that art noble and apparail
That leadest us unto the high tower
Of Paradise...
But once the reader has acquainted himself with the grammar and


72


  "


diction of these and similar verses, he will want to read more for
the reward which lies at the end of each poem: the rare aesthetic
experience of being led into a garden exquisite in its medieval
romance.
EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B. '53


Daydreams
By LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A.B. '52
A patch of bluest sky, and some clouds if you please,
A plot of greenery, where solitary trees
Sball kecp me company, and where the palm-kissed breeze
Pines not away, nor sighs, but sings swect melodies
Throughout the day, throughout the night, throughout the year—
A spot, O Lord, where wild and busy honey bees
Suck nectar from the blossoms wild on virgin leas,
Where streams reflect the gypsy-flocks of geese
Still gracing skics in honking echelons of ease
Resplendent sweep of blue and wbite, in wild carcerA place, O Lord, free from the grimy nauscous grease
Of modern man and bis corrupt philosophies,
Frce from bypocrisy, from empty vanities,
From ronged checks, dusty streets and deadlines, jeeps, dis-case,
Free from decay, from blight, free from congealing fear—
A place far bence, wherein the soul soars pristine-pure;
If this be granted, Lord, can I crave freedom more?


MARCH, 1950


73


FOOTBALL TURNABOUT


would listen) that the Ateneo soccer team was sauce without
meat, a dish that would never taste like victory. Even when the
Ateneo authorities found a new soccer-cook, though I admired
Mr. Erenchun, I had no appetite for his viand. But when the
team beat Mapua, 4-0, I found the flavor pleasant, even though
my fear of having predicted wrongly had begun to bother me.
Then came the cheer-rally before the first Ateneo-San Beda game.
I told the fellow next to me that if our team finished in a tie, we
might be hilariously grateful. The score for that game was oneall. Had I been running away from the facts? In the evening
of February 9th our team starved the favored Red Lions, 1-0. By
that time my doubts were gone.
What was the mistake that had led to my miscalculations?
When the football team was formed,I had stolen into the Ateneo
field-kitchen and found the cupboard wanting in rich foods except for one ingredient, master-goalie Louie Javellana. And I
reasoned that a goalie could not win a game alone. After laborious search I discovered speed in Domingo Imperial and Antonio
Diaz. I also saw an attractive label tagged on Ramon Estella. I
missed Olegario Orbeta completely. Jose Ma. Gonzalez, unorthodox goalie of 1948, was back after a scason’s absence. There
were the two Louie’s, Lorenzo and La O from last year’s varsity.
The rest were graduates from the intramurals.
But until this time I had not seen our new coach in action.
That was it! I had seen the kitchen and not the cook. Coach
Erenchun trained his boys in fundamentals with the persistence
of an electric drill boring through the pavement, even in the rain.
And with his personality and accent, he made the players like it.
He gave them confidence. Then, he supported Goalie Javellana


IPORTSCASTERS have to be ready to face up to wrong
Aprophecies. My own experience of this has been the
NCAA football season. I had foretold (to sports fans who


74


“  "


with three fullbacks; ordered right and left in’s Imperial and La
O to work on both the offensive and defensive lines; assigned Orbeta’s intelligent left foot to offensive’s left wing, Estella’s cleverness to the right wing; and made every player, both active and
inactive, appreciate team-work. Yes, I had prophesied blindly.
With individual improvement, generous teamwork, wise
confidence, in short, with Coach Erenchun’s training and gamesense plus Father Dowd’s patience, the Ateneo blue booters faced
San Beda without their coach. The Lions, with murder in their
paws, sprang for the Eagles coming down the field. Unlike
other battles, this one was remarkable for extraordinary determination on the part of both teams. San Beda had a score to settle.
Ateneo had pride to keep. With neither team giving quarter, a
truce was called after thirty-five minutes. In the second half
the Eagles drafted every member into the front line; even Louie
Javellana was trying to sneak out of his post, but on second
thought he stopped short of the white line around the goal. The
timer gave the signal to start, put his hand down, turned to the
scorer to ask the time, dropped his time-watch in the process,
picked it up, returned his attention to the game, and discovered
that the score was 1-0 in favor of Ateneo. Luis Lorenzo, playing left-in for Domingo Imperial, who was in bed with bronchitis, had kicked the ball to Olegario Orbeta who caught it with his
right foot, dribbled once, then whammed it with his left boot.
In the race between the flying ball and San Beda’s goal-keeper,
the ball won. Except for the usual kicks in the shins and elbows
and in the ribs there was no more damage after that. And that is
the short of the feat that upset my forecastings.
The next game, with the La Salle XI, assumed unusual proportions because of circumstances. The Red Lion, proclaimed
the king by the hasty judgements of sportcasters, had been forced
into exile by menacing powers, by La Salle on February 12th and
by Atenco on the preceding Thursday; though, of course, San
Beda promised to return. Any way, by then soccer fans agreed
that the Arrow and the Talon were the two top teams in the 1950
NCAA league.
Both teams were cautious and fightingly eager. In the
stands the fans were just anxious. As the Ateneo "regulars” gave
silence a nightmare with a rolling rumble of the "Fabilleoh" and
the La Salle students boomed out the “Recktikana, the game began with La Salle executing the first kick. The ball rolled into


MARCH, 1950


the Ateneo backfield. Almost immediately Domingo Imperial
confronted the ball and mailed it back. Ateneo’s frontline attacked, crossed the demarcation, and besieged the La Salle Maginot line. The siege raged for twenty minutes. Gradually the
blue barrage lessened, and the Green Archers came rushing out,
arrows flying. The erstwhile attackers fell back before the La
Salle counter-attack. The scene of battle shifted. Now, it was
in Ateneo’s locality. Twice did the Archers almost succeed in
crashing the gate; first, when gate-keeper Louie Javellana sprang
forward, caught the ball but let it drop behind him, then, when
he again lunged forward, tapped the ball out, fell flat on his chest
as the ball rolled helplessly a few yards from the goal. Soon after
the timer’s whistle called a pause to the game.
In the second half the amassed experience and three months
of diligent practice of the La Salle team made itself felt. Their
fairly accurate passing and reserve stamina had the Ateneo players on the defensive. And the defense weakened as fatigue began to gnaw at the Ateneo eleven. With each succeeding attack
of the Green Archers boiling a degree nearer disaster, the Ateneo
defenders, in the spirit of World War II’s Bastogne, held on desperately and stubbornly.
Then it happened,—that which sportswriters call a "break,
opponents “chamba, and betters "luck.
The ball found its way to an Atenean’s boot. He kicked it
high and far to the La Salle frontyard. The back-line Green Archers retreated to retrieve the ball as a few of Ateneo’s frontline
attacked boldly. With inspirational suddenness Luis Lorenzo
stole the ball from the La Salle fullbacks and quickly whammed
it towards the guarded gate. The anxious ball was frustrated,
bounced back to mid-field, onto Louie La O’s lap. Before anyone had even decided what to do, La O swung his left foot, hit
the ball a little below the belt, consequently propelling it headhigh into the air, and landing it into the goal’s net a few inches
from the ceiling.
With this promise of victory the war was waged with even
results till the last two minutes. In those final dragging minutes
the La Salle players earned the title of “die-hards"; they also almost proved again that while there is time there is hope. Despite
their four corner-kicks, however, they fought in vain, but courageously nevertheless.
ROBERT WILSON, A.B. '52


76


  "


Vol. II, No. I
August, 1950


 ENO MUARTERN


THE CONTENTS


EDITORIALS
Page
Catholic Education and the Hail Mary ................. A.P.G.M. 3
Fire at Hand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ... Manuel Lim, Jr., Guest Editor 5
The Meaning of the Word ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M.V.S. 7


ESSAYS


A Glance at Chesterton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Meliton V. Salazar 10
Brothers are Brothers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Guillermo V. Soliven 17
Mother . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Robert D. Wilson 21
“Southward Ho!” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Eduardo D. Lachica 31
Golden Harvest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sixto K. Roxas III, Guest Writer 46
Wanted: A Wife . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hector Quesada 55


SHORT STORIES
The Barber of Naiwanan
Homecoming .............
The Kite ......... ... . . . ..
Moment of Youngness ....
The Wallet ..............
VERSE
Cycle .
Sunrift .......... . . . . . . . .
Lost Song ...............
Spatiality ................
To Lilia .................
Sight and Faith ..........
Reflections at Ba'y ......
Thrice Peter’s Sin .......
Last Song ...............
RNY
FEATURES
Drama ........
Campus ..................
Books — Emmanuel Torres
The Arena ...............


.. Onofre Pagsanghan
.... Francisco Borja
.. . . . Gabino Mendoza
Gregorio C. Brillantes
.. . . . . . Arturo Tanco


. . . . . . Andres Bautista
. . . . . . Percival Olarte
... . Onofre Pagsanghan
... Leonidas V. Benesa
.. Leonidas V. Benesa
. . . . . . Percival Olarte
Antonio P. G. Manuud
.. . . . . . Joaquin S. Lim
... Maximo V. Soliven


.. . .. Carmelo Quintero
Enrique L. Esquivel, Jr.


Robert D. Wilson


8
13
19
24
39


16
20
30
35
38
41
42
45
50


36
43
51
58


THE STAFF


Editor-in-Chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........ MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51
Managing Editors ................... ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B. '51
ANTONIO G. MANUUD, A.B. '52


SECTION EDITORS
Enffque Esquivel Jr.. A.B. '51
Robert Wilson, A.B. '52
Hector Hofilena, A.B. '51
Gabino Mendoza, A.B. '53
Leonidas V. Benesa, A.B. '52
Emmanuel Torres, A.B. '53
Gregorio C. Brillantes, Litt. B. '52
Carmelo P. Quintero, A.B. '53
Ernesto Gorospe, A.B. '53


ASSOCIATE EDITORS


Francisco Borja, A.B. '51
Hector Quesada, A.B. '51
Ricardo Henson, Litt. B. '52
Eduardo D. Lachica, Litt. B. '52
Business Manager .............
Circulation Manage.s..........


Rodolfo Olivares, A.B. '51
Jorge Lorredo, Jr., Litt. B. '52
Percival Olarte, A.B. '52
Guillermo V. Soliven, A.B. '53


JOSE L. SANTOS, A.B. '51
RAYMUNDO SAYO, A.B. '51
MANUEL M. ROXAS, A.B. '52


  , a literary magazine, is published four times annually
by the College of Arts and Sclences of the Ateneo de Manila. Its editorial offices
are at the Ateneo de Manila, Padre Faura Street. Manila. Philippines; its publication
office at M. Colcol &e Co.. 678 Rizal Ave., Manila. Subscription rates are four pesos
yearly, single coples one peso.
This publication was entered in the Post Office of Manila as second class mailing
matter on September 10, 1949.


2


  


CATHOLIC EDUCATION AND THE "HAIL MARY"
FOR men who pride themselves in calling their basketball team
 “The Hail Mary Five,” it should not be a bad idea to think
seriously on the Angelical Salutation once in a while. The feast
of the Assumption is a good time to turn our thoughts Maryward. With the world outside insisting more and more vehemently on "modernization," it may not be imprudent to compel the
walled-in Atenean to review Catholic outlooks as
What Prize implied in his every day prayers. For it is true
Modernization?as much as it is unfortunate that "modernization" has become a mere euphemism for the systematic exclusion of God from certain of man’s activities. And the
Hail Mary simply but clearly advocates the opposite.
It is not all philosophy and theology, this examination of the
"Hail Mary.” But let us take the very first line, "Hail, full of
grace, the Lord is with thee, and the whole conGabriel and cept of Catholic education stares us in the face.
Totality of The Archangel Gabriel chose his words rather exViewpoint pertly, taking care to say—even in his very greeting—that the Lord was with the Blessed Mother...
with all of her, and not merely with part of her.
And so it is with Catholic education: the man who gets an
Atonco education should be able to develop a set of traits whereby
he can make our Lord his constant companion, not
Mary’s Way only in his going to Mass, not only in his study of
Is Atenco's Religion, not only in his Sodality work, but also in
Way.
his Mathematics and in his intramurals, and in
his college store back-slapping. Witness today’s
perrenial bickering for separation of Church and State, today’s
agitated wrangling for the separation, of science from philosophy.
How many times de we have to listen to debates on the separation of religion and education? The whole trouble is that man
finds it convenient to order his life in pigcon-hole fashion, "as
though his life were set like concrete, in moulds" or "as though


AUGUST, 1950


3


there were compartments for his thoughts, his emotions, his actions.” As a consequence, rather than sacrifice
System of God ease for a totality of viewpoint, he abandons the
Or God Of service of God for the slavery of a purely mechaSystem?
nical system! How much this has told on rationality is summarized for us by Walter Lippmann
when he wrote that modern man’s impulses were "no longer part
of one attitude towards life; his ideals are no longer in a hierarchy under one lordly ideal. They have been differentiated, they
are free and they are incommensurable.”
Understandably enough, modern non-Catholic education sets
out to impart to modern man his culture. But this brand of instruction—since instruction alone it is—at once anThe Logic
nounces its neutrality with regard to religion, and
Of Departthereby immediately gives assent to the seeming
mentalization, possibility of life’s departmentalization. We say
this assent is both absurd and stupid, and with good
reason. It would be tantamount to preaching that on Sunday,
we could go ahead, offer Mass, sing Alleluia, and on Monday (Sunday having been done away with for the rest of the week) we
could fall back on good, old pecca fortiter, we could cheat in business, we could get drunk, we could murder and rape and pillage!
It would be ridiculous to think of the Archangel Gabriel telling our Lady that the Lord was with her finger or with her big
toe—and even if the first line of the prayer is but a greeting, the
Archangel did not wish the Lord on Mary’s hair. “The Lord is
with thee.” It was upon her complete being that Gabriel wished
the Lord.
And so, it is good once in a while to think on our little prayers.
Who knows but that had Dr. Mauro Baradi studied his "Hail
Mary” a little more closely, that Protestant and Masonic champion of public education’s divorce from religion might never have
rattled the windows of Congress with his loud logic...or lack
of it.


4


  "


FIRE AT HAND


THIRD world war in the next six months is at least very proAbable. Let us try to foresee what would happen to this country, should that war come. The leaders of the United States
openly admit their country’s unpreparedness. The astounding
American weakness in Korea is a manifest proof of it. Russia,
on the other hand, with the readied armies of satellite countries at
her beck and call can launch simultaneous attacks
The Web
on three continents: against Western Europe,
of Danger against Japan, and across the Bering Strait upon
Alaska and the North American continent. Under
the pounding of such blows it is plain that the Americans would,
for a time at least, be desperately put to it to defend themselves.
They would not be able even to think about the Philippines. But
there are those millions of Red robbers in China who will be able
to think about the Philippines. In fact, there is plenty of evidence
that the masters of that gigantic military machine are already regarding the Philippines and are spinning a web of conspiracy that
reaches not only into the mountain fastnesses of Central Luzon,
but into Manila itself.
Now what are we Filipinos doing in the face of this peril?
Morally and spiritually have we so degenerated in the last decade
or two that the hour of crisis finds our fibre of
Spiritual
resistance flabby? If so, are there any signs even
Rearmament now, as the zero hour approaches, of moral or spiritual rearmament? By isolated groups, yes. The
Family Rosary and the Novena of Perpetual Help have made
changes for the better in the spiritual lives of many. But have
there been enough prayers and enough holier lives? It does not
seem so, judging from the stories of hatred and godlessness that
newspapers publish daily, of brutal murder and rapes, of roberies
and graft, of almost unopposed attempts to break down religion
and morality: by "liberalizing” divorce (that is by overriding the
divine law of marriage), by forcing perverted books upon school
children, by withholding religious instruction from children.
What can we do? For now, I answer with the boy scout:
“Be prepared.” It should be evident that any preparation must
be first of all a spiritual rearmament, a fortifying
“Be
of the soul. We must suit the action to the danPrepared”
ger, and the danger is no less than that of a third
world war and a Bolshevik invasion or revolution
in our own country. In such an event, we Catholics will find ourselves under the heels of the men who will take over the government. And judging from the stories that come from Bolshevik
China and Europe, that will be no picnic. With the abolition of
private property along with its corollary rights such as free or

AUGUST, 1950


5


ganization and personal privacy, we shall find our freedom greatly or totally curtailed, and our dignity as men meaningless. Eurthermore, even the littie love that exists in human relations will
be methodically squeezed out.
The danger is great. The probability of the actual occurrence of these events is very high, and the consequences sure to
follow are grave. Therefore, in the name of plain
Sheer
common sense if for no higher reason, we must
Suicide
lift ourselves to the spiritual stature which the
crisis of our times demands. Ordinarily, smug
complacency is a sign of mental stagnation and of pride, but in
the face of the present day’s perils, it is sheer suicide.


MANUEL LIM, Jr.
Guest Editor


THE MEANING OF THE WORD
THE name "Atenean" has got rather under the weather. Now adays we associate the Ateneo with that conspicuous blue
sticker found on so many cars. We look at the Blue Eagle pin
on this and that student’s shirt collar and we say: “He is an
Atenean. We are beginning to think that a cerWhat’s In tain command of the English language, a facility
of expression and a pleasant party-manner are the
A Name?
earmarks of the Ateneo man.
And yet, when the Jesuit Fathers established the Ateneo in
1859, they did not think so. Through ninety-one years of hard
work they built up the Ateneo. Through ninety-one years, under
their strict code of education, the Ratio Studiorum, they endeavor
ed to build men. And they built men. It is a tribute to those
men that one of the Manila newspapers several months ago referred to the Ateneo as “the school with the reputation.” For who
made the reputation? The men who came before us: the students
who struggled with their Latin in the same classrooms; the players who went whole-heartedly into their games with the will to
fight and the will to win; the men who led and the men who followed, each in his place working to give meaning to the name
"Atenean."
It would be a sad reflection on the shallowness of our age if
we thought of "Atenean" in terms of Blue Eagle pins and pleasant


6


  "


party-manners and social position alone. We say
A Question “alone” because these things are not wrong in
themselves. Only, when we confuse the mere exOf
Perspective
ternals with the real thing, and place the externals
above what really counts, we are being sadly misled.
“Atenean" should mean much more than that.
It does mean much more. The Most Reverend Christopher
J. Weldon, Bishop of Springfield, Mass., has an unusual motto which
says: “Ut Christum feram”—“That I may bear
Christ.” This is the motto that should be every
Ut
Ateneans'. This is what the name "Atenean"
Christum
Feram
should mean—a “Christ-bearer.” In a world that
shrinks away from the very mention of God’s name
he must be ready to go forth holding up for all to see the legionstamp of his Catholic faith.
Let’s not blink at the facts. The world is divided into two
camps: the camp of the God-loving and the camp of the God-hating.
If we who have the light do not hold high the light so that it may
shine on the darkness—who do you think will? If we who profess to love God do not fight for Him—who do you suppose will?
The Atenean, then, is a “Christ-bearer.” He is, too, a Son
of Mary. His colors are the blue and white—her blue and white.
He carries her Rosary. He honors and respects all
“blessed
Sons Of
womanhood in devotion to her who is
among women.
Mary
The Atenean is whole-hearted. Men talk of
the "Ateneo spirit.” We sum up that intangible something in one
word: "wholeheartedness. He fights whole-heartedly, he struggles whole-heartedly, he loves whole-heartedly. He strives to keep
youth and laughter and chivalry in an age where youth and laughter and chivalry are things either forgotten or despised.
Perhaps we paint a too-idealistic picture. God knows how
often we have fallen far short of this ideal. And yet, we remember what people used to call St. Ignatius Loyola:
The “Lame “The lame man who looks at the stars.” We are
Man"
"lame" men—dragged down by our faults and our
weaknesses and our worldliness. We also can rise
above our infirmities as St. Ignatius rose above his affliction. But
to do that, we too must "look at the stars.”


-M.V.S.


AUGUST, 1950


This is the story of a little town
and a man who lived there...


-he barder


of Aaiwanan


By ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B., '51


"N the little town of Naiwanan, as in
most little towns, there are three
very interesting places—the church,
the marketplace and the barbershop.
Of the threc, however, Mang Berong’s
little barbershop fascinated me most.
In Naiwanan all the males within the
haircut age know where it stands. In
fact even my grandmother, who has
never had and does not intend to
have a "feather cut" on her seventieth birthday, knows where it stands;
for what the Manila Hotel is to Manila, this Mang Berong’s establishment is to the little town of Naiwanan.
You cannot miss it, even if you
try to. It squats directly in front of
the bandstand and beside the municipio on the only asphalted road of
the town. Ten blocks away you can
more than discern the screaming red,
white and blue stripes painted on the
sawali walls. A giant of a signboard
sits heavily on the toppling roof of
the dwarf-like structure. The sign
reads, "Everlasting Barbershop."
No, there is nothing ethereal about
this particular barbershop; Mang Berong is just infatuated with highsounding words. But more interesting
than their quaint shop are Mang Berong and his wife, Aling Sebia... we
must not forget Aling Sebia, the barber’s long-suffering wife.
Mang Berong is a ponderous mountain of a man who has long lost interest in his waistline. His face has
8


strong and rugged lines. Sharp eagle
cyes flame beneath shaggy, villainous
eyebrows and his protruding lips give
you the impression of a man who
seldom smiles. No description of the
man is complete without a word about
the shinning top of his head where
an obstinate if desperate grove of
hair still stands bravely like Jose Rizal’s monument on the Luneta. Mang
Berong will tell you with a flourish
that when he was twenty he had hair
like “Roobeert Teelor”. And he will
even tell you that it was primarily
his wonderful wavy hair that made
Aling Sebia say "yes" to him twentysix years ago. And Aling Sebia,
hearing this, will give a coy chirp
and blush like a gumamela.
A very convincing proof that opposite poles attract is this couple.
Aling Sebia has the proportions of a
toothpick, pocketbook edition. Her
face, though not beautiful, looks too
meek to be true. Her eyes are as
docile as those of a wounded goat.
Her voice is soft and sweet and when
she is exceptionally happy, you can
hear her hum an old folksong. She
looks so small and fragile that you
will not even want her to lift one
of her tiny fingers for you.
Mountain and toothpick, they differ, too, in Mang Berong’s seasonal
infatuations for the cockpit and Aling
Sebia’s uncompromising detestation
of it. During the town fiesta five
years ago, people said Aling Sebia
“  '


came to the cockpit and would not
leave until Mang Berong went with
her. Mang Berong was red with
anger, so people said, and Aling Sebia shook like a leaf. That night,
the townspeople said, they could
hear loud blows and shrieks from the
hapless and helpless Aling Sebia.
And they continue to narrate that
for two days the barbershop was
closed because Mang Berong was obviously afraid he would be reprimanded by the whole town for beating his wife.
Last vacation,
however, during
the town fiesta, I

saw Mang Berong
at the cockpit again. "Sa pula!
Sa pula!” He was
shouting himself
hoarse when Aling
Sebia took him by

the hand an d
quietly led him out
e
E
of the silenced cockpit. The husband

and the wife were
an interesting study in colors. Aling HESebia w as wearing a tomato-red
balintawak and her face was radishwhite. Mang Berong was wearing a
radish-white barong-tagalog and his
was tomato red. That night there
were indistinct noises at Mang Berong’s house again. I could hear
blows and a woman’s shriek. I shook
my head and said "Poor Aling Sebia. And the whole town shook
its head with me... "Poor Aling Sebia.
The next morning curiosity got the
better of me. I wanted to see how
and to what extent Aling Sebia was
maltreated. I remembered Mang


Berong wanted to borrow one of my
grandmother’s nobelas. Making use
of this opportunity I knocked at the
closed doors of the barbershop.
“Come back tomorrow. The shop is
closed today," said a sad voice from
within.


“Yes.” I said. Sparing him further discomfiture I bid him a hasty
“goodbye.
As I stood there outside the closed
door trying to convince myself I was
awake, I heard Aling Sebia singing
her favorite folksong. Her voice was
clear and sweet and untroubled. I
shook my head and turned towards
home.
"Poor Mang Berong" I mumbled.


“I don’t need a haircut,” I insisted. “I came to give you the nobela.
The door opened a little. A hand
stretched out for the book. The
temptation to peer inside hounded
me. I was not strong enough to
resist it. I peered. It was terrible!
Mang Berong
looked like the
EO
unfinished version
A
of an Egyptian
mummy. His
eagle eyes had
patches on them.
I stared at him
Like a school
boy caught stealing he could not
—NN
meet my gaze.
"Had an acciA
dent,” he blurted.
There was an
awkward pause.
Ava  He made a new
and sensational
“The weather is
contribution:
fine."


AVERI
SARSLg with open mouth.


AUGUST, 1950


9


A Giance TAt Chesterton


By MELITON V. SALAZAR, A.B., '54


few weeks ago, an old, old man
Awho has never drooled over a
plate of steak or grown tipsy over
a bottle of beer, made an interestGeorge Bernard
ing admission.
Shaw, interviewed on the occasion
of his 94th birthday, told the press
that he had never been happy.
Shaw, a brilliant satirist, a confirmed vegetarian, a decided foe of
alcohol, and a proud contemporary
of Gilbert Ke.th Chesterton, surprised
no one. He had not made a revelation. He had only made an admission.
At the turn of the century, the
modern literature of the old world
had suddenly been overshadowed by
three giants that had sprung up
overnight, in much the same fashion
as Jack’s beanstalk. One was a
fiery and outspoken Catholic from
France. Another a quieter but
more outspoken convert from England. And the third was, of course,
the man who was never happy.
With H. G. Wells, a lesser but
more imaginative giant, these could
be called the four great horsemen
of modern thought. Belloc and
Chesterton entrenched themselves in
“Orthodoxy," and Wells and Shaw
in Fabianism. This division seemed
to presage the actual ideological
split that we see so clearly today.
On one side, Christian thought and
Christian doctrine. On the other,
Marxist thought and materialistic
doctrine.
Wells and Belloc actually do not
enter into the picture that this essay is trying to convey. Shaw, or
10


the great vegetarian, does, to a significant extent. But his role is
confined to playing the villain. And
for purposes of comparison, no one
could have filled the part so admirably. More so because he has never
been happy.
G. K. Chesterton was always
happy.
Gilbert Keith Chesterton is, himself, a human paradox. Physically,
he was a gigantic man with a wec
voice. Mentally and spiritually, he
was a small man who had reached
tremendous heights. When G.K.C.
visited the United States in 1921,
a New York reporter described him
as “the fellow of infinite vest."
Another cryptic but very colorful
picture of him is given by Johnny
Mangan and quoted by Maisie Ward
in her biography of Chesterton.
Johnny had been the chauffeur of
the Notre Dame University when
the noted author visited South Bend,
Indiana, in 1930. “He came up to
Notre Dame,” Johnny said. “He
was close to 400 lbs. but he’d never
give it away. He'd break any ordinary scale, I guess. I brought
him under the main building, he got
stuck in the door of the car. Fr.
O'Donnell tried to help. Mr Chesterton said it reminded him of an
old Irishwoman: "Why don’t you get
out sideways?' ‘I have no sideways."
His huge bulk concealed under a
long black cloak and his face hidden
in the shadow of a wide sombrero,
G. K. was as distinctive on the
streets of London as a safari on
“  "


Fifth Avenue. There is a story about
an American who rode with him
through the English capital. "Everyone seems to know you, Mr. Chesterton," the American remarked. “Yes,
agreed G. K., "and if they don’t,
they ask.
Born on May 29, 1847, to an Anglican family in London, Chesterton
had always come "in liberal proportions". He was described in his
early school days as "tall, untidy,
incredibly clumsy and absent-minded.” He attended St. Paul’s, a school
that boasts of Milton and Marlborough among its alumni, and here
he began to show the first faint
glimmerings of the man he was destined to be. “We felt, said Lucian
Aldershaw, a very close friend and
classmate of G. K., “that he was
looking for God.”
Later, a small group of boys
formed the “Junior Debating Club,
and elected Chesterton chairman.
This close association with boys of
exceptional ability — every member
of the "JDC” became prominent in
England’s literary or political lifehelped Chesterton immeasurably in
his early search for truth. It is
amazing to note that in the carliest stages of the club, with members
aged fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen,
the boys discussed such subjects as
“Macaulay as an Essayist," or "Herodotus,” or “The Three Comedies
of Shakespeare" with as much relish and vigour as our sixteen-yearolds discuss basketball or movies.
Looking back on those days, when
the “JDC” met to "eat buns and
criticise the world,” Chesterton said,
“Surely a man could have had no
better friends.” Years later, he
wrote in his book, "What’s Wrong
With the World," a passage on
friendship: “No one has ever begun
to understand comradeship who does


not accept it with a certain hearty
eagerness in eating, drinking, or
smoking. You may call the thing
an orgy or a sacrament; it is certainly an essential. In the heart
of its rowdiness there is a sort of
mad modesty; a desire to melt the
separate soul into a mass of unpretentious masculinity.”
This loyal, almost boyish adherence to his friends was a characteristic that set Chesterton apart from
most of the great thinkers of history. He did not treasure a friend
because he respected that friend as
an equal. He loved his friends as
friends.
Even the caustic Shaw who
called the Chesterton-Belloc alliance
"a four-legged monster with infinite
capacities for domg harm,” wrote
in Maisie Ward’s “Gilbert Keith
Chesterton": “The audience watched
a Shaw vs. Chesterton debate as a
sham battle or a display of fireworks,
as indeed it always partly was; for
each of them would have died rather
than really hurt the other.
Chesterton loved everything. That
is probably the most accurate way
one could put it. He loved the simple things because they were simple,
the complicated because they were
complicated. He loved the trees and
stones and flowers as a poet. He
loved the rain as a child does. He
liked to eat on the floor, or draw
on anything in sight. He had opened
the “third eye.” Shaw saw many
things clearly. But whenever he
looked at himself, the image he saw
was always twisted and blurred and
unreal. He saw the faults and the
defects of others, but he was unable
to see his own. Shaw was an egoist
to the end. G. K., on the other
hand had that rare gift, that of
looking at himself and secing how
small and petty he really was. And


AUGUST, 1950


11


from this rose his love for a hill
or a donkey or a warm glass of ale,
or the wind and rain on his face.
And from this, too, rose the love he
gave to a woman.
His letters to Frances Blogg really
revealed his character. They are
funny, they are inspiring. In them
he includes the small things, the
ordinary things, the beautiful things
that he saw everywhere. A lamppost, a pocket-knife, a child in a
store, a pink cloud, a brick wall.
He saw glory in a donkey and meaning in a straw-hat. His affection
for all the world, he told her, "was
a dim preparation for loving you."
His account of his first meeting
with Frances has the humor, the nobility, of love.
“But the second
time he (Chesterton) went there
(to the Blogg residence)," wrote
G. K., “he was plumped down on
a sofa beside a being of whom he
had a vague impression that brown
hair grew at intervals all down her
like a caterpillar.
Once in the
course of a conversation she looked
straight at him and he said to himself as plainly as if he had read it
in a book: ‘If I had anything to do
with this girl I should go on my
knees to her: if I spoke with her she


would never deceive me: if I depended on her she would never deny
me: if I loved her she would never
play with me: if I trusted her she
would never go back on me: if I
remembered her she would never
forget me. I may never see her
again. Goodbye. It was all said in
a flush: but it was all said...
“But there are four lamps of
thanksgiving always before him.
The first is for his creation out of
the same earth with such a woman
as you. The second is that he has
not, with all his faults, ‘gone after
strange women'. You cannot think
how a man’s self-restraint is rewarded in this. The third is that
he has tried to live everything alive:
a dim preparation for loving you.
And the fourth is — but no words
can express that. Here ends my
previous existence. Take it: it led
me to you.
That was the man, to the woman he had chosen to be his wife.
Bnt it was not merely that. It was
the man all over, the thinking, loving, God-fearing man. It was Chesterton, the genius who became unbelievably great because he saw how
utterly small he was.


12


  "


In the train, going home after many years,
he remembered many things....


Momecoming
By FRANCISCO BORJA, A.B. '51


PHE Express sped through the
A countryside, its engine coughing
acrid black smoke. It was noon time,
and the sleepy carabaos resting under the shade of the mango trees
did not even bother to look at the
train. Chewing their cud contentedly, their only concern was driving
away the annoying flies that swarmed on their mud-splattered backs. In
the distance, as far as the eye could
see, stretched golden fields of waving
grain, signifying a rich harvest.
Now and then flocks of mayas which
had been feeding on the ripe palay
rose into the air with chirping cries.
Scarecrows standing in the fields
held no terrors for them, the more
intrepid even alighting upon the tattered straw figures.
Looking out the train window, Lucio was reminded of his boyhood on
the farm when he used to ride on
the carabaos while tending them and
he thought of the tricky little traps
he used to make then in order to
catch the small birds. The country.
side has not changed much, he
mused. But the people, they must
have changed. He would be arriving
home in ten minutes and the thought
somchow electrified him. It was
good to think that after an absence
of seven years, he would be secing
his folks again. He thought of how
surprised his parents would be to
see him. His younger brother, Peping, must be a husky young man
of eighteen by now, and his sister
Aning, the youngest, must be quite


a young lady of sixteen. They did
not know he was arriving today, but
he had written them he would be
home within the week.
And of course there was Stella...
Would she still remember him after
all these years? Before he left for
the States, they had been just
friends. But friendships have a funny way of ripening into love, so that
it did not take him long to realize
how much he cared. Nevertheless,
he had never given her the slightest
hint, not even daring to write for
timidity overcame him. Even if she
were the right girl, it was simply the
wrong time to betray his feelings.
When the right time came after the
completion of his education, maybe
then... It would serve me right,
though, he thought, if somebody has
already won her. It is too much to
expect a girl to wait for seven years
without her even knowing just where
she stood.
Before boarding the train, he had
called on some of his friends in Manila. They had been his classmates
and co-graduates in the provincial
high school. After graduation, they
had come to Manila and taken courses in various professions. Having
come to like the gay life of the city,
they preferred to stay in the city and
practise their professions there instead of going back to their hometowns.
In a sense he had been more favored than they, for he had been sin

AUGUST, 1950


13


gled out by Don Prospero, the owner
of the hacienda on which his father
worked, to be sent to the United
States to study medicine. Don Prospero was a widower and childless, so
that financing Lucio’s studies abroad
was really a small matter to him.
He had never entertained any doubts
as to the soundness of his investment, for Lucio was intelligent and
hard-working. Graduating at the
head of his class, he was the recipient of many honors at Johns Hopkins, so that Don Prospero and his
own family had every reason to be
proud of him.
As the train sped on, Lucio recalled the short stay with his friends
in Manila. He had told them that
he planned to practise medicine at
home because he felt he was needed
there most. But his friends told him
that if he stayed in Manila he could
make more money. Graduates from
Johns Hopkins did not grow on trees,
and with the prestige of the famous
medical school behind him, it would
not be long before he would find his
place in the local medical world.
He did not want to stay long in
the city, for he had merely intended
to visit his friends. Upon their insistence, however, he finally consented to stay for a few days. He went
to social gatherings with his friends
and met prominent people. At the
same time, he kept his eyes open and
observed the medical profession in
the city.
His friends were right. Doctors,
especially graduates from abroad
were making plenty of money and
living comfortably. The specialists
could charge several hundred pesos
for a single operation and relax for
a long time afterwards. And more
than that, in the city one met people
of the "right" type. His friends told
him competition in the city was stiff,
14


and in order to get ahead, what one
knew did not matter quite as much
as whom one knew, in other words,
... the “right connections.” If he
went back to the province, where
would his patients come from? From
the poor tenants on the hacienda?
What could they pay him? They
would pay him, of course, but in
kind, which would be in goods and
in whatever service they could render him, not in money. You couldn’t
get rich that way. In the city, once
the "right connections" had been established, patients would come pouring in, and they would be from those
who “had" and who “belonged."
The more Lucio pondered over the
words of his friends, the more he
felt the growing conflict in his heart.
What they said was mostly true, but
he had answered that there were
more worthwhile goals in life than
making money. How utterly materialistic people could get in the city,
he thought. It was so easy to forget
ideals, to scrap them all once one
got out of school and faced the world
with its mania for power and wealth
and prominence. Of course, life would
be simple out in the province. Intellectually, he could even grow stale,
for, away from the company of stimulating minds, falling into a mental rut was almost inevitable. But
he would be doing good in serving
the people, his people, for after all,
was he not merely the son of an encargado, favored by fortune in obtaining a medical education? He
should make use of his talents in
serving them, for the city had
enough doctors. His rightful place
was in the province.
Then he remembered what one of
his teachers had once told him while
he was still in high school... "Whatever carcer you take, Lucio, always
remember this: the criterion of a
“  


man’s success when he dies will not
be the amount of money he may have
made during life, but the service and
good he has rendered others.” Somehow, it was difficult to decide if he
had the courage to become a "successful failure, a failure in the eyes
of the world but a success before his
Maker.
The loud clanging of the train’s
bell stirred him out of his semi-reverie and rushed his thoughts to the
present. The train was now stop
ping at the station which was full
of people and peddlers shouting
wares ranging from coconuts to balut. Carrying his suitcase, he stepped down from the train and hailed
a calesa that would take him about
three kilometers from the station to
his home. The hacienda was along
the cement highway.
As the calesa neared the hacienda,
the horse, young and newly-trained,
shied away from a carabao that suddenly crossed the highway. The horse
bolted and the calesa fell into the
ditch beside the highway. The driver
jumped out. But, as the calesa toppled over, Lucios head hit a sharp
stone, and he fell unconscious. Hailing another passing calesa, the driver brought him home.
Lucio regained consciousness in his
own room at home with a bandage
around his head. He opened his eyes
and saw the whole family gathered
around his bed smiling at him.
Welcome home, son," said his father, taking his hands. “Your bruises aren’t serious. You’ll get well
soon."
His mother said, "If you had told
us you were arriving today, we could
have met you at the station. She
bent over and tenderly kissed him on
the forehead. "It’s a bit ironical that
the doctor should need a doctor on


his first day home," she jokingly said;
but he could see her eyes blinking
away tears, tears of happiness at his
return.
“I wanted to surprise all of you.
That is why I did not tell you the day
I was arriving. He turned to Peping. “You’re almost as tall as I am!
And you’ll be graduating this year
from high school. And Aning! Mother, is this the baby sister I left?
Why, she’s a real young lady now!
Any boy friends yet?” Aning started
to blush.
“Now stop teasing her,” his mother
said, affectionately kissing her on the
forehead. "You know she’s practically a baby still.” All of them laughed
together.
“Tell us about your adventures in
the States, said Peping. "I’ve been
waiting for the day when you would
arrive home and tell us about the places you've seen and people you’ve
met."
“Oh, please do," chimed in Aning.
“Tell me, did you really meet Gregory Peck in Hollywood?”
“I think we should give your brother a chance to rest, interposed
their father. "His long journey and
the accident have exhausted him. Let
him rest first. Meanwhile, I shall call
on Don Prospero and tell him Lucio
has arrived."
“His friends will be glad to know
that he is here too, I think," Peping
said. "IIl go and tell them. Aning,
how about helping mother cook a really good dinner for him? We should
celebrate today. His father, Peping
and Aning left the room. Only his
mother stayed.
Lucio suddenly realized how lucky
he was to have such a loving family.
He belonged here, he was one of them.


AUGUST, 1950


15


It was wonderful to think that he had
a family that really cared for him.
The sweet sense of "belonging" gladdened him all over. Right then and
there, he knew there was only one
choice for him. He would not practise
in the city. Here was his place, at
home. The advice of his friends was
tempting, but no amount of money
could be a substitute for the love of
his family and gratitude of the people he would serve in his hometown.
Money can buy many things, but there
are some things that money simply
cannot buy, and among them is love.
His mother seemed to read
his thoughts, and she asked, "By the
way, have you decided where you
will practise medicine?” Without he

sitation, he answered, "Here, of
course, mother. What made you
ask?”
“Well, I thought you might prefer the gay city to our quiet town.
By the way, you might like to know,
Stella seemed happy when she heard
you were coming. She’s still single,
you know, and I may add, as beautiful as ever—" Seeing his countenance gladden visibly, his mother added with a mischievous twinkle in her
eyes...
"I think I know now why you wish
to stay here."
“And perhaps you’re right there,
too," smiled Lucio.


000


Cycle


By ANDRES BAUTISTA, Litt. B. '52
Tonight
Evening darkens deep, deeper
My heart. Bells of angelus
Resound, an empty chord.
The sunset fades.
The sun will rise
The dews of early dawn will fall
The birds will fly
Unbarred; heavy will be the heavens
With melody; the warmth of day
Will wake the drowsy blood.


16


Still, still
Will come the rains, the night will come
Be frost and dark.


  "


brotners Are botners
By GUILLERMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B., '53


THAT is a brothWer? A brother
—
is a pal and a pest;
a smile and a sneer;

a grin and a glare.
If he’s old, he’s an
.
echo of father’s
"don't do this and
don’t do that"; he’s
a word of reproach;
A
he's a piece of adA
vice; he’s an angry

frown. If he’s
young, he’s lively
little imp-full of
2

mischief. He’s a
band of Indians on
the warpath; he’s a
sudden squall; he’s a blaring radio;
he's a page from the funnies; but
most of all, he’s a bother.
It is bad enough to have one brother around the house. I have four;
and that is three too many. With
four brothers, life becomes a hectic
nightmare, a turbulent struggle for
survival. I hurry home from school
in the evening with a sheaf of notes
to type out. Rushing to the only
good typewriter in the house, what
do I find? —One of my “dear" brothers nonchalantly clicking away on
the machine. I can do nothing but
wait until he finishes; and I know
I will have to wait long. My brothers have the maddening habit of
typing as though they had all the
time in the world. The only consolation I have in such a situation is
the hope that next time I will get to
the typewriter ahead of them and
make them wait, too.


At the dinner table there is that
same spirit of "sink
or swim, live or
die.” Without entirely disregarding
etiquette, “every
man for himself
Aa seems to be the rule
where food is concerned. The one
place where my
*
brothers, o r I
Sfor that matter, try
really hard never
to be late is the
dining room; for
E
the simple reason
that the tardy one
usually has to fast. Many are the
times one comes home late to find
the table swept as clean as a vegetable garden after a tornado. On
Sundays or holidays, when mother
serves fried chicken and other special delicacies, the competition
is e v en keener. The lucky
captor of the coveted “drumstick" or
the choice slice of "lechon" smacks
his lips loudly, looks around at his
brothers with an air of smug satisfaction, and proceeds to enjoy his
morsel before their envious glances.
The youngest brother does this most
often and with the greatest relish, to
the discomfiture of his elders. But
the little upstart is easily set back
in his place again by a reproving retort like: "Stop acting like a baby!'
bolstered by a stern and piercing
look.
Peace is restored. But not for
long. Another brother finds out that


AUGUST, 1950


17


he is without an orange, and noisily
vents his indignation at the injustice
and inequality of the dessert’s distribution. A minor crisis is averted
only by the sudden and miraculous
appearance of an extra piece of fruit
on the table. But there are other
times when petty squabbles are forgotten in the heat of a discussion between two older brothers on "Logic,
“Communism," and other "profound
topics. The younger ones begin to
take sides enthusiastically; the meal
is forgotten, and the dining room becomes a "Town Hall" in uproar.
—The ordeal of mealtime over, the
family retires to the living room to
study, talk, or listen to the radio.
Did I say, “retires?” "Advances”
would be a better word. Often I
have to translate my Latin lesson
while answering little brother’s annoying queries and listening to the
music of Bach in swing-time... all
at once! I have great admiration for
the patience and tolerance of the
neighbors. The daily and nightly
clamor has as yet brought no complaint from them.
My four brothers play basketball;
even the youngest. We happen to
have a goal and a cement court in
front of the house, and they make it
a habit to take a few shots at the
basket on the way to school each
morning and on the way back in the
evening. There is no trouble until
the four of them get the urge to
“puncture the hoop" all at the same
time. Then, our single basketball becomes the object of a spirited "grabfest" which ends only when someone
notices the time.
The morning paper, too, is similarly subjected to such brutal treatment
from the moment it crosses our threshold to the time it lies torn, battered,
and forgotten on the floor. It is certainly amusing to see my scholarly


elder brother read the comic page as
avidly as he does his Philosophy book.
The rest of the paper is divided between two younger brothers into the
sports page and news section, while
the "kid brother" restlessly waits for
his turn at the "funny" page.
My brothers practise communism
Private property is not too respected
at home. Many times I have lost
pairs of socks or clean shirts only
to find them later on—on one of my
brothers. The guilty one, when accused, invariably protests his innocence, pleading ignorance of my ownership of the article in question. The
second time he is caught for the
same offense, he just smiles engagingly and says:—“I was only borrowing it for a while. I didn’t want
to bother you by asking you.” In
such a situation, there is but one alternative for me—to do a little “borrowing" myself.
The most disconcerting thing about
having too many brothers is the danger of losing your identity and being
mistaken for one of them. Imagine
my consternation when a friend accosted me in school one day, saying:
“My sister told me you were caughi
by Sor . . . climbing the fence near
the girl’s classrooms yesterday.
Were you scolded?” I was dumbfounded. Later, I learned that a
younger brother of mine had done
the scaling—to retrieve a ball that
had fallen over the fence.
Being born into a family with too
many brothers is certainly not an
easy fate. You are deomed never to
taste the joy of being an only son,
a "mama’s little boy," hugged, petted, and spoiled. Instead your life is
one long Marathon race. It’s hard,
it’s nerve-wracking, it’s back-breaking, it’s tension-packed, it’s crazy—
but it’s fascinating —and it’s fun!


18


THE ATENEO QUARTERIA


The Kite


By CABINO MENDCZA. A.B '52


AT. G.M.
IN Addition Hills there is a big
grassy field where the herders
of the barrio pasture their goats
and cows and carabaos. All morning long, and through a greater
part of the afternoon, in that large
field, carabaos munch grass stems.
cows moo at the passing people and
goats playfully butt one another
with their hard heads. But when the
sun, like a centavo slipping through
the mitebox slot, has slipped into the
valleys of the Sierra Madre, and only
wistful thoughts remain of what
could have been accomplished if the
sun has not gone, the four-legged
animals depart, leaving the field
empty.
But not for long does it stay thus.
From little nipa huts young boys
NF
AUGUST, 1950


running, pulling behind them, large
bamboo-framed kites called chape
chape’s which dance in the windfrom Villa Anita, Mang Lelong,
who is well on his way to his second
baby-hood, waddles, holding a gigantic guryon all red and yellow
and maroon; tots from Santa Lucia,
a near-by barrio, also gather in the
field, each with a kite in his hand.
One by one, the chape-chape's are
put to flight. From little Lucilo
comes the happy cry, "Look! mine
is the highest. And sure enough
his kite is scarcely a speck in the sky.
a long thin piece of string its only
link to the firm earth. There, it
dives and swoops, up now down
again, like a stunt-flyer’s planc.
Now all the others unwind their
strings. All spiritedly try to outdo
Lucilo. Mang Lelong sits nonchalantly on the fragrant grass, certain
that he can fly his guryon higher
than any of the other kites there
“There! mine is now the highest,
exults Kulas.
No it isn’t,” retorts Benny, "mine
is!" Now the whole field is pulled
into a heated controversy. Each
“pilot" claims for his kite the highest altitude. Meanwhile, the moon
has risen, and hangs in the sky, a
giant hook.
As he looks up at it, a seemingly
happy thought strikes Mang Lelong s
senile mind. “Hey, why don’t we
try to' hit the moon with our kites?
Why don’t we?”
“No one of us has enough string,"
ne sensible Kulas replies.
19
ME


“Let’s join all our pieces of string
together," pipes little Lucilo helpfully.
“Yes, let’s! Yes, let’s!" shout
the little boys as they flit about the
field like earth-bound dragon-flics.
And forthwith, the boys proceed to
haul down their chape-chape’s that
all the while have been darting like
tireless birds in the darkening sky.
The protests of the older boys are
over-ridden and at length all the
kites are down. Mang Lelong’s
guryon is given the honor of being
the first kite to reach the moon.
“Remember to throw it up high
as I pull the string,” instructs the
old little boy when all is ready for
the world-shaking flight.
Upl Up! Up! and Up! goes the
guryon. Higher and higher! One
half of the string has been released.
“Give it same more string," clamor
the Santa Lucia boys.
The kite dips. It is diving! The
thread slackens. "Do something.
Do something!" shout the alarmed
little voices. Mang Lelong pulls and
pulls. But still the guryon rushes
eagerly to the ground. Hands are
wrung....
“No, please, no," moans someone.
"Look, it’s turning!'


"It’s going up!” A big “hurrah"
startles the frog in the pond to silence. The ship has been saved. The
adventure will go on.
Again string is released slowly.
And up goes the kite.
The kite is now a dot against a
moon that brightly glows. Will the
flight succeed?
The young adventurers are getting
jubilant. “Is the moon gold?" asks
a child in tatters. “I hope it’s something to eat, says another. The
guryon is still going higher. Mang
Lelong can now see his picture in
Taliba. "Imagine,” he muttered to
himself, "just this morning, Anita
told me I was too old to do anything.
Well, she'll sec.
Dreams.
Suddenly, disaster strikes!
The strain has been too much for
the weak restraining string. The
kite is free. Still it climbs. Up!
Up! and Up! It vanishes from sight.
That was a week ago. Now, when
only red streaks across the blue sky
remind us of the departed sun,
Mang Lelong sits on a rock in the
grassy field and quietly flies his tiny
framcless boca-boca, close, very
close to the ground.


Sunrift
By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A. B. '52
Into my house of life, ravaged by wind and storm,
Sunlight has forced its way, pale and austere—
I who was arrogant, prouder than Lacifer,
Lean to it, kneel to it, touch it with fear.
It cannot warm my heart, erystalled in blocks of ice;
It cannot warm my hand shaking with cold.
Still I am drunk with joy, prostrate with gratitude—
Sunlight, however thin, glimmers with gold.


20


“  


Mother


By ROBERT WILSON, A.B. '52


CQUAINTANCES, relatives, and
A friends stare at me rather queerly when I tell them that I have much
to thank the war for. It was during
the three years of Japanese occupation that I was very happy. I discovered a jewel that had been with
me all the time. Whether I really
lost that jewel when the war ended,
I am not sure, but I do miss the
jewel’s glitter...
January, 1942. When my mother
charged me to go to our neighbor
across the street and to try to sell
him some canned-goods she had
bought cheap from "looters" of pier
seven, she said it casually, as if in
my short eleven years she had often
entrusted me with such a bold venture, as if I, who had always been
baby-fed, could now sell anything to
help in the feeding of our family. I
was scared. Yet, I felt big. I protested but my mother insisted and I
felt bigger still. I sold the cannedgoods wtih a profit.
March, 1942. My mother, looked
upon as a good cook even by gossipy
neighbors and the best cook in the
world by her two sons, concocted
jams of native fruit, which she put
into jars and sold. She appointed me
her sole agent with a ten per cent
commission. She trained me for the
job. My mother brushed off my shyness by teaching me the common
courtesies of entering a home. She
gave me my first lesson in sales demonstration. "Ask the customer to
taste a spoonful." And, "Insist with
a smile.


I soon lost all my shyness. One
day, on the example of a young
neighbor of mine, I filled a wicker
basket with canned-goods, walked out
into the streets of our district, and
peddled for all I was worth, yelling,
“Canned-goods! Lateriyas! Geenoowine canned-goods!"
I met some friends of our family
who asked me if I had my mother’s
permission to peddle. To which I
answered, no, and added rather naively, that my mother would not mind
because she had often told me not to
be ashamed of honest work. When
I returned home I told my mother
all about it. She laughed, complimented me, said she didn’t want me
to work so hard, and not to peddle
anymore.
1943. Not long after the Japanese
entry into Manila, my mother, like
practically everyone else in the city,
took up “buy-and-sell" which was
best described as a confusion of trade.
Between the buyer and the seller
there were a dozen middlemen. And
betwcen the buyer and the sseller
there were naturally a dozen different prices. At first everyone respected the agent’s right to a commission. But as living got more difficult, buyers became rare specimens
and agents multiplied, the old doublecross of transacting business without
rewarding the middleman became for
many a sound business policy.
My mother did not adopt this fashionable policy. It was not right, she
said. I believed her but I wondered
how she would manage to make mo

AUGUST, 1950


21


ney honestly. She managed with
only one rule: that between a cashpaying buyer and herself or between
the owner-seller and herself, there
should be only one sub-agent.
Her honesty became a by-word.
Sub-agents left at our home cheap,
saleable articles on consignment without receipts. Other sub-agents introduced her to many good cash-buying customers. In a few months my
mother’s volume of business had
swelled. And I could easily tell how
her trade had puffed because by that
time she had promoted me to secretary, messenger boy, and amateur
salesman. Yet she never became just
a businesswoman. She always remained wholly lovable.
If I loved my mother because she
understood my troubles, my affection
could be matched by many of her
friends. Wives with stray husbands,
husbands with spendthrift wives,
mothers with "impossible” children,
all came to my mother to ask for advice or just to complain. Though
these family confessions were fairly
confidential, my mother told me about
them. From such true-to-life examples she would instruct me about future problems, such as the problem
of harmonious family living, the difficulties encountered in raising children, and, not infrequently, about
choosing the right partner.
When family friends tried to praise
my mother, they had to face her
laughter. And before my mother’s
most devastating weapon—second only
to the morning sunshine—the praise
of friends or the disappointments
from them, hunger, Japanese swords
and American bombs didn't stand a
chance. Her laughter scared away
the blues from her visitors. For
those in the dumps my mother put on
her best lilting smile, talked lightly
22


and happily and soon had them laughing. But she always laughed loudest. Neighbors claimed that they
could hear her laugh two blocks
away. And when she laughed she
usually had a chorus.
1944. By this year of the war
everyone took mealtime very seriously. Our family was not hit by hunger really hard, but at times we
helped ourselves by tightening our
belts. At such times my mother ate
a little less and my brother and I
ate a little more. True, she was my
mother and I her son; but even to
the point of hunger? I wondered.
Like other families we tried to
raise a stock of rice. Whenever the
day’s buy-and-sell “take” was more
than we needed, my mother immediately would purchase rice. To conserve our stock of it was my father’s
great concern, and he quarrelled with
my mother about it.
"Pilar,” he frowned, “I suspect
that the servant has been stealing
from our sack of rice. I measured
it the last time.
“No, our servant is very honest,"
she answered.
But my father insisted and this
went on for days until finally my
mother explained to him that she had
given some chupas to a needy family.
"Pilar! We are needy, too!"
“We are not as needy as they.
Remember, that what you give, somebody else will return to you a hundredfold. It is a good investment."
"Pero, Pilar, this world will not
help you. We must look out for ourselves.
This sort of discussion went on
for weeks. My mother who disliked
“  "


repetitions, finally stopped arguing
back. My father believed that he
had convinced her.
But I knew better. My mother often would send me on unbusinesslike
errands such as delivering rice to a
needy neighbor. Those whom my
mother helped were so grateful that
they thanked even me. I was her
son.
Once, while playing billards at a
dirty little place, a thug approached
me and asked, "Are you the son of
Pilar, the woman who laughs loudly?
"Why, yes."
“You tell your mother not to worry about the robberies that have been
occurring lately in Ermita. Your
home will not be touched."
“Uh, yes."
“You see, he added, "we know
that your mother helps the poor."
By the time General MacArthur
had landed in Leyte, I had fallen victim to day-dreaming. I made up my
world. Of course, in that dreamy
world I was a great guy. And like
any other hero in his teens I wanted
to share my future glory and happiness with somebody else. My daydreams, or future plans as I called
them, took much time in figuring
how I would thank my mother. I’d
bring her out dancing as my date. I
would buy her a house for her to
decorate to her heart’s content.
When I should achieve eminent sue

cess I would give her credit for it.
And my future wife had to be just
like the one that married my father.
My children would be the last great
joys of their grandmother.
Two weeks before the GI’s crashed into Manila, my mother fell ill.
My mother was a robust woman who
had never had a fever. Her friends
joshed her about it and all found
some opportunity to please her.
watched over her as best as I could.
Being ill, she was in the unusual position of having to receive care instead of giving it.
A few nights later she became delirious. The next morning we brought
her to the hospital. My father was
so worried, he cried. I thought it
foolish to worry over such a healthy
woman as my mother. Besides, my
mother was too smart for any illness.
Early the following morning my
father telephoned our home from the
hospital. Claro, a friend who was
staying with my brother and myself
at the time, answered the phone and
was told by my father that my mother was dead.
While my mother lay in state at
our parish church, it seemed that
the whole Ermita district had turned
out to visit her. Even the shoeshine boys went to sec her when they
heard that the woman who laughed
loudly had died.
I remember Mother. She was a
really great woman.


AUGUST, 1950


23


Of rain and a girl and a poetio truth...


Moment of Youngness
By GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, Litt. B. '52


... a stone, a leaf, an unfound door; of a stone, a leaf, a door....And
of all the forgotten faces.... Remembering speechleasly, we seek the great
forgotten language, the lost lane-end into heaven, a stone, a leaf, an unfound door....


—Thomas Wolfe, in Look Homeward, Angel


GHE awakened with a start from
 the dream, and the room was
still dark with the gray darkness
of morning, and outside the rain
that had started in the night was
still falling, only there was no wind
blowing through it now, streaking
the window panes and sweeping
violently across the roof and lashing
at the acacia in the lawn, there was
no wind now and the rain fell with
a s oft whispering sound.
She lay unmoving in the gray cold
darkness, listening to the rain and
the frightened beating of her heart
in the silence. It was a vague and
nebulous dream, full of a strange
sadness and glory; awake now in
the friendliness of familiar things,
she recalled fragments of it, saw
again the leafless trees and the barren streets and the sea, vast and
lonely in the moonlight; saw again
the shining city and the star. In the
dream, she had wept when she
found herself alone in a world of
time and silences; she had laughed
too when in the city there was only the singing and the gold. She
was in a grassy meadow in the end
of the dream and the sun was bright
upon everything and suddenly night
came across the sky like thunder,
and in the emptiness she had wept
24


at the remembrance of things lost...
It was Sunday, and in the early
morning, she walked to church with
her father and mother and her brother Agustin. The rain had ceased
falling but the sky remained overcast and upon the dripping foliage
of the acacias that Iined the street
was spread a thin mist, hazy and
bluish like woodsmoke. Walking up
the street with her parents and
brother, the strangeness of the
dream followed her and she felt far
away from them, remote and untouchable in her loneliness.
In the church, even at the altar
rail at Communion time, where before
she used to feel an exultant gladness in the knowledge that she possessed God, she was aware of a queer
melancholy that swelled and receded
within her like the organ music and
in her heart she said, "Lord, O Lord
Welp me,” because suddenly she was
afraid she would always be unhappy.
The voice of the priest saying the
last prayers came to her as through
a great distance...
The morning was long and ashgray. The sky was dark with impending rain. She sat in the porch,
remembering the dream again, feeling the strange sadness and glory
“  "


again. The wind was high in the
trees; it ruffled the wet leaves of
the acacia in the lawn, spraying accumulated rain-drops upon the roof.
From the house across the street
came the do-re-mi-fa-sol of a child’s
piano lesson, the notes clear and deliberate in the silence of morning.
She tried reading the Sunday magazines but the words became blurred evasions before her and finally
she put them away and sat there in
the porch, thinking, What is all this
sadness and this glory that I cannot touch or understand? Why am
I so lost and alone? I am sixteen..
this is my home... this is I...
In the summer, with her hurried
growth she knew now that something
inside her had changed and died,
something that belonged to the years
far and long ago. In the summer,
she had awakened one night from
sleep and the wind blowing the
curtains into the room had been like
the warm breath of someone intolerably near. She had remained
awake for a long time, tossing restlessly with the thought of the magnificent earth, and her being upon
it, sixteen, alive and remembering.
How wonderful and tragic it is to live
again, she had thought. To live again
and know grief and joy unutterable
in the living of a moment...
The sudden awakening in the night
had been the beginning of many
dreams. The dreams came to her in
her troubled sleep, in her waking
hours. All the dreams, even her
dream of the barren streets and the
star were part of one vast dream
that had begun that night in the
summer: life had been a child’s time
of wish and fable, and now it was
a reaching out, a searching for
grace and warmth and certitude. The
secret world of the great dream seem

ed near and almost tangible in its
urgency, but always, there was the
sense of going away and never arriving, there was always the sadness
with the glory, the futility with the
delicious anxiety of waiting. The
image of the longed-for world came
to her in contrasting tones of light
and dark; she saw hurried snatches
of it in the rustling of a tree at
night and the slamming of a screen
door and sudden silence, and then
the voices of people in the summer
darkness: near, strange, familiar;
and lying awake at night in the hot,
brooding spell of summer, she felt
she could embrace it all with a word
that, somehow would never be
spoken...
There was only this wishing and
this longing in the first days of the
summer. There was only this lying
awake in the night and the waiting.
And with the end of April, the sterile
dreaming resolved itself into a hard
ball of unrest and bewilderment. She
wanted now to twist things in her
hands, wanted now to run away from
everything; but she could only sit
wordlessly in the porch, her hands
quiet in her lap, while the fierce inward conflict choked her with an unreasoning fury, while the remorseless
sun blazed in the sky with the immense fever of noon and struck the
unstirring house with waves of heat.
And then the unexpected two weeks
in Baguio, and the tension at last
finding release in the violent throwing of a ball in a bowling alley
(Nenita, Cecy, Josie, Menchu, Angie), and the sense of reckiess speed
on roller-skates, she working up a
sweat, and the wind cool against her
face. And afterwards, the city again,
and the rains, and the rebellion and
the conflict gone now with only the
loneliness of the young summer again,


AUGUST, 1950


25


and the sadness and glory of her
dreams...
The rain began falling again in
the afternoon, pelting noisily against
the roof with a nervous insistence.
She stood at the living room window,
looking out at the July rain.
“You should come,” her mother said
quietly, behind her. “You haven’t
seen your sister for sometime now."
“But I just can’t go, Ma, she said,
twisting the tulle curtains in her
white slender hands. "I’m not feeling
well.” She felt miserable for saying she could not go. But now,
should I tell them? she thought, anguishedly. How should one go about
in the telling of it? The loneliness
and the strangeness, the grief and
the glory. They would not understand... And rain, dark rain, and the
wanting to sit in the porch through
the afternoon watching it falling
from an ash-gray sky. She turned
around and kissed her mother, unhurriedly, on the forehead. Already,
her father was racing the Pontiac
in the garage, warming up the engine for the long ride to San Juan
where her sister Amparing lived with
her husband Ben.
There was only the rain, steady
but gentler now, and sounds broken
in the wind after the car had left.
She heard her brother, Agustin, walking about upstairs. Standing alone
in the living room, she thought of
her brother. Has he ever known the
same things that I feel now? Has
he ever known loneliness, and at the
same time felt certain that somewhere waited a purpose and a magic? Her brother Agustin was eighteen, tall and lean and wiry from
basketball, his face like his father’s,
frank and ready with laughter. Always, when she thought of her brother, in her mind she saw him laugh

ing. He has always been happy, she
decided, and walked out into the
porch.
She leaned against the porch railing and watched the rain falling
whisperingly on the lawn. Two cars
following each other closely swept by
in the street, their tires swishing on
the rain-washed pavement. Everywhere in the world, she thought, it
is raining. She imagined the rain
falling ceaselessly over the seas and
plains and towns of the world. It is
raining everywhere, she thought and
suddenly she had a vision of the
make-shift huts of the poor hugging
the shell-scarred ruins of Ermita, the
rain piercing through the thatch roofs
and the cardboard walls like hurled
spears. She shivered inwardly...
She heard the harsh grating of the
grilled iron gate against the concrete
driveway. She recognized at once her
brother’s friend, Eddie, as he walked
towards the house in the rain.
At the foot of the porch steps.
away now from the rain, Eddie paused familiarly, smiling up at her. He
looked solid and eighteen and collegiate in his brown leather jacket
"Hi Lina, he said, and his voice was
bright in the rain-gray afternoon.
“Hello," she said.
“Is Nito in?” Eddie said.
“Yes,” she said. "C’mon up and I’ll
call him.
Upstairs, she found her brother
Agustin sprawled on the ancient upholstered divan in the hall, rending
the Sunday newspapers.
“Eddie’s here,” she said.
Her brother Agustin sprang up
from the newspapers and the divan and hurried to the top of the
stairs, now his usual self again, swift
and rushing about, doing things, "Hi
there, Eddie m’boy,” he called out,


26


“  


peering over the banister at Eddie
in the living room, his voice loud and
theatrical. “I gotta take a shower
first, guy. OK with you?”
“Sure,” she heard Eddie answer.
Eddie was standing before the radio-phonograph when she descended
the stairs, looking over idly at the
titles of the record albums stacked
tightly in their mahogany rack. He
turned around at the sound of her
slippered feet on the stairway landing.
“Nice records you have here, Lin,"
Eddie said.
“Oh, they’re Papa’s,” she said. She
felt proud she had a father who listened to Chopin
and Tchaikoysky
in the evenings. "I
-

go in for the popular ones. Bebop, aP
slow drag.”

1
“Me, too,” Eddie said, smiling.
PE
Now that Eddie
ba
stood near, she
noticed how tall

he was, how his
Adams apple -
 ia.

worked up and

down when he .

talked. He stood
there, smilingly at CaB
her, looking matured and correct. He was a member
of her brother Agustin’s gang
Only last week, all of them, except
Raul who had entered the seminary,
had been in the house: her cousin
Chito who was a section-chairman in
their Sodality, and Monch who was
a guard in the Varsity, and Mike
who wrote undecipherable poems, and
Tony with his terrible puns, and he,
Eddic, who played the piano, and
smiled solemnly, as he was smiling
now, his eyes dark and grave and
sometimes sullen. That afternoon,


she had come home from her classes
to find them singing "All the Things
You Are," at the top of their voices,
gathered around Eddie at the piano,
and when they saw her listening smilingly in the doorway, they had stopped their singing and Mike had said,
"How about joining us, Lina?" and
she had answered, "No, no, thanks,
fumblingly, all at once aware of all
the eyes upon her, her cheeks flushing deeply...
Her brother Agustin was singing
"My Foolish Heart" under the shower in the bathroom upstairs. She
and Eddie could hear him singing
above the whispering rain.
“You'll have to
wait," she said.
"It takes him an
hour to get dressed."
N
Eddie laughed.
"I'm in no hurry.”
he said.
"Going to a
movie?” she asked.
"No,” he said.
"He told me we'd
go see a girl. In
Cubao.
She went over
to the piano,

thinking vaguely,
Who could that girl be? She lifted
the lid and the keys were white and
cold in the grayness that was like
twilight in the room.
"How about a piece. Eddie?' she
said.
"Now, I—"
"Please, she said persuasively.
Eddie played "Smoke Gets in Your
Eyes" and the song shut out the rain
and the grayness and the sounds
broken in the wind. She thought of
poetry, watching his strong lean
fingers, certain and precise, urging


AUGUST, 1950


27


music out of the cold white keys:
We look before and after and pine
for what is not...Our sweetest songa
are those that tell of saddest thought.
That was Shelley. As far back as
she could remember, she had always
had a devout fondness for Shelley.
“You play wonderfully," she said.
“You can do it better,” Eddie said.
“You play by ear, don’t you, Eddie?”
“Yes, Eddie said.
“How nice, she said.
Under the shower upstairs, her brother Agustin had taken up the song
and they could hear his loud voice
singing above the drizzling rain.
“Eddie," she said, making conversation, "what’re you going to be? Doctor-Lawyer-Ind—
Abruptly, she
stopped when she saw the deep hurt
in the way he suddenly looked at
her.
“I don’t know, Eddie said finally. He had turned his face away
from hers and he did not look at
her when he spoke and the pale light
outlined softly his youngish face.
'Really, I don’t know. I don’t know
what I’m going to be. I guess I’m
all mixed up—
Now she felt a shy tenderness for
him as she stood against the side of
the piano, her chin on her hand upon
the chintz-draped top, looking down
at his strong lean fingers unmoving on the keys. She let her eyes
rest upon his face half-turned away
from hers and she saw that he was
looking blankly out the window and
staring at the rain and she thought,
He is lost and bewildered and unhappy, like me, but why? but why?
“Why, Eddie, why?” she almost
whispered. Somehow, she felt she
must know the reason for the bewilderment and the hurt. She watched


him close the lid of the piano slowly,
his eyes sullen now, unsmiling.
“Well—I—when I think of what
I’m going to be—Skip it."
“But—but Eddie—" she said in an
anguish of expectancy. Her large
dark eyes looked at him unwaveringly, her hands clenched tightly
around the edge of the piano top,
and she held her breath as though
by it she could listen better.
Eddie looked up at her now, smiling wryly. It was as though a great
tiredness had settled upon him, and
he was trying to smile it away "All
the guys," he said, looking up at
her, “they’re going to take law, medicine, commerce. And Nito, he’s
going to be a doctor, isn’t he?'
“Yes,” she said.
“Raul,” Eddie said, "You know him,
don't you? He’s going to be a priest."
She stood there, unspeaking, listening carefully to Eddie talking, feeling for him a strange shy tenderness. Upstairs, her brother Agustin
was singing, "If knew you were coming, I’d 'a’ baked a cake—
“Raul and I,” Eddie said, "we
used to see Father Wilson together.
You know, talk things over. Then I
found out I just didn’t have thewhat do you call it now?—the vocation—
“Yes—" she said almost breathlessly.
"Pa wants me to take law,” Eddie
said. "Big-time lawyer and all that
sort of thing. But I — I hate the
stuff."
“Eddie," she said, somehow feeling
involved in his indecision and bewilderment, somehow feeling there was
a bond between them now because he
was telling her everything, "Eddie,
what are you going to do now?'
“I don’t know,” Eddie said. “I
“  "


28


want to do something big, something
wonderful. I want to go away. I’m
all mixed-up—I sound corny, don't
9"
“No, no,” she said, fiercely...
Her brother Agustin stamped down
the stairs, whistling a fragment of a
song. At the landing, he paused
swaggeringly, buttoning the sleeves of
his oilcloth jacket. “Water’s cold,"
he announced. “I almost froze to
death."
Eddie rose from the piano stool,
and she saw that he was the same
Eddie again, smiling solemnly, eighteen, not a trace of the conflict and
the indecision on his young face.
“Let’s shove, Ed,” her brother
Agustin said.
“'Bye, Lina, Eddie said in the
doorway. He was the same Eddie
again, his voice warmly familiar, tall,
smiling solemnly, going with her brother Agustin to see a girl in Cubao.
“Goodbye," she said.
From the porch, she watched Eddie and her brother Agustin walking
away down the street, in their jackets, in the soft whispering rain.
They bent forward slightly against
the rain. They walked rapidly, eagerly, as thought they were in a great
hurry, as though they did not have
the time to bother with the unceasing rain. They were both tall and
slim, only her brother Agustin had
broader shoulders and a more springy
stride. She watched them walk up
the street until they turned around
the corner. On Taft Avenue, they
would wait for the bus, standing in
the gentle rain...
Finally, she left the porch and
went inside into the living room. The
room was dark now and she switched
on the lights, the orange glow of


the ornate lamps reassuring in the
early July dusk. From the kitchen
came the sounds of Atang the maid
cooking. She sat on the sofa and laced
her hands together and watched the
dark slanting rain falling across the
light from the window. She thought
of Eddie, Eddie playing "Smoke Gets
in Your Eyes" on the piano, Eddie
talking, his voice husky and torn
with conflict, Eddie telling her he
wanted to go away...
She thought of many little things,
sitting alone in the room with the
dark July rain falling. The picture
of a girl she had come across, accidentally, among her brother's books:
To Agustinito—With all my love, Chiquita... She must be the girl they
are going to see in Cubao... How
is it really to love and be loved?...
Raul in a cassock, Raul with his
handsome face and his ringing laughter... The writer who came one day
to lecture on the short-story in the
Auditorium, whose soul, Josie had
said, one could see in his eyes...
Ency's birthday party, and the boys
all trying hard to be witty, and Angie telling Mike, Mike, you look tike
a Shmoo, and everybody laughing...
And at the end of every corridor of
thought, there was Eddie, lost and
confused, smiling wryly, telling her
he wanted to go away...
The thought of Eddie was an intricate web that held her fast to
the chair, and she sat there, helplessly, with the rain falling across the
light from the window in the July
dusk, alone in the dark forest of her
remembering. Now she let her mind
run through the years, lingering on
single moments, on fringes and ends.
She remembered the beach in Lisay,
how she used to run down the long
strip of sand when she was a child.
She remembered the town there, and


AUGUST, 1950


29


the plaza with the Rizal monument,
and her playing patintero until the
water lines drawn on the dusty street
could not be seen anymore, even in
the bright moonlight. The remembrances came effortlessly, and she
remembered a street and morning in
San Juan before the war, and when
she thought of Baguio, the memory
was not of violent confusion and bowling-pins crashing but of mist upon
the mountainsides with only the tops
of the pine trees showing and of
houses on the sloping hillsides white
in the ineffectual sun...
Someday, she thought (and the
thought was like an ache), I must
share with Eddie this remembering.
I must tell him about the beach in Lisay, and San Juan before the war,
and Baguio beautiful in the summer.
I must tell him everything, even the


loneliness and the grief and the glory, and he must understand...
The phone rang suddenly, scattering her remembrances. Her friend
Cecy’s voice, bubbling with her usual
excitement, came to her from the
other end of the line. That math
homework, is it on page 207 But we
didn't finish 18. Nasty, nasty weather. By the way, have you seen Menchu's cousin Bote? He's a dead ringer for Monty Clift, only hes so so
short. Have you heard about Mila
and your cousin Chito? Its simply
mush-mush...
She cradle the phone languidly and
returned to the sofa, aware again of
the strange sadness and glory of the
dream, and thought of Eddie, and
waited for her father and mother
and brother Agustin to come home.


-OOo

Lost Song
By ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A. B. '51
Lake the trembling reflection of shivering stars
That lies scimitared to shreds on the sea,
The dreaming, the laughter Ive known at your side,
Will never come back to me.
At the feverish clutch of a writhing dead tree
In sundown's last faltering gleam,
My heart's aching void brims with wild shouting for
The love that has flown like a dream.
But this song that I sing for you this dark night,
And I know I am singing in vainThis lorn quivering song is a lonely ghost wind
That is lost in the night and the rain.


30.


"  


Southward Hol
OR
Forty Thousand Leagues Under Normal
By EDUARDO D. LACHICA, Litt.B. '52


EARLY in April, a boy sailed for
S the south to soothe his jangled
nerves which were the outcome of
two weeks of cramming for the
finals. Those days had been black
and so had been the coffee. This boy
had gone to his classmate’s home
to study, but in vain. His classmates
were holding a barn dance and they
tried to cow him to stay. But, being bull-headed, he declined, knowing
that when his classmates got together, the neighborhood did not
sleep. He was later observed reviewing Philosophy in the Assembly
room where the Glee Club was
practicing. There, everything was
quiet and peaceful. Then the Day
of Judgment came when the blue
books were passed around and from
separate sections of the city came
sounds of muffled pistol reports.
His seatmate was caught cheating
and was dragged away helplessly by
two cold-eyed proctors. He had been
seen opening an alphabet book in
an Algebra exam. But miraculously,
our boy passed. Instead of proving
his Thesis, he called Kant and Hegel
such infamous and heinous names
that the correctors were greatly
pleased and consequently awarded
him a “3” for his talent.
A week from then the doctor announced a marked improvement. At
least, the boy’s teeth did not clatter
as loudly as before. His mother began to think of sending him to his
uncle’s villa in Baguio, but Father
objected loudly to that.


“I know it’s good for Junior's
health, but what about theirs!”
Father, after some deliberation,
decided instead to ship his son to
Zamboanga where his mother-in-law
stayed. He presumed she wouldn’t
mind the boy’s hobby of shooting
indiscriminately at lizards with an
air rifle. He left, while the family
stood waving on the shore, shedding
¡cars of joy.
The boy wrote a faithful account
of his various escapades under the
Capricorn, excerpts of which are reproduced here. The first four entries are in English, the next in
awkward Visayan, and the rest in
Hindustani. There are some vague
passages which at first puzzled the
translators but were shown by diligent research to be quotations fron
the telephone directory.
April 18
The advertisement read: cabins
with ruuning water but they failed
to add that the water poured from
a porthole, every time the ship yawed.
Still, that slight discomfort solved
the problem of brushing your teeth.
All you needed to do was to go to
the porthole, wait for the next sea
to close in and bare your teeth.
Similarly, the 20-point brags about
super-cushiony bunks were bunk
Last night as I threw myself on the
bunk, I immediately went to sleep.
The shock of that wooden pillow
must have knocked me out. The
berths have staunched, first-class
springs, which was why I was toss

AUGUST. 1950


31


ing in bed all night long. One of them
sprang loose in the middle of the night
and stabbed me in the back. The
Captain must have resented the indignant note I sent him entitled
“The Berth and Death of an Irate
Passenger" in which I remarked that
his berths were really restful, permanently so. Still, the brochure
was accurate concerning their option
of breakfast in bed. After one particularly hard gale, I woke up with a
shiny lapu-lapu on my lap. I scaled
it with a sharp rivet which jutted
from the wall, and it, together with
a small flounder I found under the
mattress, served as breakfast. A
cabin boy came in later bearing a
tray of fried brown fish, after
which I chased him three times
around the poop.
April 19
The weather has cleared and the
crew, passengers and stowaways
have emerged from hibernation to
sun themselves. It is safe to stroll
down the deck except for an occasional octopus who reaches for the
railing with a slimy tentacle and
drags some protesting passenger into
the watery depths. After a little
of this, the ship was thrown into a
panic and there was a frantic counting of heads. Three were found
absent. Hearing of these occurrences, the Captain was enraged
but calmed down somewhat when
told that the luckless vacationers
were Nacionalistas. Nevertheless,
he ordered the First Mate to lead
a posse down the deck armed with
fire axes. Later in the morning,
they caught one enterprising octopus in the galley trying to slip away
with a gallon of ice cream but failing miserably because he was all
thumbs. The vengeful crew hacked
him to pieces. We had dinner that
noon, the main dish being what the


chef called chopped squid. Nobody
ate that noon.
In the afternoon, an octopus appeared astern and, spying the ship’s
cook carrying a tray to the Captain’s cabin, the black-hearted thing
lost no time in wrapping an undulating appendage around the man’s
leg. The poor cook let out such
a terrible outcry, however, that the
entire ship’s complement rushed
amidships to investigate the awful
clamor. Now the entire ship’s company was very fond of their cook
whose delicious crab omelet had no
equal in the entire Southern Lines,
and hence they were very reluctant
to have him go without a fight.
The cook would have been cooked had
not a passenger grabbed the former’s other leg. The Second Mate
supported this passenger from behind
while more people joined in until
there was a long line of people
thwarting this octopus from hauling
the cook overboard. The crafty
beast did not give up, however, but
bellowed for assistance. To the
crew’s dismay, another octopus bobbed out of the water and lent a tentacle, followed by more and more
octopi rushing to enter this precarious tug-of-war. The underwater
team would have gotten the cook had
not the Captain, unsportsmanlike,
hooked the leading tentacle to an
aft power hoist which almost cranked
the entire tribe of cephalopodates
onto the deck. That evening, the
cook served us chopped squid.
April 21
Our hardships did not end there.
Since the Captain classed his passengers as the cultural sort, he
thought it highly appropriate that
we have a contralto soprano aboard
to entertain us after supper. I
have never seen such slow eaters
as these before! The Captain an“  "


nounced that this lady gave concerts in Vienna, Milan, Brussels and
Paris, usually running for over three
weeks. Whether they caught her
or not, he did not say. She was so
broad that the Captain had to cancel a shipment of tractors for Cotabato in order to have her aboard.
The dire moment came when she had
the microphone before her. She hit
her first note, a high C, which was
not very impressive except that a
chandelier suddenly fell on two officers, knocking them senseless. She
was swinging with gusto into a vigorous cantata when without warning a storm blew up and churned the
sea into fury. To save the ship
from turning turtle, we had to drop
anchor and stay moored till the tempest blew over. The sailors cried
lustily: “Anchor!” The lady, mistaking that for a gesture of musical
appreciation on the part of her audience, gave full vent to her operatic
ardor. The wind, naturally, blew
the harder and the sailors yelled
the more desperately: "Anchor!"
Our cruise would have had an abrupt
and tragic ending had not a civicspirited tourist gathered the covers
from six or seven tables and stuffed
them (in gentlemanly fashion, of
course) into her mouth.
April 22
We stopped at Guimaras Island,
some knots from Negros Occidental
where the sugar is so refined. The
natives told us that there were pearl
beds at the bottom of the bay at
which we skeptical city folk laughed.
That night there were heard some
slight splashes around the ship. We
discovered that one of the local industries was the brewing of tuba
which is an orange concoction derived
from the unopened flower buds of
palm trees and exposed in an earthen vat for forty days and nights.


This vinum daemonum is then poured
into flagons and is of great demand
at surgical hospitals in case the
other runs out. The common practice is that a native downs a generous swig of this liquid, then grabs
hold of a coconut trunk and shakes.
Hence, the copra industry.
The
ship’s stay in the island was prolonged to three days by a unanimous
vote of passengers, crew and captain. On the third day we sailed
and nothing else happened except
for the fact that the boat was caught
off-course four times. Of course.
April 24
Zamboanga! Our ship was moored
before the pier that was the pride
of the City. Everybody was gathered on the forecastle to watch the
little brown Moro boys plunge into
the turquiose waters for coins. The
morning could have gone happily
had not an Ilocano tossed a slug into
the water.
A native Zamboangeno was my
travel guide and he knew all the
inns and outs of the City. We visited
very few of the outs. He suggested
we take a launch for Basilan. He
told me how on exotic Southern
nights, he would steal through the
moon-shot coconut groves into the
village of the Yakan aborigines to
spy on their tribal rites. He thought
he could pick up some bebop steps
that way. We never knew how he
made out because, as he himself
confessed, he never came back.
April 25
I walked down Pershing Plaza
looking for Moros. I was told they
were very peaceful people, although
occasionally one gets jilted by a
ranee, after which he goes home to
take a bath, then runs through the
streets shrieking in an unspeakable


AUGUST, 1950


33


manner, hewing at the Christians
with a gleaming kris. He generally
continues this routine until he
stops a dozen Constabulary bullets,
at which point he goes home. My
father had beforehand warned me
of this quaint Moro habit and I took
along my Crossman just in case. I
only succeeded in giving some Moros
who were selling durian in the Market, a bad scare. The durian, however, gave me a bad scare, too, so
we were even. A traffic policeman
almost took me in
for disturbing the
naace but he told
me later that Moros don’t do that
anymore. For excitement, they go
to “The Palikero"
and spend their
allowance on the
pin-ball machines.
May 8
The Zamboangeno regaled me
with stories of a
strongly southern
flavor. One of
them goes like
this. At the end
of the second Ice 
Age, the entire
archipelago was inundated which
left only three peaks above
water. The pcople then were incorrigible loafers, vowing that they
wouldn’t move about, come hell or
high water. When the latter came,
they scampered up the mountains,
taking with them their barest necessities, which generally comprised
some toothpicks and a deck of cards.
But then, an unforseen tragedy awaited them. There lived on Mt.
Kababalan, one of the three peaks,
a monster of tremendous length who
was called Kurita. He possessed
many grasping tentacles (more than


a decent octopus has). There are
many creatures like him existing at
present, only they now call them capitalists. His daily fare consisted
of monkeys. But there were no
monkeys available since Noah had
secreted them all in his Ark with
which he could later populate biology
laboratories. So the ogre resorted
to the refugees on the mountain, who
were not as tasty as the usual, but
could suffice in an emergency.
The people on the second mountain were faced
with the same dilemma, at this
time in the form
of a giant, Tarabusaw. Mt. Bita,
the third mountain, was the nest
of a huge bird,
called Pah, whose
wings were so
wide that whenever he yawned
and stretched himself, the tips of
his wings would

be frozen stiff by
DS
polar air. This
bird also resorted
 to the only avail
able item in the
menu, i.e., people. This became
so exasperating that the people, or
what were left of them, sent a wire
of distress to two brother kings from
a neighboring island, who were Indaraputra and Sulayman. These
two wired back:
“What’s eating you?” The immediate response was:
"Kurita, Tarabusaw and Pah.
Sulayman rushed to the rescue in
an airplane. Indaraputra remained
behind, upset because the wireless
operator had mispelled his name.
Sulayman, however, landed his plane


34


  


on Mt. Kababalan (which by itself
was a feat) and he stepped out
brandishing his blue kampilan, calling Kurita by name. The beast
dropped his dinner, who was the
former Vice-Mayor, and made for
the invader. Sulayman sidestepped
the charge and buried his blade into Kurita’s neck who, stingy though
he was, gave up his ghost. The
much-applauded hero flew over to
the second mountain and disposed of
Tarabusaw with a tommy-gun. Successful so far, he hopped over Mt.
Bita and the bird Pah rose to intercept. The dog-fight raged for
hours until finally Sulayman hounded his foe to death. But as the vanquished bird fell, Sulayman was hit
by its wing and was instantly killed.
This story is derived from the


folklore of the Malays handed down
from generation to generation and
was later adapted by Warner Brothers as a suspenseful film play with
Humphrey Bogart as Sulayman and
Bob Hope in the role of Kurita.
—OOoJunior was back in time for the
school opening. He enjoyed good
enough relations with the faculty
until one day he showed his Log
to his English teacher, who upon
reading it lost no time in hustling
the boy over to the Infirmarian for
rigid questioning. It was discovered
that the combination of raw fish,
cold oysters and a giddy Southern
atmosphere had thrown him a little
off-balance. But the boy pulled
through and is now an outstanding
Staff member of The Quarterly, it
says here.


OOo

Spatiality
By LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A. B. '52
(At Communion)


"Tis said that a part
Can never grasp its whole:
Well said, for can a handful of sand
Span the strand?
Can a glass hold tight the quarry's pool?
Is a second longer than an hour?
A petal larger than the flower?
Who but the fool
Contends that he
Within the cup of his one, latticed hand
Could scoop the sea?
Yet look, O blunted, blinded man, and see
This mystery:
Look! within this flesh-walled frail ciborium I hold
God!


AUGUST, 1950.


35


NOTES ON KNOWING AND DOING
UR interest in the drama, even in this paradoxical age of leisure amidst
O poverty, is one that has never been surpassed by past ages, except
perhaps by the ancient Grceks. All over the world, we read of busy little
theaters. In the United States particularly, we hear of the seeds of dramatic expression sown in the heart of small communities by little Community
Groups built mainly on enthusiasm. And like an echo, we in the Philippines have organized small amateur and professional groups almost overnight. Though the future of these professional groups is uncertain and
indefinite, yet in them and with the amateurs especially, we
see evident the enthusiasm, the demand, the instinct, and the
Growth
growth of an art which perhaps is the most misunderstood
and
Enthusiasm and neglected of all among the fine arts here.
In this growth and development of the amateur stage, the Ateneo, since
its beginning, has held an honorable place. We intend to kecp that place.
We intend to keep that place, since the Ateneo, as a seminary of the
Liberal Arts and Sciences, finds its proper expression and center of academic life on the stage. For the stage draws from all the other artspainting, music, rhythmics, poetry, and perhaps from some sports, too, like
fencing—in weaving its artistic whole. And in the Great Dramas we sec
all these harmonized into the sum of a refined and studied symphony of all
Arts—in a re-creation of human affairs, in a living synthesis of Man.
Of academic policy, we do not pretend to have competence to speak.
But a few rapid, if amateurish observations, will not perhaps disturb the
general equilibrium of established opinion among our readers.
We think that there is a danger in a merely and mainly intellectualized
and superficial knowledge of dramatic art. For there are two distinct
though closely related patterns in the study of dramatic
art: the directly intellectual and external knowledge, as
Academic
against the non-purely-intellectual, directly personal, active
and
stage experience. The danger we think is on the tooDramatic
academic stress. For though there is a point in a literary drama course.
we must remember that drama was and is intended primarily for the stagc.
And in practice, the difference is obvious: dramatic art is doing; academic
learning is knowing. Here lies the crux.
Though we previously admitted that our age has a tremendous
dramatic interest, yet sadly enough, it has little dramatic understanding.


36


  "


This point seems to argue to a stress on more academic
learning. On the contrary, however, our ignorance is preAcademic
cisely the result of too much stress on the conceptual and
Stress
external experience of literary drama. Not only will tooacademic learning encourage superficial and vain self-confidence in the
student just out of college, and mislead him with the illusion that he truly
knows drama, but learning mainly academic can and has dampened the
dramatic instinct of many a student while in school.
But at the Ateneo we are indeed fortunate. Our ideal is the balance
of the conceptual and the actual experience of dramatic art. There is no
watering down of the dramatic wine of our students, and
(we hope!) neither will dramatic criticism sterilize our
Balanced
dramatic impulse, but instead inspire it to nobler achieveIdeal
ments.
As Aristotle said, "Imitation is natural to man from childhood, one
of his advantages over the lower animals being this, that he is the most
imitative creature in the world and learns at first by imitation. And it is
also natural for all to delight in works of imitation.” (Introduction to Aristotle, edited by Richard McKeon, p. 627). We have perhaps in this statement, a hint of why Shakespeare’s company remained loyal to their profession, though by it they were legally classed as "rogues and vagabonds.”
Not because royalty regularly supported them, but because they played
royalty, if not always royally. They enjoyed their play.
For true acting is not merely an imitation, but a re-creation; an actor
“creating his other self” whenever he is at work, or rather, at play before
an audience, is but his "stage self" and by virtue of that
self is, however small his part, a king. For truly he is a
The True
king, who, as he discovers a new and a variable personality
Actor
from within his depths, expresses not an ordinary emotion,
but an artistic emotion, and thus a power is “born" in him that can move
his fellow men at his beck.
The actor discovers the power and the versatility of his voice, whose
stiffness and inhibitions he must first break down. This is of primary importance in any act, in an entry into the heart of any great dramatic poem,
and the perfection of this, coupled with the freedom of body expression, is
the harmonic song of a great interpretation.
The actor discovers a sympathetic emotional contact with his fellow
actors on the stage, and with his audience—for dramatic art is the most
social of all arts, and for this reason alone, the most natural
to man. And in this contact with his fellow men, there
The
evolves a sympathy, a comradeship, a cooperation of purContact
poses that we so lack in daily competitive life.
Acting, however, is a dangerous game. As acting "must search for
expression throughout the body,” so the actor must use both the mind and
the emotions, the heart and the head, as the soul of his whole act. And
since, as Wilson Knight asserts, "people are likely to be cast for their
parts according to their vices than for their virtues; and these vices are,
if only in mimicry, to be deliberately called up, and encouraged," we can

AUGUST, 1950


37


not assure the actor that his role will do him more moral
good than bad. If a role will awaken in him a queer, unThe
fathomed instinct, or uncover an “irrational layer" in-his
Peril
otherwise harmonious emotional make-up, then to accept
that role would be nothing short of foolish, however brilliant that role may
seem. The damage to his personality may cause in the future a permaneat
irritation to himself and to others. (Do we wonder why some boys act queerly and irrationally when the night of their performance draws near?)
There is certainly a need for prudence on the part of the actors, and not a
little caution by the casting director.
Yet, how many of our lecturers, teachers, statesmen, soldiers, clerics,
would have been three times-or morepowerful if on the college stage they
had learned the inflection of tone, the pauses, the candor of
movement, the repose, the sweep of gesture, proper to draThe
matic art?
Need
No doubt drama, with what emphasis it is esteemed in the Ateneo,
plays a powerful role in the shaping of any prospective professional. But
of all that has been said of the drama, it must never be forgotten that
no true playwright can express the full life, the ageless beauty, and the
true emotional meaning of his play except through the actor on the stage.
And for this reason, the actor who is true to the play rightly and alone
stands in the heart of a Shakespearean drama, of that of :
Marlowe, of a Rostand, or a Moliere. And if throughout the
Heart
actor’s career, he maintains a freshness, a freedom, and a
of the
youthful intensity that are but the reward of a selfless, perDrama
sonal dedication to the glorious drama that is Catholic
living,—then surely is the worth of his achievement great!
CARMELO QUINTERO, AB '53


—o0o—
To A Pal
By LEONIDAS BENESA, A.B. '52
(who shall be nameless except that his initials are APGM)
I have a crony named Tony,
Who, believe me, is not a fool,
Not a bum, not a cheat, not a phony,
Never given to deceptions,
(At least in school).
Except for one or two exceptions
No friend is better than he,
And I admire him constantly;
He has but one big fault which he fails to see—
He contradicts me!


38


  "


He was just another starving newsboy, and one day,
he found forty pesos on the aidewalk....


The Wanet
By ARTURO TANCO, A.B., '53


raHE restless hum of disturbed humanity rose from the jumbled
snarl of traffic on Plaza Sta. Cruz.
The rush of vehicles passed up the
avenue and ended in a tangled mass
of honking cars, jeeps, and buses, all
secking to outmaneuver each other.
The morning was cool, but the traffic
policeman on the corner was already
sweating profusely, his round face red
as he blew his whistle.
Pepe stood amidst all this flurry
and confusion, calling raucously at
the indifferent crowd eddying around
him. He hadn’t sold any of his papers yet and his voice was already
starting to get hoarse. He felt hot,
sticky, and tired—and the morning
wasn’t even half over yet. Maybe
he'd be able to sell all his papers
before the noon-whistle blew, and
then he could be home early to help
his mother cook lunch. Here, this
man coming was dressed neatly, maybe he'd buy one.
“Paper?... Read about...! Paper,
mister?'
Eagerly, Pepe thrust a newspaper
at the approaching man, showing him
the bold headline on the front page.
Digging absentmindedly into his pocket, the man flipped a coin at him,
took the profferred newspaper, and
started to stride slowly away.
“Say, here’s your change, mister!
Don't you want it?” Pepe called, as
he hurried after the retreating figure.


“Oh, yes, thanks, the man murmured abashedly as Pepe handed the
forty centavos change to him, “I forgot.”
The morning rush was over and
Pepe had sold almost half of his
bundle. Another two hours and he'd
have it all sold. Having a slack hour,
he sat down on the curb and thought
of his mother. She was probably
beginning to do her washing now.
Nine o’clock—yes, she’d be hunched
on the stool near the faucet, with
the dirty clothes soaking in a tub
beside her. Stooping down, she'd soap
them, and then beat each one with
a small wooden stick to rinse it.
Once in a while, she’d stop, push her
stringy hair into place, and then
start again, the dull thud of the falling water echoing monotonously in
her ears. This was the only way she
could support her family of three,
the only work she could find.
As he thought of her, Pepe felt a
warm glow of love flow through
him, but this quickly disappeared as
he glanced at the thick batch of papers he had yet to sell. This, too,
was the small way he contributed
to their support; the only work he
could find that did not require a certain amount of height and age. Well,
he'd show them—all those other newsboys who bullied and shoved him
around. This was why he had had
to transfer to this relatively dull corner, but anyway, he had one steady
customer.


AUGUST, 1950


39


Every morning, this customer, a
rather genial-looking old man in neat
clothes, would pass by promptly at
nine-ten. He would stop to buy a
paper and chat for a while, and then
move on to work. Again, at threethirty, he'd pass by to get the afternoon edition. It was then that they
talked; about politics, business—anything, but mostly about Pepe—what
he was going to be, what he was going to do. Mang Isidro, as Pepe
called him, seemed very sympathetic.
He listened attentively to all dreams
and plans unfolded to him. Often he
would caution Pepe about virtuehonesty most of all!
Today he was late. It was a quarter
past nine when he finally plodded
into view While yet far off, he
waved. “Good morning, boy!” he
shouted cheerily as he drew nearer.
"All your papers gone or have you
saved one for me?"
“Here’s one, sir " Pepe offered.
“Ah, I see they’re still shooting it
out in Central Luzon. It will be
the death of us yet, mark my words!'
Mang Isidro was authoritative as he
pulled out his black wallet to pay
the ten centavos. "Here’s the money
Pepe. I’ve got to hurry. I’m late for
work as it is.
“Thank you, sir, I hope you're not
too late.
As Mang Isidro turned to go, he
pulled out his handkerchief to wipe
his perspiring face. His small, black
wallet fell unnoticed from his pocket and lay on the curb. A few
minutes passed, then Pepe, glancing
down, noticed it. Picking it up, he
examined it carefully, turning it over
and over in his hands. There were
forty pesos and a few odd centavos
in it—an unheard of sum for him;
one that he never even dreamed he
would even hold in his hands.
40


There was Mang Isidro, still in
sight! Would he return it now? If
he would, he’d better hurry up and
do so. No, it’s too late now There
he goes into that thick crowd. Well,
anyway, he'd see him this afternoon.
A sudden doubt assailed him; what
if Mang Isidro thought that he deliberately did not return it then?
Why, he might even think that he
did not intend to return it—even
that he stole it! After all that advice about honesty too! Pepe’s first
impulse was to run and try to look
somewhere, anywhere, for Mang Isidro, but he realized that he did not
know where Mang Isidro would be.
“It would be so easy to keep it,"
he thought wistfully, "and I could
leave this corner and the'd never
see me again.” Besides, what would
forty pesos be to Mang Isidro anyway He was rich, always dressed in
fine clothes, while Pepe himselfhe couldn’t even get a new pair of
hoes...
His morning papers all sold, Pepe
headed for home, turning these
thoughts over in his mind. He trudged wearily over the hot, dusty road
and thought of the injustice of it!
What was the difference between the
other boys and him—those other boys
who rode in big, shining cars and
who had nice clothes to wear all the
time. And his mother—what was the
difference between her and other
mothers? Why was she forced to
wash the clothes of others to make a
living? Why?... why?
Pepe turned into a dingy alley
crowded with leaning, makeshift
shacks. Treading slowly down the
small trodden path, his brow furrowed, he thought of all the things
the forty pesos could buy. Nice, decent clothes for the two children,
food enough to support them for two
weeks. After that?... well, he'd go
“  "


back to selling papers, but in another part of town.
Their shack was a typical barongbarong with walls of galvanized iron
sheets, and a roof of nipa reinforced
with more galvanized iron. The faint
odor of cooked rice drifted through
the one doorless entrance and greeted him as he stepped in.
All through lunch, he was moody
and abstracted. When his mother
inquired about it, he gave evasive answers and constantly fidgeted under her observant glance. Right after lunch, he gave an excuse and
stepped out hastily. In the street,
he walked slowly, trying to fix his
disordered thoughts. He would be
a thief; a crook....why, if he kept
this, he walked on to his corner.
Reaching it, he glanced around. It
was two-thirty — an hour more before Mang Isidro would arrive. Pepe
sat down on the curb and glanced idly
at the passing buses.


stopped a few meters from him—
Mang Isidro! probably looking for
him right now. The bus was starting to move now. Galvanized into
action, Pepe rose and ran after it.
"Mang Isidro! Mang Isidro!” he
yelled, "Para... para!!... Mang
Isidro...!”
The sudden screeching of brakes
and the dull thud of a falling body
silenced the loud cries, and all at
once, a heavy hush descended over
the swiftly forming crowd gathered
around a small crumpled body.
-O—
Mang Isidro, on his way to work
the day after, bought a paper from
the boy who now sold them on Pepe’s corner. He turned the pages
over to the lost and found column.
Odd, he thought,—next to the ad for
his lost wallet, the paper had printed a short paragraph on the death
of that friendly little newsboy, Pepe.
Suddenly he caught a glimpse of a The account was brief and imperson

brown-clad man on a bus that had al.
-o0o—


Sight And Faith
BS PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52
I walked by sight along the sunlit way,
Through pleasant fields among the flowers fair.
By quiet streams, through restful vales it lay,
And loveliness and joy were everywhere.
I walked by sight, so confident my soul,
Nor dreamed that it would ever different be,
As I moved onward to the shining goal
That through the distance scemed so clear to me.
But lo, there came the hour when dusk increased
And sunset slowly faded into night,
As hour by hour the strength of vision ceased,
And I no more could make my way by sight.
But when the day had waned to shadows dim.
Without a star to lend a flickering ray,
I took God’s hand and travelled on with Him.
And sudden glory flooded all my way.


AUGUST, 1950


41


Reflections At Ba'y
By ANTONIO P. GELLA MANUUD, A. B. '52


Once when before my eyes this breathing lake
Would vield a laughing egret to the sky,
Pd wonder why the placid pool would shake,
Would shudder, gasp, would heave a liquid sigh.
And here, where bamboo stoops to kiss and grace
With limpid coquetry or whispered lore
The fretful wrinkles on Laguna's face,
Pd wonder why the waters wept the more.
But that was long ago. Today, a heart
Cried out for you who, like an egret, fled—
A lake disturbing; who, with laughing art,
Did steal a soul's serenity and sped
Away. Wherefore, an empty lake will pine;
I know, because an empty heart is mine.


“  "


N a cold murky day in 1521,
as the "Guidon" aptly put
it, it all began. The man who fired
the cannon-ball which shattered lg
nacio de Loyola’s leg never thought
that his shot would have such a
profound influence on history. And
yet, he gave the lamed Ignatius
a new battle-line more far-reaching and momentous than the battered
walls of Pamplona. Forced to retire from the field of military combat, Ignatius formed another army
and hurled it again another enemy.
With Ignatius, ever the knight,
ever the leader, in fore-front of the
conflict, the Society of Jesus fought
valiantly to turn back the tide of
the Protestant Revolt. For more
than four hundred years Ignatius"
Army has guarded the ramparts of
Catholic Philosophy and Catholic
thought against enemies more bitter
and determined than the besiegers
of Pamplona—and this time the
ramparts held, and have held.
On July 31st, the Ateneo, as a
ninety-one year old Jesuit College,
celebrated the Feast of founder St.
Ignatius Loyola with a solemn high
Mass. The Vice Superior of the
Philippine Jesuits, the Rev. Arthur
Weiss, S.J. offered the Holy Sacrifice, assisted by the Rev. Jose Eli

azo, S.J. and the Rev. Albert O'Hara, S.J.
AFTER HUNDRED YEARS
If Saint Ignatius had happened
to pay a FFeast-day visit to the Ateneo, he would have found a typical
Jesuit school. Ateneans started their
school year fittingly with a threeday open Retreat. Father Thomas
B. Cannon, S. J., speaking to the
Freshmen, set as the motto of their
Retreat the prayer: "Lord, that I
may see!” Father John P. Delaney,
S.J. told the Upperclassmen: "What
God wants us to do, we can do!
No sooner hadthe Retreat ended
than the Ateneo men went into action, aiming for what they believed
God wanted them to do. At the
first meeting of the St. Ignatius Sodality, Manuel Lim Jr,, the Perfect,
told the assembled 200 Sodalists and
Sodalist-aspirants that now was the
time for doing. He mapped out a
plan of activity which would be carried out by a Central Council of five
Sodality officers, the heads of the
two spiritual sections and the four
apostolic sections, and the Chairman of the Publicity Committec.

THE "ACIES ORDINATA"
Three of the four apostolic sections of the Sodality have been re

AUGUST, 1950


43


organized along more efficient lines.
As a result, at the end of the school
year’s first quarter we find the Social Order Club, the Campion Literary Guild and the Ateneo Catechetical Instruction League already in
high gear. The Social Order Club
is accomplishing silent but effective
work with the Institute of Social
Order under the supervision of Father Walter Hogan, S.J. The Campion Literary Guild has reinitiated
the sale of pamphlets at Parishchurch doors, sponsored a subscription drive for the "“Sentinel” the
national Catholic newspaper, assumed the duties of the Legion of
Decency, and now is preparing for the
annual Catholic Book Exhibit. At
Fort McKinley, every Wednesday
and Saturday, 3,000 Filipino soldiers
receive religious instruction from
the A.C.I.L. men, who, 90 strong,
also conduct a “Catechetical Center"
in the Burgos Elementary School in
Sta. Mesa and in the Abad Santos
High School in Pasay.
In every traditional field of work
and even in new fields, the Sodality’s "Acies Ordinata” is carrying
on the fight in the footsteps of Ignatius, as true sons of Loyola.
WOMEN IN ATENEO!
This year something new has been
introduced. Every Saturday afternoon, when the Graduate School
holds classes, there are women among
the students. Not only have the
Graduate Courses leading to the degrees of Master of Arts in English Literature, in Education or in
Social Sciences increased their enrollment by six times, but for the
first time in their history women
are admitted and allowed to gain credits for graduate work.
The decision to have women students in the Ateneo came all the way
44


from Rome. This poses a problem,
indeed. But, after all, when our Lord
said: “Go ye and teach all nations"
He didn’t mean "men only."
CASEY STILL BATTING
Facing the Grade School patio, reclaimed from the charred ruins of
the main building of the old Ateneo,
stands the pride and joy of Father
Martin J. Casey, S. J Head of the
Chemistry Department. It is the
new Chemistry Laboratory—a cooler,
more spacious room designed to accommodate up to a hundred students.
Father Casey has announced that he
intends to set up facilities for every
branch of Chemistry, to offer special
courses this coming summer, and
eventually establish a separate Dopartment of Industrial Technology
as in pre-war days.
Father Eugene Gisel, S.J., prewar
llead of the Industrial Technology
Department, is now at Fordham University, busy purchasing and shipping Laboratory equipment for Father Casey’s expanding lab. Father
Casey plans to stock the already
well-set-up chemistry library with
different chemistry journals and abstracts which are essential in any
chemistry course as encyclopedias in
any modern library.
Keeping pace with the expansion
of the Chemistry Department, Father Philip Bourret’s Physics Department has plans of restoring its
laboratory to its pre-war state, set
up equipment adequate for a physics
major, and work out a full four-year
engineering course. Father Bourret.
S.J., who is a Fulbright Scholar and
once assistant to Loyola University’s
Dean of Engineering, has just received P10,000 worth of machine tools
and electronic equipment and with the
assistance of Father Francis Glover, S.J., he intends to install a com“  "


plete set of mechanical and electrical apparata.
Both Departments are taking a
long-range view towards the large
scale industrializat'op of the Philippines. They intend to train Catholic leaders in an age of technological
progress.
AT QUARTER'S END
The Feast of Our Lady’s Assumption on August 15th provided a fitting climax to the First Quarter’s
activities. After the Missa Recitata in
which the entire College offered itself to Our Blessed Mother, the officers of the Saint Ignatius Loyola
Sodality were installed by Father
Thomas B. Cannon. S.J., the Sodality Moderator. They were: Manue!


Lim, Jr., Prefect; Enrique Esquivel,
Vice Prefect; Carmelo Nepomuceno,
Secretary: Antonio Manuud, Asst.
Secretary: Jesus Ayala, Treasurer;
Pio de Castro Jr., President of the
A.C.I.L., Hector Quesada, President
of the Campion Literary Guild; Arturo Tanco, temporary Chairman of
the Chesterton Evidence Guild; Rodolfo Siojo, Head of the Sanctuary
Society; Manuel M. Roxas, Chief
Promotor of the League of the Sacred Heart; Aurelio Locsin Jr.,
Head of the Legion of Decency;
Jorge Lorredo, Chairman of the Society for the Propagation of the
Faith.
ENRIQUE L. ESQUIVEL JR.
A.B. '51


Today's persecuted Churci sadly
obserres men commit...
Thrice Peter's Sin
By JOAQUIN S. LIM, A.B. '51
The point of pain
Is not turning rack, in chain
That scuffs to white of bonc.
In Tablet crushed
To unGodded dust,
Or tenct stilled,
But...
In watching from the edge of sorrowThe blighted yesterloves
Whose iris spurn the damning light
And tongue turn alien proud.
Stirs dumb remembrance
Of Bariona love refuted
Yet—
Past crow of cock.


AUGUST, 1950


45


Golden Marvest
By SIXTO ROXAS


"VHEN MALTHUS foresaw starWyation for a world population
that he thought was increasing too
fast, he overlooked one thing among
others: the development of science
and its application to food production.
Within a hundred years, science has
proven the Malthusian laws inapplicable to large sections of the world.
But an the Philippines, these laws
can come too close to actuality. Yet
there is no reason why science cannot defeat them here. The question
is, How?


The Philippines is an agricultural
country—a given fact. Although
we must industrialize to a certain
extent, the mainstay of our economy
will always be our agriculture.


The greatest part of our resources,
the history and temperament of our
people are tied up with the brown
earth. Over sixteen and a half million hectares of our land are agricultural. Seventy percent of our
gainful workers are engaged in agricultural pursuits and depend solely
on agriculture for their living.
The main problems of our country,
therefore, must be agricultural. And
it is of no use for us to sidestep
by dreaming of a vague Philippine
Industrial Empire of the future.
Our immediate problen:s (which are
now dangcrously immediate) lie in
agriculture. They lie in our soll,
with our farms and our farmers.
And if science has the solution, we
must first apply it to our soil.
But first let us examine the nature of these problems.


The Filipino farmur is in a peculiar situation: he has been cursed
with too many blessings. Nature has
endowed him with too fertile a soil.
He has has had no trouble growing
his rice on such rich land, for instance. Why, all he had to do was
to clear a plot, seratch the surface
of the earth, drop his seeds and presto! a golden harvest!
He did not have to worry about efficient methods of farming. There
was land aplenty. And the soil was
rich and generous.
And so he used his soil as a miner
digs for gold—emptying the earth
of its wealth without thought of
conserving its riches, or replacing
its elements. Soon the soil grew less
and less fertile. The yields were not
so large anymore nor so good. But
that did not worry the fFilipino. He
still had hectare upon hectare of rich
forest land waiting to be cleared
whenever he had squeezed out all
the fertility of his original plot.
But he could not go on like this forever, The population began to grow.
Land began to have more permanent
occupants. The farmer could not roam
around any more. He had to till
the same soil over and over again,
and in the only way he knew: the
crude, wasteful way. Every year
h.s harvest became smaller and smaller. The soil was losing its richness.
Its wealth was trickling away. If
such conditions prevailed, the Filipino would soon starve.
Once again, he was blessed with
another misfortune. He came under
the tutelage of an advanced modern


46


“  


industrial country whose ways he
tried to imitate and whose tastes he
too quickly acquired.
W.thout going through the fundamental stages of growth—farming
first for its own essential food supply, and only then cultivating and
extracting the raw materials for industry, without going through all
that, the Philippines became a precocious child, economically speaking.
It devoted much of its lands to "industrial crops” (the money-crops they
were called): sugar cane, coconut,
abaca, ramie. Favorable trade agreements with the United States encouraged this. And the government
concentrated on the development of
these crops to the neglect of the essential food crops.
In the meantime what did our people do for food? True, a great protion of our agricultural lands was
still devoted to rice. But with the
crude, wasteful methods to which
our farmers had become accustomed,
the yields were pitifully small. They
were not enough to feed our people.
So we imported rice. This agricultural country endowed with sixteen
and a half million hectares of rich
farm land, had to import the basic
food of its people.
And rice is only a staple.
It must be supplemented with meat
and fish, eggs and green vegetables
in order to provide a healthy diet.
We had vast pastures. Our seas
were teeming with fish. We had land
enough for all the vegetables we
needed. But in 1939 we actually imported 19 million kilograms of vegetables. And even so this was still
a long way off from the 1,461 million kilograms which, nutritionists
tell us, constitute the vegetable-deficiency in our national dict—leaving
us still about 1,442 million kilograms
short of normaley!


WHY did the government permit
" such a state of affairs? Because
it had a reason, a philosophy, a
rationale. It went something like
this: "money crops bring money
with money you can buy food abroad:
therefore produce money-crops here
and buy food abroad.” It was a
beautiful piece of logic. An explanation that explained. But it failed to
consider one thing. The food we
bought abroad did not feed all our
people here.
Our money-crops meant moneyincome for only about 209% of our
gainful workers. And if the 1939
Census figures give the facts, not
even that small portion was wallowing in wealth. They had a slightly
higher income than the ordinary foodcrop farmer, but even they had to
struggle below the “decency level"
of income. It seems that "money
crops" only meant that the farmers
grew the crops while the hacenderos
got the money.
And so we had the great mass
of our farmers unable to grow
enough food not only for the whole
nation, but also for their own consumption. The farmer’s meal consisted mainly of rice and, only seldom, of green vegetables. Once in
a while he could get a little dried
fish. That filled his stomach. But
he got a decept ve satisfaction. His
meal allayed his appetite without
satisfying his hunger. He suffered
from a blight that our modern nutrition experts call the “hidden
hunger" or malnutrition. His vitality was low. He became an easy
prey to tuberculosis.
This is the problem that confronts
our country—not so much of turning our backs on the raising. of export crops, but a problem of increasing our food production for the
health of our people. It is by no


AUGUST, 1950


47


means a simple problem. It involves
many things: greed and selfishness
of some landowners, maladjustment,
ignorance, failure of our leaders
to see the main roots of the evil. It
is a problem that has placed our
people in an unbearable situation
where men are hungry amidst plenty,
where people wallow in poverty while
the country teems with wealth.
To this problem we have a solution. It may not be the whole solution, the "wonder drug” that will
cure all the ills of this country. But
it may solve the greater part of our
problem. It is certainly the cure
that will make possible the application of further cures. This solution,
this cure ds science.
Within the past few decades,
science has made tremendous advances. In agriculture, it has developed
methods of producing from the land
yields that Malthus never dreamed
of when he formulated his famous
laws.
Science has amassed a wealth of
knowledge on plant growth, crop rotation, fertilization, irrigation, plant
genetics, the combatting of plant diseases, vitamins and human nutrition. These items are now common headings in every agricultural
manual.
Add to this treasury of knowledge
the invaluable assistance that the
Food and Agriculture branch of the
United Nation offers, and you have
a potent force indeed. In the Food
and Agriculture Organization, we
have not only an up-to-date source
of technological development, but an
army of experts prepared to render their aid in solving our problems.
In the words of its Director-General, Norris E. Dodd, the program
of the Food and Agriculture Organization is one "of help for self
48


help. The FAO can only help us help
ourselves; therefore, the main job
still rests on our own people. —And
this brings us back to "our" problem.
The Philippines has the technical
men who possess a wealth of scientific knowledge. They can lay the
groundwork for a more complete
solution to our country’s paradox of
hunger amidst plenty. We have right
here in our country agricultural experts and nutritionists who are recognized in their particular fields by
scientists abroad.
But they are strangely ignored here.
ME HAVE the men who hold in
their hands the cure for our
country’s ills. But it is one thing
to have the cure. It is another
thing to apply it.
For the real heart of our problem is to bring the remedy to the
wound and let it do its work; to
bridge the gap between our knowledge and the ignorance of our farmers; to carry our light into their
darkness; to convince them of the
superiority of modern farming over
their crude methods; to free our
farmer from the slavery of custom
and introduce an innovation.
That is no casy task. The Filipino is by nature a conservative
man. He hates novelties. Old institutions, even though crude and
wasteful, become comfortable for
him. He looks with a skeptic’s eye
upon any change.
This skepticism has been strengthened by a blunder of a few years
back. The government, sensing the
need for instruction of farmers in
modern agricultural methods, sent
for some American technologists to
demonstrate here methods that had
been successful in the United States.
After much cajoling and begging
“  "


the government did succeed in securing an audience to witness what
turned out to be a miserable failure.
The reason for the failure? There
were not enough data on soil and
climatic conditions in the particular
region where the demonstration was
held. So the whole experiment succeeded not in breaking the crust of
our farmer’s skepticism, but in hardening it into solid armor.
The main job of science is to
pierce that armor. As an apostle
of progress and prosperity, the
scientist must go to the farmer to
preach his creed. The task needs
men and money. But it must be
done if we are to feed our people.
It needs a large organization of
specially trained men with a full
grasp not only of the methods of
agricultural science but also of the
psychology of our farmers. It needs
equipment: research laboratories
for gathering data on soil and
climatic conditions in particular regions, for development of suitable
crop varieties, and cultivation methods. The Burcau of Plant Industry has experiment stat-ons in some
provinces, but there are not enough
of them. And the few that there
are, are poorly manned and inadequately equipped. The indoctrination of our farmers must be more
extensive and more organized. It
must also originate from sources
very close to the farmer himself.
In this we can take a cue from
the extension work of the United
States Department of Agriculture
which has succeeded in placing at
the disposal of farmers all the way
from lowa to Kentucky the agricultural knowledge and information
coming out from departmental and
state experiment stations. In remote
corners of American rural regions,
agricultural science is being trans

lated into fields lush with grain and
vegetables, into dairy farms—into
food for a hungry world.
QUR FIRST step will be to form
an organization of research scientists, engineers, practical technologists, geologists, metcorologists,
soil experts, chemists as well as social
scientists to study the all-around
conditions of our farmers and their
farms.
Then they will divide the country
into regions based on soil, climate
and terrain conditions. Careful
study of each individual region will
determine the precise method of
crops and small industries best
suited for each region. It will also
reveal the possibilities for irrigation
and power projects.
After such a study, then the field
workers can be sent out armed with
the findings of the research
scientists. They will set up processing stations where the farmers of
each region will be instructed in the
methods and crops that will redound
to the greatest benefit of the farmers themselves as well as the rest
of the nation. In order to break
through the armor of skepticism that
our farmers have donned, the instructions must take the form of actual field demonstrations.
While this is going on, other government agencies will have negotiated
for cheap fertilizers, tools, power
plants and crop loans to enable the
farmers to put into practice their
new-learned knowledge.
Seeds developed in the research
stations will be distributed on casy
payment plans. Livestock, dairy
cows, pigs and poultry, all of special
strains developed in government
breeding stations, will provide for
the deficiencies in the farmer’s diet
as well as for the enrichment of the
soil.


AUGUST, 1950


49


The social scientists can also come
in to promote the spirit of cooperation and mutual help. This should
dispose the farmers to band together for the construction of common
irrigation systems for which the
engineers have laid out plans, and
for the establishment of tractor
pools, purchase of common harvesting
machines and devices to provide for


cheap electrical power.
This country with its manifold
natural wealth could be the paradise
of the Orient, if we could only
bridge the gap that lies between our
scientific knowledge and the potentialities of our country.
And the choice is clear: to bridge
that gap... or starve.


Last Song
By MAXIMO SOLIVEN, A. B. '51
May there be no grieving, no sadness,
Only a poignant rueOnly your face in the starlight,
Only the voice of you,
And deep in its lilt remembered
Each little joy we knew:
Hours that we shared together
Never to come again,
Only a restless longing
Never a note of pain;
Only the memories embered
And the wecping of the rain.
I must not gricve, my dearest,
Yet the teardrops start
For the pathways wind before us,
And our pathways part;
And, oh, the storm is closing
About my lonely heart.


50


“  "


THE CARDINAL


By HENRY MORTON ROBINSON
Simon and Shuster, 1950


YO Catholic novel published this year can possibly match the widespread
Npublicity and fanfare of The Cardinal, a vast, colorful story about the
Church. Like most fiction destined for the best-seller lists, the book bears
an impressive plot which recounts the inspiring carcer of a gifted clergyman’s rise to the cardinalate. It is robust with characters and places of
the eventful era of the gaudy twenties and the two world wars, replete
with the pageantry of ecclesiastical life; there is pathos and sympathy, human interest and drama in the unwieldy sub-plots and cpisodes — all narrated in an evenly vigorous style.
Born of hard-working Boston-Irish parents, courageous, virile Stephen
Fermolye returns from his ordination in Rome to America where a great
harvest and bright promise lie in store. He fulfills his manifold tasks
as curate of a suburban parish, resourceful pastor of a rural flock, and
capable secretary to a Cardinal. From then on, Steghen’s candor, efficiency and good-will win the Pope’s favor to engage him as a Vatican diplomat,
until, to crown his priestly life, he becomes a wearer of the Red Hat.
Through countless vicissitudes, Stephen Fermoyle’s character unfolds,
"seasoned by reality", into the “ripe product of religious faith, spiritual
discipline, and intellectual energy.” His is an admirable composite of solid
Amcrican common sense, Irish determination, and universal Christian temper. And his high ideals do not exclude him from the harsh verities of
life as he wades through treacherous waters to grapple with ignorance,
human foibles, and deceit in some of the most trying places: an illiterate
French-speaking community, a violence-ridden Southern state, a seething
Boston underworld. Not spared from the coils of temptation, Stephen’s
heroism shines through defeats and momentary disillusionment. However,
his trust in God goads him on to act always, finally, as a compassionate
and thoroughly human priest.
“Neither propaganda for nor against the Church,” The Cardinal makes
much out of the ample material its subject affords. In the words of Mr.


AUGUST, 1950


51


Robinson, one-time editor of Reader's Digest, “the ecclesiastical life offers
the novelist a genuine challenge in a much neglected field.” With the zeal of
a miner who has discovered precious ore, the author vividly depicts the complicated functions of the Church and its world-wide influence with an air of
authenticity. In passing, it briskly runs over the significant voice of a rocksolid Church in such controversial issues of modern society as birth control, separation of Church and State, racial prejudice, craniotonomy, and
psychoanalysis. It succinctly documents historical data, like the Wall Street
Crash and the friction of the Vatican and Mussolini, between chapters of a
novel that is seldom dull.
But what keeps The Cardinal from being a first-rate novel is its very
impartiality; the book is objectively told, without much of the apparent
conviction that does justice to a great subject. Although far from approaching the heretical, the impression it gives is that the author’s knowledge of
his faith is embarrassingly scanty. Mr. Robinson never probes deep enough
bengath the surface grandeur of the Catholic religion nor captures the
Spirit of the Church, as evidenced in Stephen Fermoyle’s celebration of his
first Mass. In one instance, Dom Arcibal, the eloquent retreat-master, in
solving Stephen’s spiritual difficulties, actually uses the inane language
of Freud.
As a fictional tale, the novel is too cluttered with people for the author
to indulge in character development and provide sufficient motives for their
actions. In spite of the morass, some saintly and some down-to-earth
characters carry more than a whiff of reality. Among these are the
ship captain Orselli, "Dollar Bill" Monaghan, and Father Frank Ronan.
Even the style, to readers of critical tastes, may seem too ingenuous though
deeply absorbing in descriptive detail.
Judging it from standards of fiction best sellers, The Cardinal has
much to lift it above the common state. As such, it may well be a
literary tour de force to encourage future probing of a challenging theme.
If we have here no distinguished piece of art, we certainly have delectable
reading fare designed for week-end readers clamoring for a novel that is
not notably profound nor heavily "significant.”
EMMANUEL TORRES, A. B. '53


-O


POINT OF NO RETURN


By JOHN P. MARQUAND
Little, Brown, 1949
PHARLEY GRAY, the hero of John P. Marquand’s latest novel, had
Oeverything he needed to live in comfort. He was energetic, intelligent,
decently brought up, and well admired in social and business circles. He
had a devoted wife, owned a car and a thirty-thousand-dollar house in
Sycamore Park, and held a respectable position in one of Manhattan’s distinguished banks. Besides, both he and Nancy were members of an elite
country club. But a ruthless craving to, do better ruled their lives. At


52


“  "


the moment, a vice-presidency lay open for one of two rival contenders,
Charley and Roger Blakesley, both equally able in the eyes of Bank president Anthony Burton. To the Grays, this opportunity meant increased
prominence, added security, a better house, and a reputable education for
their son. Beneath their anxiety, moreover, gnawed an obsession to beat
the Blakesleys and keep up with the Burtons.
And yet the Grays were dissatisfied with their material comforts.
Charley scorned the sham they were putting on to impress people, while
the hypocrisy and strain in the intense rivalry at the office began to rack
his nerves. Bored with sophistication and the shallow life of endless
cocktail parties, Charley sensed vaguely that something was missing beyond
upper-crust respectability.
The roots of discontent dug deep into Charley’s boyhood past. In his
hometown of Clyde, Massachusetts, there had always been a distinct demarcation between the middle and upper classes. When Charley Gray, who
lived in middle-class Spruce Street, fell helplessly in love with Jessica
Lovell of Aristocratic Johnson Street, everything seemed bound for tragedy
from the start. Charley decided to bridge the gap between the two streets
ny scaling the unstable ladder to financial success. With his father’s investments on the stock market paying staggering dividends, it looked as if
the Grays were going to “beat the system.” But the differences lay beyond talents and money; Charley had to cope with barriers of the Lovell
ancestry—which traced itself back to the Founding Fathers—and the snobbish code of the rich; and there remained irreconcilable social outlooks.
Charley and Jessica realized that their relationship was forbidden as long
as it had to be sanctioned by these standards, as long as pride and distrust stood in the way.
Revisiting Clyde years later, Charley became aware of the contentment
he could have had by being a small-town boy with sufficiently bright prospects. Beset by the pressure of adult competition and the corroding desire
for prestige and happiness, he felt he no longer wanted the worldly successes he had determined to attain; these were simply things beyond his
grasp, which he desired for that reason—but they were "not worth the
effort.” Integrity and self-respect were drowned in the welter of class
rivalry. Charley sensed he was bound to be the loser; but caught in the
midst of the struggle for the top, it was too late for him to turn back.
Now, regarded a "success" and in a position to marry the patrician daughter,
he discovered, ironically enough, that someone beneath his level had won
Jessica.
In Point of No Return, Marquand reveals what is wrong with the
typical middle-class American male confused by the "mores" and “haves"
of society, in the tense often disgusting fight for the pinnacle of worldly
success. But it also represents a scathing picture of modern life with its
absurd conventions and its rejection of Christian values. In this century of
the mass-man, the social code seems to measure the individual not accord

AUGUST, 1950


53


ing to his spiritual worth, but in terms of dollars, assets and bonds. And
the disease which corrupts Charley Gray’s system is the urge to enhance
personal happiness by accumulating more wealth, as if money could substitute for the spiritual values that really matter. The result, Marquand
observes, is a feeling of inadequacy and guilt. Although the author gives
no naive answer, he implicitly shows the mainsprings that make his characters permeated with a discomforting emptiness: there is no substantial
philosophy that bolsters the motives of the Grays and the lives they touch.
God is conspicuously absent.
What renders Marquand’s pessimism duly significant are the moral
overtones that ring throughout the book. The pursuit of happiness and
the advancement of personal welfare, Marquand recognizes, are strong inherent drives in man as a social being; but without the firm moral fiber
which religion affords, dissipation and suicide seem but logical recourses
when disillusionment sets in. Like the sad prototypes of T. S. Eliot’s “The
Hollow Men," the characters in Marquand’s novel are far from discovering
God.
Point of No Return stands out from among the mass of contemporary
fiction for its timely import. It is at once a subtile satire and a grim warning on modern living with the town of Clyde as its microcosm; and no author
since Sinclair Lewis in Main Street has given a more probing cross-section
of American life than Marquand does in this book. But here the similarity
ends: whereas Lewis’ characters are so blisteringly ridiculed as to approach
mere caricatures, Marquand’s Charley Gray and Jessica Lovell are real,
credible people. Even Charley’s man-of-the-worldish father and the redoubtable Laurence Lovell evoke sympathy from the reader which Lewis’s
Babbitts and Elmer Gantrys do not. This is probably because Lewis does
not evince genuine regard for his characters or Christian charity in his
themes, but Marquand does.
If only for this virtue, Point of No Return is a great book. It may
not jolt readers as Main Street did a generation ago; but it has something
in common with the work of a great satirist like Evelyn Waugh, as manifested in the pseudo-scientific interpretation of human society which Marquand puts in the mouth of Malcolm Bryant, by dividing it into npper-upper,
middle-upper, upper-middle, etc. At best it will startle the moral consciousness and start readers identifying themselves with its characters.
But precisely where, readers will ask, is the beauty in this book? Just
as in Marquand’s Pulitzer Prize-winning Late George Apley and So Little
Time, Father Harold Gardiner, outspoken AMERICA critic, comments:
“...It is in the wistful gropings of the rootless characters,... in the whole
poignant contrast... which lurks in every page—the contrast between what
these huddled people actually are and what, as human beings, they could
have been. There is beauty; the beauty of the potentiality of the human
soul, unrealized, frustrated... but still fundamentally and eternally there.”
EMMANUEL TORRES, A. B. '53


54


  "


wantea. A wite


mHE subject of this survey is a
Iclass of 47 senior students who
were asked to specify the qualities
they would desire in a marriage
partner. Whether this group of
students represents a cross-section of
the entire college has not been determined. If marks are an accurate
gauge of intelligence, then this class
is above average (25% of the class
are honor students, which represents
44% of the honor students in the
entire college). On the other hand,
this class contains almost all character types. It has bespectacled wisps of
stammering intellectuality and handsome hunks of unabashed inanity.
It has young boys (17 years old) and
not-too-young men (4 feet, 9 inches).


It has the adored basketball star
(receives a daily average of a dozen fan letters during the season)
and the unblushing genius who
talks to h.mself through the mirror
(reason: nobody else is intellectual
enough to talk to). It has, too, the
average and the unspectacular, they
who provide the “solid citizen" backdrop for the more sensational (and
pedaliar) personalities.
In this class of 47 students, 79%
mentioned that the girl of their
choice should be of the same religious bellef, or, more specifically,
be a Catholic. This and similar figures do not mean that the remaining 216% who did not mention religion are indifferent to this all im

55



AUGUST, 1950


portant consideration. For them,
identity of religious conviction was
to be taken for granted. However,
the fact that a majority explicitly
mentioned religious belief and spiritual character significantly shows
the frame and the focus of mind of
the group as a whole. The wife-tobe should be (to quote verbatim),
“Religious without being fanatical",
or "A practical Catholic who knows
how and loves to pray," or, more
sternly, “One who agrees 99.97%
with my philosophy of life" and,
finally, “One who can help me and
our children attain our final destiny."
The next set of figures merely reasserts the well established fact that
one of the surest ways to a man’s
heart is through his stomach. Seventy-eight percent would first inquire,
before popping the question, whether
the little woman knows home-making and loves home life. One asserts
rather bluntly, "I’d like her to be at
home in the kitchen. A logician concluded that beauty and good cooking
do not go in one neat package, and,
having decided which was more important, wrote, “She must be the
homely type.” "Preferably a college
major in Home Economics," mentioned another, smacking his lips. This
should provide enough cue for the
“have-you-read-the-latest?'
ladies
to shift from the literary to the
culinary arts.
Under the more elusive heading of
social and personal charm, 667%
voiced their desires in various ways.
With amazing foresight and in seeming preparation for a big family, one
said, "She must still take care of her
looks and womanly bearing after our
tenth child." Another is not so fastidious, "She should be fairly presentable and sociable. Almost all agreed
on the wife’s belng, "Neat and chic
enough to make me feel proud of her
56


and be a gay companion," and her
being able to give "occasional small
"T
parties," but, cautioned somebody.
do not intend to start up a hotel or a
cafeteria.
The next set of figures springs
quite a surprise. Twenty-five per
cent do not mention good looks and
the 75% who do are rather modest
in their desires. To quote one man,
who seems to be a victim of clashing
uncertainties, "She must be beautiful at least a bit.” Another more
keenly, "She must have a face that
not only a mother can love.” The
next one must have horrifyingly seen
his sweetheart an hour before their
Saturday date and wisely admonishes, "She must be a lady whose features are not repulsive at any time
(italics mine) of day or night.”
Their rather modest aspirations are
not flattering to the Filipina. On the
other hand, it is most reassuring to
think that after years of training in
Logic, Cosmology and Ontology, the
student can fearlessly gaze upon his
sweetheart’s face, so homely that pigeons roost on her head, and softly
whisper, “Conscious of the difference
between the essential and the accidental, will you be my wife?”
Liking for children is important,
according to 55%. She who will be
taken must "know how and love to
care for our children.” Another
wants a poetic wife: “To her, children are not little imps but bundles
from heaven.
For this proud class (and prideful
class, since one member writes this
article—Ed.) it is not surprising
that 629% want a fairly intelligent
and fairly well-educated wife. She
must have "lots of common sense and
a fairly high I.Q., says one. Another is not so ambitious: “She must
know what is going on, — he will
lean perhaps, on the decisive test of
her ability to count her fingers. Still
“  "


another will have a difficult search;
"Not too much like me in intelligence,
just a bit dumber, perhaps."
A minority of 117% stated the age
preferred, each usually desiring her
to be younger than himself, while
67% (probably dwarfs) specified the
height. A student who will soon be
seen with a tape measure said, "She
must be 5 feet, 3 inches.
Probably having experienced difficulty in distinguishing between the
fair and the masculine sex, 15%
wrote that they desired femininity in
their future partners. One beautifully wrote, "I want a woman who is
intensely feminine, someone who is so
tender and sweet that she will need
someone to take care of her and yet
in whose very tenderness and sweetness I find encouragement and
strength.
Forty-five per cent emphasized honesty and frankness. "She must have
honesty, which includes modesty.
This is a rare thing among women
but a quality which I must have in
my wife.” Considerateness, which includes kindness, thoughtfulness and
understanding rated 62% while 19%
were interested in the affability of
"in-laws.
Twenty-one per cent disliked the
over-possessive and nagging woman.
Also 21% explicitly mentioned that
she must be “unsullied, clean and
pure.” Again, here it cannot be inferred that the 79% are indifferent;
rather they have, for the most part,
taken purity for granted.
Surprisingly enough, only 110%
stated the need for a perusal of the
girl’s bank account before taking her
to the altar. Could it be that this,
too, is taken for granted? (Or are
all of us just too, too rich to be bothered?)
What can be concluded from the
results of this survey? For one thing
it is significant that so many should
explicitly require a marked degrec


of holiness in their marriage partner.
With an inspired pen, one wrote, "I
want to get married to a saint, for I
believe that they are the most beautiful and the happiest people to get
along with. I want a smiling saint,
a saint with a contagious laughter
and a delicious sense of humour.
Having the above passage in mind,
the general modesty in the manner
in which they expressed the physical
qualities of their future wives—
"beautiful a bit," or “pretty enough
to ease troubles, —attains great significance. It points to an understanding of correct values. It points to a
realization of fundamentals.
In resume, we find that the students in this senior class are not
very hard to please, considering the
fact that the lady they describe is
their ideal for a future life partner.
A moderately intelligent and practical Catholic girl, “beautiful a bit,"
and, fairly sociable and presentable,"
could easily lead the average young
man of this class to repeat with her
(lucky girl) eternal vows of love.
An afterthought touches two related questions. Do the students actually seek the qualities they have written down? And if they do seek those
qualities, how successful have they
been? To the first question, the author’s personal observation is that
they actually do. He has observed
within his own circle of friends that
charm, companionability and unspoiled simplicity are more highly prized
than mere physical attractiveness.
The second question can not now be
answered. Whether the student (probably a midget) who wrote, “She
should want a little white house,
with a little green roof, a little green
lawn and a little white fence around
it,” will actually find and marry the
complicated lady of his chaice, another survey, to be conducted ten
years from this date, will give the
answer.


AUGUST, 1950


57


UR team, good or bad! and fortunately it is a good team. It is not fifteen
O players and one coach. It is one team. On the court are all the six
talons of the Eagle—the five players and the orders of the coach. This
liaison, powerful for any team, has been evident in the tune-up games. Coach
Roco may have censured his players for mistakes but not for disregard of
orders.
Again, this year our team is a fighting one. In all the practice games,
the team played hard from the beginning, through every minute of the four
quarters, to the end. Encouraging indeed. By using one of our mightiest
weapons — the fighting spirit—throughout the game, the team becomes a
real threat to any opponent.
Rafael Roco has divided the team into two well-knit quintets and the
substitutes. Neither quintet is the first team or the second team all the
time. In one quintet, which we may call the "Wings” of the Eagle, the coach
has: Federico Campos, Oscar Batallones, Roberto Garcia, Jose Ma. Cacho
and Antonio Gaston with Luis Lorenzo as substitute for pivot-man Garcia.
In the other quintet which we may call the “Talons" of the Eagle, the
coach has: Alfredo Javelosa, Jose Estella, Luis Lorenzo, Casto Madamba
and Rafael Santos with Olegario Orbeta as substitute for either guard. Orbeta, with his experience, is in fact general utility substitute, attached permanently to neither of these quintets but often seeing more action than any
of their regular members.
These two quintets, each powerful in its own way, solve the problem of
inadequate reserves. Because both quintets have undergone a certain amount
of physical training, a wise method of putting in and taking out players will
assure a never-tired Atenco playing team. And with his two units, Rafael
Roco does not have to field a quintet haunted by ill-luck.
The “Wings” is the fastest Atenco quintet since the war. With this
speed coach Roco has taken hold of lightning and turned in into an obedient fast-break play. He is not a hard master, though. He allows his
little lightning bolts to put on a deceptive slow run-around game for a few
seconds and then suddenly let loose one of the bolts in the direction of the
goal for another two points.
Teamwork is at least effort to execute a play and the absence of "buaya”
attempts. The “Wings” teamwork includes a thorough knowledge of each
other’s playing habits, immediate detection by all players of the first sign
of any prepared set or pattern play, and quick coordinated decision and ac

58


  '


tion in any unforeseen situation as in an interception. This is the brand
of teamwork learned from Coach Roco and put at his disposal by the five
lightning bolts.
The speed, teamwork, shooting power (which is a flapping 50% average), cleverness, and stamina of the "Wings” and the new rule widening
the key-hole or three-seconds area around the basket, will be an even match
for the seasoned veterans of rival teams. Cleverness, however, should not
be mistaken for experience and the energy of the lightning bolts, at their
rate of speed, should be mostly gone from the sagging "Wings” of the
Eagle by the third straight quarter.
Also, the "Wings” is a short team. Consequently, it will find the
man-to-man defense of very tall experienced opponents almost insurmountable, almost. Against a zone-defense manned by skyscrappers our two forwards and center will have to use stilts for the rebound.
On their own defensive tactics this eaglet-sized quintet will suffer many
headaches. If they use a zone defense, the two forwards cannot stop tall
opponents from taking near set shots. The two guards are in trouble when
they encounter tall forwards who specialize in side-shots, like Lauro Mumar. The pivot-man should somehow stop the opponent’s tall center from
executing a center-play.
Two faults the "Wings" have. When playing against man-to-man the
lightning bolts disregard screening and depend solely on their speed. Screening is important because the other alternative—cutting—is not very effective against seasoned players. With speed a lightning-bolt may get
ahead of this guard in a race to the basket, but to aim he must take one
extra moment which his guard need not. Speed may work but it isn’t safe.
Screening is still the best attack against a man-to-man defense. And screening greased with speed is a coach’s dream.
Then, too, in the same play against a man-to-man defense the "Wings”
boys have a tendency to clog the key-hole area, so that when one of the
lightning bolts is let loose, he still has to dribble past three guards. If
the area were free, once one of the five shakes loose from his guard, with
his speed he has a running chance to make two valuable points.
The “Wings” will keep the Eagle flying and the “Talons” will tear
the opponent apart. The three-barelled "shootin' iron" of the "Talons":
Luis Lorenzo, Jose Estella, and Alfredo Javelosa, will keep every rival
team jumping. A zone defense against the “Talons" would be practically
vain. The forward line can shoot in or out of a zone, and only half-worry
over retrieving the ball—they shoot so accurately. A whole worry would be
better here, of course. Still, the wealth of experience of the three forwards
should outflank the opponent.
The “Talons" have at least fighting height. The forward line is still
short but the speed of "Poch” the aggressiveness of Javelosa, and “Moro”
who can reach the goal when he has a mind to, should give skyscrapers
even match. Then, the height of Madamba, the skill of “Chua", and the
power of “Ole” will take care of the defense.


AUGUST, 1950


59


The teamwork of the “Talons” is a web between the two forwards and
center with the two guards bringing up the supply, covering the attack, and
ready for any counter-attack.
“Bringing the ball in" is the ability of the guards to bring the ball
to the forward line where and when it is needed. There is a definite lack
of this ability in the rear-line of the “Talons” Sometimes Lorenzo has to
heip the guards in this job and this keeps our keenest eye from his favorite shooting area.
Like the “Wings” the “Talons” have neglected screening. The experience of the forward line and of Santos and Orbeta should be able to
perform screening plays against a man-to-man defense. How delightful to
imagine what would result if Lorenzo, Estella, and Javelosa could consistently get free for an unguarded shot!
One peculiar fault of the “Talons” is the lack of a change of pace.
This quality is not easy to acquire. The "Wings” possesses it to some extent but not in every game. With screening and a change of pace the
“Talons" could tear apart practically every team in the NCAA.
This is our team. True, it is not perfect, but also true, none of the
postwar NCAA champions have been perfect.
ROBERT WILSON, A.B. '52


60


  


No. 2
1950


Vol. II,
October,


InL HILLo AUARIEREN


THE CONTENTS


EDITORIALS
Page
Reform er Revolution .......... .. . . . . . . .. .. .. . . . . . . . . . .. M.V.S. 3
Our Catholic-Mindedness .............................. A.P.G.M. 5


ESSAYS
The Story of Writing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... Eduardo D. Lachica
The Soul of the Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hector L. Hofilena
The Dissection of a Teacher’s Heart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pablo Silva Jr.
SHORT STORIES
The Cicadas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Antonio P. G. Manuud
The Mountain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Maximo V. Soliven
Escort of the Queen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Alfredo Tengco
VERSE
To Our Lady . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Percival Olarte
Bugles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Maximo V. Soliven
Two Views . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Meliton V. Salazar
To Cords . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Percival Olarte
The Rain ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ernesto G. Roceles
Wishing Well . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Leonidas V. Benesa
Rain Song . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Onofre Pagsanghan
FEATURES
Drama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Carmelo Quintero, Emmanuel Torres
Campus . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Enrique Esquivel Jr.
BookS .................................. ... Ricardo Henson
The Arena ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Robert Wilson


12
26
32


6
20
28


11
15
18
19
27
30


33


16
24
31
34


THE STAFF


Editor-in-Chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51
Managing Editors .... . . . . .. ......... ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B. '51
ANTONIO G. MANUUD, A.B. '52


SECTION EDITORS
Robert Wilson, A.B. '52
Engique Esquivel Jr.. A.B. '51
Gabino Mendoza, A.B. '53
Hector Hofilena, A.B. '51
Emmanuel Torres, A.B. '53
Leonidas V. Benesa, A.B. '52
Carmelo P. Quintero, A.B. '53
Gregorio C. Brillantes, Litt. B. '52
Ernesto Gorospe, A.B. '53


ASSOCIATE EDITORS


Francisco Borja, A.B. '51
Hector Quesada, A.B. '51
Ricardo Henson, Litt. B. '52
Eduardo D. Lachica, Litt. B. '52
Business Manager .............
Circulation Managers ..........


Rodolfo Olivares, A.B. '51
Jorge Lorredo, Jr., Litt. B. '52
Percival Olarte, A.B. '52
Guillermo V. Soliven, A.B. '53


JOSE L. SANTOS, A.B. '51
RAYMUNDO SAYO, A.B. '51
MANUEL M. ROXAS, A.B. '52


  , a literary magazine, is published four times annually
by tne Colicse ef Arts and sciences ot the Atenco de Mamia, les editoral ornces
are at the Ateneo de Manila, Padre Fsura Street. Manila, Philippines: its publication
office at M. Colcol &e Co.. 878 Rizal Ave., Manila. Subscription rates are four pesos
yearly, single copies one peso.
This publication was entered in the Post Office of Manila as second class mailing
matter on September 10, 1949.


2


“  


REFORM OR REVOLUTION?
WHEN Sixto K. Roxas (who was Editor of last year’s Columbia
Award winning “Quarterly" and is now Editor of the official organ of the Federation of Free Workers) stood before the
Ateneo student body on September lIth to plead the case of
Labor and “The Free Worker" he wasn’t talking
Treachery
through his hat. Sixto Roxas knows what he’s
and
talking about. He knows that here in the PhilipInjustice
pines, all the fine political speeches to the contrary notwithstanding, Labor is getting a raw deal. And Labor is
getting tired of being pushed around — Labor is beginning to
be irked by the chains of economic subjection. Someday the suppressed discontent, the smouldering bitterness nourished by acts
of violence and treachery and injustice on the part of an unscrupulous minority who hold money and power, may explode into
open revolt.
What is the plight of the working man in our country today? We find him being exploited on two sides: by the unjust
Employer and by the mercenary or spurious Labor Union.
For the present, let’s look at our Labor Union situation.
Ever since the coming of the machine age, with its tendency to
despoil human personality and human labor as
Spotlight
mere material factors of production, working
on
men have found that unless they unite they canUnionism
not bargain effectively with the management of
Industry to secure just wages, shorter working
hours, better working and living conditions and a guarantee of
their rights and privileges. Labor recognized, therefore, the
urgent need of Labor Unions as a means of bargaining collectively for Social Justice within an economic set-up in which Capitalism would naturally hold the upperhand.


OCTOBER, 1950


3


When our National Assembly, on November 21, 1936, passed
Commonwealth Act No. 213 “to define and regulate legitimate
labor organizations", our Assemblymen hoped, alThe
truistically perhaps, that they had made the way
Tragic
clear for the organization of Labor into efTruth
fective Unions. Today, fourteen years after the
passage of that law, their hope has failed to materialize. It is true that there are a great many Labor Unions
registered with the Department of Labor. But, unfortunately,
most of these Unions are spurious. They, too often, are not
formed for the benefit of Labor but are (1) organized for political purposes; (2) are Company Unions used to counteract
existing Unions or prevent the organization of a legitimate Labor
Union; (3) formed for private financial profit or (4) Communistled and dominated.
—The National Confederation of Trade Unions, for instance,
was organized by Under-Secretary of Labor Figueras who became
and still is Chairman of the Confederation. Is
Some
it or is it not a political Union? And what about
Questions ..
the Union de Obreros y Estivadores de Filipinas, the U.O.E. F., which in cooperation with the
Luzon Stevedoring Company is trying to gain control of the harbor area? It boasts a membership of about 75,000 and yet has
reportedly never held an election or had its accounts audited. The
controversial Congress of Labor Organizations, with leaders Balgos, Capadocia and Saulo now either in hiding or in the field
with the Huks, cannot successfully conceal the fact that it is
at least Communist-led if not dominated.
In the face of oppression by unfair management or betrayal
by spurious Labor Organizations, what do we expect our working
men to do? The seeds of resentment are being
A Violent
sown and we may stand to reap the harvest of
Harvest?
violence.
Do we speak like Communists? Do we speak
too strongly? Where the Communist advocates revolution and
force, we propose reform and reconciliation. We ask that our
Labor Unions be reorganized into real associations of working
men, honestly seeking the betterment of wages and the conditions of employment through collective bargaining with Management. We ask that Management give the working man a chance
to earn a decent living wage, to be regarded as a human being
with an innate dignity and sacred rights, not a mere tool or instrument of production.
These things we ask in the name, not of Charity, but of
Justice! If just reform is rejected, we ourselves pave the path
to revolution. — M. V. S.


4


"  


OUR CATHOLIC-MINDEDNESS


IN the face of rising Communism to the north, just how strong
is Philippine Catholicity?
Very recently, a local theater tried to gauge
Catholic
this strength of our Catholicity with the exhibiInaction?
tion, one after the other, of films that were blatant in their indecency and lewdness. The resultant reaction in Catholic circles, although prompt, was nevertheless inadequate and would seem to indicate either of two things:
first, that there is no such thing as Catholic strength in this
country....or second, that there is indeed such strength but
that it is rendered ineffective by the internecine influence of what
has been called “retired" or “liberal” Catholicism.
We choose to believe that the latter conclusion is much
closer to the truth. There is a sufficient number of Catholic
Catholics who are united, at least in the convicUnited
tion that something must be done about the morAt Least
al looseness which was a regressive resultant of
the last war....and it is said that where there
is union, there is strength.
This, however, does not cover up for the fact that there are
also many "liberal-minded” Catholics who, when faced with concrete issues, become suddenly apologetic. “Sure, I go to Mass,
but I am also broad-minded.” Or again, “Why condemn such
and such a movie — don’t we see the same kind of pictures in
the magazines? Come, come, let us not be bigots....
Are we to make the magazines our norm of morality, then?
Is it God or the magazine-publisher who establishes the Natural
Law?
Evidently, many here, in these Catholic Philippines, judge
that it is the magazine-publisher or the movie-exhibitor or the
corporation head who is the true founder of
Modern Norms basic morality. To speak for fundamental deof Morality
cencies or for fundamental justice against the
mandates of any of these three is to open oneself to loud charges and open persecution. If that is the attitude
of so many in positions of prominence and influence, well, we
Filipinos may be Catholic, but are enough of us Catholic-minded?


The thunderclouds loom close, dangerously close, from the
north. The next lightning flash may shatter our Philippine sky.
Will a Catholicism that has the flaw of compromise running
through it be tough enough to weather the storm? — A. P. G. M.


OCTOBER, 1950


Waiting in the cold Sierra Madre darkness
for the Constabulary men, Baste listened
to the peaceful music of ...


The Cicadas
By ANTONIO P. G. MANUUD, A.B. '52


mHERE is a full moon tonight over
the Sierra Madre thickets. It
is Mune, late in the month, and the
slender agoho is now silver, now
black, even as the moon kisses the
sleeping earth and then sadly, haltingly veils its face in a mantle of
dim clouds. The eerie whirring of
the cicadas vie with the broken
croaking of frogs in the bamboofringed creeks. Theirs is a serenade to a sky that promises much
rain, but apart from the sleepy monotony of their orchestration, all else
is silence. All else is peace.
Peace? Deathly stillness, rather.
The type of ominous serenity that
precedes the onslaught of a violent
wind—and this, Baste knows only
too well. (For there are but two
of them covered with nipa leaves
and crouched behind the enormous
acacia; himself and the corporal
Mariano...alone in that outpost.
Only two of them, and soon, the
constabulary men, their backs loaded
down with provisions, will cut silently through the underbrush.
Baste keeps thinking of what will
happen then. He is not very old.
It is not good to kill. Fear cuts
deeply into his heart and during
the motionless periods of moonlight,
a beam falls on his thirty-year old
face—betraying little silver beads
of sweat rolling painfully down his
brow.


His breath is heavy and his alert
ear catches a footfall. No, it is
only the drumming of his heart.
He tries not to listen to it. His
eyes roll wildly in expectant attention. Bulging nervously. Silence.
Through his distended nostrils,
Baste sucks in the forest air, at
first hurriedly, then deeply, easily.
Now he allows the singing of the
cicadas to play upon his thoughts;
he knows of the nostalgic trances
one can fall into while listening to
the crickets' monotone. It is good
diversion. Perhaps, it will calm his
nerves.
It was also June—oh, so many
years back—when he first remembers listening to the cicadas. His
sister Paula was humming a balitaw over the earthen stove and his
mother scolded her very severely
because singing over a stove, according to the old people, would
make a girl sterile. And Baste remembers how he laughed long and
hard when Paula crossed herself in
fright. But that was long ago in
Dumangas, when his father was
Don Calixto’s capataz, when he himself was vaquero to Don Calixto’s
many heads of cattie. Then, on
moonlight nights, he would lie on
the broad back of his carabao Anuang, and with the crickets, he would
fill the air with silly music. There


6


"  "


was a song he liked to sing often.
It ran like this:
“Take a bath, you are beginning
to smell,
Take a bath, let us all bathe well."
And every time he would sing the
song, the woman Pascuala of Don
Calixto’s staff of servants would
chase him and Anuang down to the
river.
Ah, yes, Baste muses, the years
of boyhood are truly the best.
The years of boyhood with Jaime,
his best friend.
Baste remembers that one
afternoon they
fought over the
ownership of a
rice bunting’s

nest until they
were blue from
blows and until
they cried toge---
ther. And Baste also remembers that on E
P
the night fol —
lowing, he had

E
a stomach-ache,
for in his tiny
hed  a 
years, he kept
ER
thinking so
hard of the
 R 
rice bunting
and if it had already found its
lost nest—that he had indigestion.
The cicadas also sang on Sunday
mornings before the roosters would
crow. On Sundays, how his mother
would scold and pinch him in the
thigh if he did not wake up early!
There was the firc-wood to chop
for the breakfast meal. And the
one-kilometer walk to Liloan where
Padre Fernando would say Mass.
At Mass, Baste was impatient most


of the time, and while his sister
Paula was praying, he would toy
with her pigtails and his father
would look at him sharply and he
would sit up motionless on the hard
wooden bench until the Mass was
over.
One day, Padre Fernando, whom
everybody called Amay, gave Baste
a necklace, exactly like the one the
priest himself was wearing over his
white soutane. “Good boy, Sebastian, the padre smiled (he always
called Baste by his Christian name),
"I think you
are old enough
to pray to our

"Lady. Here,

wear this with
Ryou always.
And ask her to
make you a
a strong man like
your father."
“Yes, Amay,
r Baste nodded
with o pe n
mouth and eyes
fixed on the
 priest’s bearded face. “Yes,
Amay." Not

forgetting to
kiss the back
of the padre’s
—
hand, he mumApGra'salbled his thanks
and sped off to
join his parents and the other boys.
On the way home, he wore his prize
about his shoulders, very much the
braggart, while Jaime and the other
boys walked beside him, looking
every now and then at the rosary,
asking him questions about it.
To this day, Baste wears it around
his neck, not quite having learned
to pray it properly. But there is
one thing he knows about it. Padre
Fernando told him one day when


OCTOBER, 1950


7


he was a little older that the Gino-o,
nailed hand and foot to a cross,
died because of love. “That is God,
you know, Sebastian.” And Baste
could never understand why God
should die for love when the strong
est men of the barrio like Kulas and
Huseng and Carpio told the people
openly that the farmers were fools
not to hate and despise and condemn the whole family of land-owners like Don Modesto in the other
town and Don Calixto in Dumangas.
"Farmers of Dumangas,” they
would say, "you are fools and you
are blind if you do not force these
ricir dogs to treat you with more
fairness. You slave and you break
your backs over the soil while they
ride around in Manila with their
Cadillacs. For shame, do you not
realize that we, who till the land,
must own the land?” And the people, listening intently, would nod in
unison.
Baste could not understand that
sort of talk about hate, nor could he
understand the Amay’s talk about
love. Until much later...
Much later when the crickets were
singing what seemed to Baste a new
song. Much later in the bamboo
brakes by the Jalaud’s muddy banks.
Again it was June. Again the
moon was beautiful. For Baste,
everything was perfect. He had
grown up with a lot of loving, and
his man’s heart yearned for a mate
with whom to share that legacy....
a mate, perhaps, like Pascuala’s
daughter Basion—she who had dark,
straight hair which was kept in place
with a knot behind the neck. Baste
liked dark straight hair kept in
place by a knot behind the neck.
Basion could sing beautifully. Baste
liked music. He prided himself in
being Barrio Ila-Ud’s guitar expert.
With the help of Carlos and Doming
8


who could sing like the heroes of the
moving pictures, Baste would go beneath the little window of Basion’s
room and they three would wakeup
all the servants of Don Calixto
with their singing and guitar playing, while the dogs would bark and
howl and whine. The servants would
be very angry and especially Pascuala, the mother of Basion; but in
the fullness of time, Baste wooed
his dark-haired beauty some more,
won her, and finally, though with
much trouble, brought her before
Padre Fernando.
Don Calixto was in Ila-Ud for the
wedding of his vaguero and because
he was feeling big and happy, he
gave the couple a carabao. For her
part, Basion got a very special gift
from Don Calixto’s wife. When
girls got married in Ila-Ud, they
rented the modiste Tia Sayo’s white
evening gown, and after a few alterations, it would be worn to a
morning nuptial ceremony. But
Basion did not have to rent Tia
Sayo's much-used gown; Don Calixto’s wife gave her a terno that had
been used only once before at a
big society party — in the Manila
Hotel, perhaps. And the barrio
women eyed Basion half with envy,
half with awe...
Today, in Sierra Madre, Baste
remembers. Lying now in the darkness, with his body wet with sweat
and itching under the nipa palm
leaf, Baste tries hard to catch the
singing of the magic crickets from
the creck below for they now tell
of Baste’s happiest days in Ila-Ud—
days of laughter when he would
tease Basion because she was getting broad and buxom and muscular,
days of joyful tears when, after he
had given up hope that Basion
would recover from her first parturition, the doctor smiled and told
him that she would live, but frowned
“  "


and told him that his child had
died; days, indeed, of much living
and teasing and pinching.
How can Baste forget? A man
pounds rice with heavy pestle and
feels tired at the end of the day.
What better welcome need he expect than the warm smile and the
equally warm kiss of a dutiful wife
at homecoming? In his little nipa
castle overlooking the wide expanse
of rice paddies that was the hacienda
of Don Calixto, he would sit late
in the afternoons, fanning the perspiration from his muscular torso—
and Basion would cuddle close to
him. Together, hand clasped in
hand, heart knotted to heart, soul
bound to soul, they would silently
watch the sun’s sweeping swirls of
impasto on the western sky, and
slowly, scarlet death would claim
day, leaving Basion and Baste alone
with the darkness.
How can a man forget? Oh, but
he must; he must! For into his
private heaven of seemingly everlasting happiness, a man Mariano
forced himself with smiles and promises of a classless world.
"Listen to me, Baste,” he said.
“You deserve much more than what
you allow yourself to get. Why be
a martyr for a man who loves to
gamble and drink and flirt with
fat women in the night clubs of
Manila? You give him half of your
crops, but you ache in the back and
your muscles get painful while that,
that son of a...
"Don't say it, Mariano. Baste
has always been the one with the
conscience. "Don’t say it. I owe
Don Calixto many things. It is
ungrateful to think even of—well,
I owe him many things. That’s all."
“Yes,” hissed Mariano from behind his gold teeth. “Even your
soul," and smiling maliciously, "even


your woman.
Baste does not anymore remember
what he did to Mariano, but now in
the darkness, his eyes narrow as
he tries to think of it. Mariano
the corporal nudges Baste in the
ribs because Baste is muttering a
curse under his breath. Mariano
the corporal. The same Mariano
the malcontent. But Baste represses his emotions; the constabulary
may be in the vicinity now.
Baste, true, does not remember
what happened then to Mariano but
it is a fact that Mariano no longer
has his gold teeth. And one thing
Baste remembers. Although Mariano then left him alone, Baste knew
deep down inside of him that life
would no longer be the same; the
man Mariano had planted the seed
of hate in a heart that from boyhood yielded love alone. The man
Mariano...
Why do the cicadas stop singing?
Where is their magic whirring?
Only once before did Baste bend an
ear for the enchanted monotone and
heard it not. That was the night
he came home from Don Calixto’s
house. He had gone all the way to
town to speak with the hacendado,
and he was on his way home now.
He had asked if it were possible for
him to obtain a bigger share in the
harvest since Basion and he were
expecting a child soon. And Don
Calixto, who had always lived in
mortal fear of Pulajanes or Reds,
as he called them, Don Calixto who
had apparently been fighting with
his wife, Don Calixto who had been
in a very black mood, had rashly
told him that he was assigning half
of the land Baste was tilling to the
new tenant Alberto. The disbelief
that accompanied Baste’s thoughts
on the way home was augmented by
the discovery that Basion had fallen
from the third rung of the shaky


OCTOBER, 1950


9


bamboo steps to their house.
The tender poignancy of those
few hours when Baste rushed
his half-conscious wife to a doctor
all comes back to him in the cold and
lonely shadows of the agoho and
the acacia. The doctor told him to
forget the fee and Baste was thankful. The doctor was a learned
man. He had gone to the university
in Manila before he came to Ila-Ud
and he even knew a little of the
law and he said he would help Baste get a lawyer and he did. Don
Calixto would have to pay for injustice. Indeed, Don Calixto did
pay—and he paid well—for more
injustice, the commitment of graver
wrongs. There were such things
as bribes and influence and power,
and with these things, the doctor
Sixto Tupas and the lawyer Luis
Quintos and the abused man Baste
did not reckon. Litigation was
long in coming, the waiting was
long....two months, three months,
six, seven, nine. And when time finally came for Baste to appear in
court, he heard a great deal of
strange language—wherefores and
whereases and inasmuches, precedents and rulings and objections—
all legal verbiage, all very confusing. For Baste, the words meant
hardly anything clear. 'For Baste,
the decision only meant the death
of his wife Basion—she, who through
the months, worried in the hospital
bed about her husband no less than
he worried everywhere about her.
That was the end of all his loving,
and in a sense, that was the end
of all his living.
Padre Fernando was beside him
at the cemetery, but Baste could not
hear, would not hear the Amay
saying, “There are crosses we must
bear through life, even as He bore
the Cross of Love. Calvary lives
10


today in every human heart—some
people reach the summit; others
sink after the first fall."
The man Mariano was beside Baste
that same afternoon. "I am joining the Army of the Liberation of
Oppressed Peasants. The Day is
coming. If you want to come with
me, I shall meet you by Bancal at
midnight. We shall ride to the hills
and there receive arms."
At midnight, two horsemen galloped into the darkness of the scalloped hills. The cicadas were mute
-and the night moved on with a
dead silence.
That was six months ago. Six
months of learning in the Sierra
thickets that the state must own
everything to be able to distribute
wealth more equitably to a society
in which exists no class, in which
exist no differences. They were
six long months of memorizing
names like Karl Marx and Nikolai
Lenin and Adam Smith. Six months
to this very day when the constabulary from the lowlands is starting
a punitive expedition.
The cicadas in the creek below
no longer fill the air with mystic
singing. The corporal Mariano
cocks his automatic rifle. There is
a movement of stealth in the mango
grove to the right. Baste breathes
heavily and likewise readies his rifle. They can hear twigs cracking
now. Dry leaves being crushed underfoot. The air under the nipa
leaves becomes oppressively hot.
Baste takes careful aim at the moving shadows to the right, waiting
for the signal from the corporal Mariano. One minute. Two minutes.
The moon appears briefly and flashes
its silver light on the neck of Baste;
the corporal Mariano’s eyes are arrested by the light. He looks away.
“  "


Three minutes. Baste gropes for
his neck. What was that? The cicadas are singing again. Baste’s
perspiring fingers feel the image of
the Man-God hanging from the
string of beads about his neck.
Four minutes. He died for love.
Padre Fernando’s words. He died
for love. I kill, reasons Baste, and
more people will be killed. Baste
has heard about the town Maliwalu
where the people, innocent and
young, were killed because the Peasants’ Army had stayed there for a
while and the constabulary thought
the people’s liberators were still
there. It is not right, Sebastian.
Who said that? It is not right,
Sebastian. And then Baste, the man
who loved when he was young, the
man who learned to hate, the man
with the conscience, the man Baste
—he shouts loud and crazedly over
the singing of the cicadas, "I will
not do it! I will not do it!” A


burst of machine gun fire staccatoes from the mango grove to the
right. “I will not...arrgh! My
Ggg-!"
The frogs in the creek below
shriek nerveusly. The cicadas'
singing becomes a terrible crescendo.
Did somebody say, “Come, Sebastian,
come?"
There is a full moon tonight over
the Sierra Madre thickets. It is
June, late in the month, and the
slender agoho is now silver, now
black, even as the moon kisses the
sleeping earth and then sadly, haltingly veils its face in a mantle of
dim clouds. The eerie whirring of
the cicadas vie with the broken
croaking of frogs in the bamboofringed creeks. Theirs is a serenade
to a sky that promises much rain,
but apart from the sleepy monotony
of their orchestration, all else is
silence. All else is peace.


To Our Lady
By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52
There is no aspect of thee, Mother-Maid,
That others have not seen and loved and sung
Before. In these late days, my feeble tongue
Took up the song, and at thy dear feet laid
This little tribute. Yet all unafraid,
I come to thy rich galleries where are hung
Thy pictures painted, thy bright hangings flung
Over the walls, thy sculptured tikeness made
By those who loved thee. But I know thy grace,
Thy motherliness, thy heavenly courtesy.
Will not reject the child who comes to thee
Bringing no lovely image of thy face,
No divine poesy, but only this —
My song, simple and common as a kiss.


OCTOBER, 1950


11


The Story Of Writing
A Term Paper
By EDUARDO D. LACHICA, Litt. B. '52
Ever since the Phoenicians brought the
science of writing to western civilization, the
world has not been the same. Scanning world
literature for 3,000 years, we come across
names like Homer, Ovid, Dante, Rabelais, Kant,
Goethe, Eliot, Mencken, Proust and Dreiser.
But to read all these authors would lead to
pantheism, agnostic idealism, and myopia. So
we merely present selections culled from the
classics, from odds and ends, from the Quarterly, to determine the trend of writing from savage to contemporary times.
A. The Beginnings
The first writings were done between the
Early Paleolithic Age and the Later Horseless
Carriage Age. Archeologists accuse the CroMagnon of the dastardly deed, but he had an
honest face and couldn’t have possibly. One species used to make merry all night long, creeping back home only at the wee hours of the
morning. That was the Dawn Man. As for
the Java man, there is hardly any comment except that a paleontologist mistook him for a
gibbon and was later taken for a ride by the
Harvard faculty. Judging from his pictures in
Rand—MeNally, he ran around wearing selfwinding watches. That’s for people whose faces stop clocks. This kind of man had a very
small brain and he left little doubt about that.
Neanderthal woman married Neanderthal man
which proves that Neanderthal woman was short
on brains, too.
Let us look closely at this pre-historic scene.
Roaming about these reaches were wooly mastodons, who were pursued by Peking men, who
were pursued by correspondents for the National Geographic Magazine. The reptiles of
this period were generally well-behaved, eating
their neighbors only when they got hungry.
Now they wear three stripes on their sleeves
and bark at you on the South Parade grounds.


12


  "


Fauna and Flora were two sisters
who clubbed the young men who circled their cave making bird noises.
Later on, they reformed and established a laundry for the young lovers
who came around determined to press
their suits.
The Neanderthal man was a very
busy man; up at 5:00, breakfast at
5:15 and back to bed at 5:30. When
pangs of hunger seized him, he would
pick up his club and look for dinosaurs for dinner. If he failed to
return in twenty-four hours, his wife
concluded the dinosaurs had him for
dinner. How a man like this got
around to serious writing is a mystery that has puzzled writers of humorous essays for years. Actually.
he enjoyed weight-lifting, wrestling
bears, and other parlor games.
The newspaper business was a
dangerous profession in those days.
Instead of newsprint, they had granite tablets. Every morning the newsboy would pedal over and heave the
first edition onto the front porch
and woe if the household did not duck
fast enough! What a cute domestic
scene it was! Junior chiseling out
the cross-word puzzle, sister all over
the society page and Father ducking
behind the front page before the
barrage of irons and rolling pins
from the kitchen. The editors had
a novel way of correcting copy. When
they spotted a mistake, they reached
for a mallet and bopped the reporter
on the head. This is known as putting the reporter to bed. Anyhow,
newspapers kept the Neanderthal
man well-informed on such topics as
the decline and fall of the Roman empire and the sinking of Great Britain
below the Atlantic with all hands
aboard.
B. The Middle Phase
Here we are at the Victorian age
already, surprised? (Yes.—Ed.)


Drama flourished in Victorian England and that was why France was
so popular then. One virtue of the
Victorians was their fine sense of
humor. A columnist named Sydney
thought it topping if he mentioned
that a certain Duke Dishwater’s performance of Hamlet moved about everybody including Shakespeare beneath
Westminster Abbey. You know,
anything for a Duke. Next morning, Dishwater, his face clouded,
came up to the newspaper office to
reason the thing out calmly.
“Bah!" he greeted.
“Oogoolidums!” Sydney returned
with equal inanity.
Dishwater, with an oath, tweaked the culprit’s moustache. Sydney,
in turn, emptied a wastebasket on
the other’s head. They were about
to draw their blunderbusses when
Lady Dishwater came to the scene
looking for the loafer who was supposed to mow the lawn that morning. Cursing their luck, they mounted their steeds and escaped in opposite directions.
That night there was an ominous
knock on Sydney’s door . As he opened it, two black-shrouded figures stepped in.
“The ghosts of the Christmas past,
I presume?'
"We are Dishwater’s seconds. The
duel will be at dawn tomorrow on
the Royal gardens from where only
one shall walk away."
“I see. The other will be running.
They exchanged cards in silence.
“What’s this? This isn’t Dishwater’s card!"
"I know, but that’s Morgatroyd’s
Funeral Home, my uncle’s establishment. Thousands of patrons buried
and not a single complaint!"


OCTOBER, 1950


13


At five to six, Sydney excused himself from a night-long soiree, explaining that he had some business to run
through. Duels then were social
events and the nobility usually turned out to root for their favorite
courtiers. Queen Victoria was to
toss the first rapier. Among those
present were the Duke of Windsor
who laid heavily on Dishwater at
16 to 5, the Prince of Wales who
had a side-bet with some ladies-inwaiting that Dishwater would be carried out on a spit, the Dauphin, the
Czar, and Doctor Faustus. Sydney
was dressed in a chic Bohemian
blsuse with flying panels and Morroco boots. Dishwater was stunning
in the latest Spring dueling styles,
decollete with a plunging waistline.
“Come, one for me!” roared Dishwater, picking up a sinister-looking
Schlager To demonstrate his prowess with the blade, he cornered a
lonely carnation stem and decapitated it with one vicious stroke. Appalled at this but not undone, Sydney laid low some nearby bushes with
a few vigorous swathes. Dishwater
blanched, but with more ponderous
slashes, he gamely proceeded to prune
the hedges surrounding the garden.
Queen Victoria didn’t mind dueling
so much because it saved her the cost
of gardeners. By seven in the morning, the two duelists were busy outdoing themselves felling the chestnut
trees. The two finally got together
and went into the lumber business
and were exchanging letters with the
Spanish armada when last heard
from.
C. Modern Writers
The writing game is not as terribly exciting as basketball or football,
although at times you have to play
ball with the publishers. (This ballplaying gets exasperating sometimes,
14


there’s usually a catch to it. Yah!).
One drawback about the writing
game is that people forget that writers have to eat. Farmers eat, liontamers eat, (lions eat, too, which does
not console lion-tamers any), but
writers eat only during testimonial
banquets. A short story writer I
know wanders about in the town
plaza where the white doves flutter
about and peck at the bust of Rizal.
He stoops to fondle a cooing bird,
gazing at it with the universal love
of St. Francis of Assisi. There are
also some little white feathers scattered in the plaza by nightfall.
It is not difficult to write a story.
One day I wrote one and, frankly,
whenever my father gazes at my report card, he always sees red. Nevertheless, I know writers even more
hopeless: who think that sinus trouble is the civil war in China. Yet
there is a simple secret to story-writing. To pick up fiction, I have learned. go to the Smoking Room and listen to the varsity players’ versions of
the last game. Or better still, eavesdrop at Fr. Dean’s office and listen
to the "studes" explain away their
absences. I did such and got quite a
story. I gave the story to the Managing Editor who is as stubborn as
they come. Earlier, I had spent a
full two hours trying to convince him
that S. J. Perelman was not a Jesuit.
I submitted my MS. to him and left
him to brood over it for awhile. When
I returned, five minutes later, there
was an eerie light in his eyes and
he was methodically snipping paper dolls out of my major work. He
almost died from shear delight.
Shocked at this vandalism, I appealed to the Higher One or the Editor
Himself, declaring that Managing
Editors who make paper dolls out
of perfectly licit manuscripts ought
“  "


to be exiled to some far-removed spot
before they got really violent. The
Great One grasped my shoulder and
discoursed at some length on the increasing pressure nowadays on managing editors but saying, nevertheless, that justice would be done and
that the M.E. would be dispatched
on the next boat for the Fiji Islands.
I gave the Master a duplicate to read
himself and after one page his eyes
began to get glassy. I left him under the table emitting unearthly


laughs and clipping little lanterns out
of my immortal pages.
My story dealt with the collapse
of a movie theatre and was entitled,
The Fall of the House of Ushers. Its
reception by a limited public is the
main reason why I am now probing
with a critical eye into the whole
writing business. I am now in Australia waiting for the professors to
finish reading the term papers. They
may follow, but there’s always New
Zealand and Antarctica.


BUGLES
By MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51


Far call the bugles and set my heart to burning,
Soft calling bugles that give my heart no peace -
The far ways are calling, my wanderers feet are turning
To seek beyond the sunsets, to seek beyond the seas.
The wide world over that song is ever calling,
The far, far cry of bugles — proud and unafraid —
Through woods that have only known the dry leaves falling
By long-lost caverns where the gupay dead are laid.
The swift oar splashing and the wild wind roaring.
These have been the lullabies that rocked me to my sleep,
The white sail shaking like eagle's pinions soaring,
The moaning of the Tempest as he walks upon the deep.
Hark! I hear them calling, the bugles — bugles singing,
But now the bugles tell me I must no lonber roam;
At last their song comes louder — the magic bugles ringing,
The Angel bugles drawing my truant footsteps home.


OCTOBER, 1950


15


LAURELS AND ENCORE


mHE Senior one-act plays manifestI ed what hard work and years of
valuable stage training can achieve.
Except for some accidental flaws, the
total production was a brilliant piece
of coordination perhaps unsurpassed
since the days of the old Ateneo at
Intramuros. Players, directors, and
stage crew merited praise; setting,
stage props, lighting, and sound and
musical effects were all superbly
handled. Altogether, the Senior presentation was a well-knit performance that provided something more
than escape entertainment, truly a
model for this year’s dramatic efforts.
Nerves, John Farrar’s unflattering picture of a group of battleworn American fliers of World War
II, was a gratifying emotional experience. Carrying the brunt of the
action, Jose Avellana, Victor Silayan, and Onofre Pagsanghan portrayed their respective roles with
skill and propriety. Notable was
their success in sustaining tense
emotion, particularly by planned
dramatic poses, and brisk, taut handling of dialogue. A seasoned actor,
Jose Avellana, as the stern-lipped
Captain Ted Hill, was sure and decisive in his “portrayal” actions,
and delivered his lines in a sharp,
matter-of-fact voice which accentuated the drab war atmosphere. Victor
Silayan, as Lieutenant Bob Thatch,
16


was excellent but in uneven doses.
Cenerally, he acted naturally and
easily without strain or difficulty:
yet there were moments when he
practically muffed his lines. As the
nerve-shattered pilot, Jack Coates,
Onofre Pagsanghan was distinguished in his command of diction and
gesture, setting the dominant key of
the play: high-pitched and emotionally charged. In the death scene,
Pagsanghan was superbly compelling, turinig the climax from a melodramatic rut into which it could
casily have fallen if handled by a
less inspired actor, into something
valid and truly powerful.
Special mention goes to a capable
khaki-clad ensemble composed of Alfredo Tengco, Ramon Hontiveros,
Rodericus Manapat, Rodrigo Sotto,
and Alfredo Layug. Rafael Kaluag,
as the stocky young orderly, provided the human sidelight to an otherwise unrelieved drama.
In their acting, amateurs often
have this over professional actors:
they exhibit unspoiled freshness rarely found in not uncommonly standardized professional acting. This
freshness of amateurs was especially evident in Charles George’s rollicking comedy, When Shakespeare's
Gentlemen Get Together in which a
spontaneity of stage positions and inspired ad-libbing was so common and
“  "


apt that the repeat performance was
spiced with novelty.
Jose Tuason acted Romeo as only
Tuason could act it. He was fresh,
spontaneous and suave, especially in
bis comic variations of mood, and he
was electric in his vocal inflections.
With that rare instinct of comedians,
he "signalled” to the audience the
kind of reactions desired—and got
them all. One possible fault evident
in the second showing was an overrelaxation of his movements, the result of enjoying his role too much.
But certainly, judging both objectively and by popular acclaim, he
was the most distinctive comedian
of the two performances.
The spotlight, especially in the second performance, was admirably
shared by Generoso Villanueva as
the melancholy Hamlet. He was effortlessly and directly comic, by
playing it perfectly "deadpan . Johnny Araneta’s bombastic interpretation of Antony was bold, although
somehow he gave the impression of
a pillar with no foundation by his
blunt attempts at creating a stiff
military figure. With his compelling
whip and dominating stage personality, Augusto Domingo, as the shrewtaming Petruchio, strutted across the
center stage and gave the audience
some delectable thoughts on the taming of wilful wives, thoughts which
had genuine value for comedy. Luis
Lorenzo was certainly at home as
Othello, clear-cut, calm, and his cueing was among the best. To Francis


Moran should be awarded an extra
laurel for being both an outstanding
actor and director of this genuinely
successful play. As Shylock, his diction was impeccable, his characterization was well studied and approched professional finish.
Robert Newman’s The Button is a
one-man play packed with emotional
intensity far in excess (we think) of
the average amateurs’ ability. The
difficulties of this play exceed the
merely physical, for it also enters the
realm of the psychological, since this
is a story of shrieking madness. The
part places a heavy burden on the
emotions as well as on the actor’s
dramatic understanding. The delicate intonations, modulations, and
the tragic intensity of the voice must
blend and balance with the rough,
uncertain, and nervous utterances of
the character. The actor’s body must
be so adaptable that it can by slight
movements convey half-conscious
thoughts. Rodolfo Olivares, a comparatively new and untried actor,
courageously essayed this role. During his first show his physical tension caused emotional strain—not a
desirable effect . But in the repeat
performance, Olivares’ interpretation was a poem in darkness. Here
the refinement, the subtlety, the
thrilling climaxes, and the tragic intensity of the story were all powerfully uttered.
-EMMANUEL TORRES, A. B. '53
CARMELO QUINTERO, A. B. '53


OCTOBER, 1950


17


TWO VIEWS
By MELITON V. SALAZAR, AB '54.


Said the smug modern youth to the gentleman old.
Whese fingers were trembling, whose eyes were still bold,
“In your days as a Brummell, what fun was in life?
When your ma was your jailer, your pa chose your wife?
“You had no cars whatever, no movies, no games.
And the skirts you escorted, — such old-fashioned dames!
You couldn't go skating; when you wanted to swim,
You wore your pajamas, plus a hat with a brim.
“You swooned to Caruso, an out-dated ham!
You screamed 'Valentino!' another Sad Sam.
Your great Pola Negri could stop a clock cold;
Your movies were silent and lousy, all told.
“As a boy you looked happy in a white sailor-suit,
You were perfumed and powdered and well-greased to boot!
When you had a date with the girl of your choice,
Her folks tagged along, and you lost all your poise.
"If you'll look at your portrait of long, long ago
With your ill-fitting coat and your whiskers so-so
(You sported a necktie and you leaned on a cane),
Please forgive the expression, you looked slighily insanc.
"Now sir, don't you think that your youth was ill-spent?
You should have been born when the late twenties went!
But since birth is a function man cannot undo,
From the depths of my heart, I am sorry for you."
Then spoke the old man, and his cyes were aglint,
With the ghost of a leer, with his breath full of mint,
“We are young, we are foolish,” he said with a bow.
“And that I was as much of a fool IIl allow.
“It is true you have changed. For the best? — that I doubt!
For whenever you walk now, one thinks of the gout.
Gone is the spring of the step and the eyc,
Gone is the gentleman, all good things must die.
“And your ladies — ahem! — ladies only in name,
I have seen them behave at a basketball game!
And those outlandish fads that you have nowadays:
The 'Duck's Tail' and 'New Look and that sort of a craze!


18


“  


"Why, my lovely Leonor never painted her lips,
(Though she did wear a bustle to streamline her hips).
Ah, those fair flow'rs of Eden, they ne er more will bloom.
This thing you call 'fashion' has fashioned their doom!
“The green plazas are gone, the lamplighters are dead,
The stone benches and cobbles, the lace from Madrid.
The white-coated people have gone into books,
And their modern descendants now largely are crooks!
“No, give me the years when decorum was gold,
And there let me live, there let me grow old.
You can have all your changes, you can have all thats new,
From the depths of my soul, I am sorry for you.


0Oo

To


By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A. B. '52
Keep your soul as fair
As the blossom in your hair,
My sweet.
Like the flower, your hair may fade
Ere life's journey you have made;
But your soul,
My swcet,
Ah, never!
Keep your soul as bright
As the eyes of you tonight,
My swcet.
Bright eyes, you may sometimes be
Lusterless as the sunless sea;
But your soul,
My sweet,
Ah, never!
Oh, keep it pure as now
Is your snowy brow,
My sweet.
Flesh must dic and someday know
Worm and soilure here below;
But your soul,
My swcet,
Ah, never!


OCTOBER, 1950


The boy standing beside the road reminded
the lieutenant of Dunkirk and Bataan—and faith...


The Mountain
By MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51


AAME June and, with June, the
sudden showers that marked
the end of the long siege of summer.
All through the hot weeks the green
mountain had stood like an oasis of
tall palms in limitless desert, beckoning, its slopes eternally green despite the scorching heat of the slow
summer months. And now it was
June again, June with the sudden
showers — and sudden death. For
in the mountain, in the green mountain that had beckoned so invitingly
were men with death in their hands.
Haggard men, they were, with haggard faces, but the rifles that they
carried in their hands were shiny
and well-kept and efficiently deadly.
The officer in the olive-drab uniform knew all this as the caravan
of trucks wound slowly towards the
mountain. The time was late afternoon and the day was warm including drowsiness, but the roar of
the truck engines roused the barrio
folk at each little sitio along their
course and all came scurrying to
watch as the Army patrol swept
past in a shower of dust. In stolid
silence they watched the convoy go
by — one truck, two trucks... five.
And then they shook their heads
sadly and went back to their fields.
The lieutenant in the olive-drab
uniform stood in the lead truck,
looking at the approaching mountain. He knew he was afraid. He
did not want to go back there — to
20


the sudden, sharp encounters with
an enemy you seldom saw and the
waiting between fights that was
worse than the fighting itself. Death
was waiting in the mountain
fastness and he was afraid. The
nausea of fear gripped him in
waves. He fought down desperately
a sudden insane impulse to shout.
Digging his nails into his palm, he
felt reality come back with a jerk.
He stole a furtive glance at the
soldiers beside him in the truck.
“I must look like hell,” he thought.
Then blind fury seized him. Of
course I look like hell. What do
these people know about hell? Only
five months ago the medics had
carried him down this same road,
wounded, burning with fever, crying
over and over again in his delirium:
“Take cover! For God’s sake — Take
cover!” A search patrol had found
him like that, lying in the mountains, shrieking the same words
over and over again shouting to
the men who lay sprawled around
him as if asleep. Only they could
never have heard him, for they were
not asleep. They were dead.
He closed his eyes in intense, unwilling pain, remembering... remembering all too clearly what had happened then. The memory of that
day seemed to have been branded
deep into his consciousness and he
would not soon forget....
“  "


It had been early morning when
they had started out, a fifteen-man
patrol sent out as a "feeler" to determine the position of the main
dissident force. They had broken
camp in high spirits, two officers
leading the group, the rest enlisted
men. By the time they reached the
upper slopes it was high noon and
they were tired and hungry.
Cautiously, they made their way
through the thick undergrowth,
slithering as noislessly as possible
over the sharp ascents, moving
among the stunted trees and thick
thorn bushes that caught at a man’s
clothing and left raw scratches on
hand and arms. The noon-sun
was merciless and in the oppresive
stillness no welcome breath of wind
stirred the encircling forest of bush
and shrub. Perhaps the heat had
made them unwary, or was it the
insistent hunger in their stomach?
—because they never saw it coming.
The lead scout had just topped
the crest of an outjutting ridge,
from that vantage point scanned


the terrain ahead, and turned back
to signal “all clear" when the guns
started popping. Half the patrol
never knew what hit them as the
first fusillade of the enemy crashed
through the concealing tangle of
brush and found its mark among
the advancing men.
"Ambush!" the other officer
shouted and started to lift his gun
but he didn’t quite complete the
movement. A bullet staggered him
and then another finished the job.
He spun around like a prizefighter
who has just stopped a solid uppercut and then his knees buckled under him and he fell. Some of the soldiers had recovered from the initial
shock of surprise and were shooting
away at the brush where puffs of
smoke only half-revealed the wellplanned positions of the ambushing
force. The lieutenant, lying on his
stomach on the hard dirt ground
added the chatter of his Thompson
to the crescendo of rifle fire that
was sweeping through the forest.
He knew that they had been


OCTOBER, 1950


21


caught in a bad spot. It was very
bad — pinned down in a small clearing, free of trees and larger bushes,
in full view of an unseen enemy.
All of a sudden he heard a heavier
rattling penetrate the raucous din.
Somewhere, the enemy had brought
a heavy machine-gun into play and
now he saw its staggering effect.
Little puffs of smoke started crisscrossing the open clearing with the
systematic precision of a shredding
machine. For a moment he watched
with horrified eyes as the trapped
soldiers were cut down mercilessly
and with efficient brutality. Then,
finding his voice, he started to run
towards the protecting shelter of a
tree uprooted by the last typhoon
and lying on its side on the ground
only twenty yards away, shouting:
“Take cover!" Running, stumbling,
running again, he kept shouting,
“Take cover! Take cover!” It was
only twenty yards away. How far
away is twenty yards? It was
far enough. He did not make it.
A burning finger raked his side,
another bullet ploughed through the
skin at the base of his skull ... he
staggered, tried to recover his balance, but how could he when the
ground would not stay where it was
but rushed up towards him and exploded in his face.
* *
Wearily, the lieutenant stood in
the lead truck and now the mountain
was so close he could make out the
low, sloping hills at its foot, the
deep ravines looking like bolo-gashes
in the mountain-side, and he thought
of the haggard men who waited
like fate for his return. He felt
like retching and yet he knew
that even if he tried he could not.
What’s the meaning of it all, he
thought, bitterly, what’s the use of
fighting men who are your flesh
and blood — people with skin as


brown as mine — with the same
longings, the same desire to live, the
same desperate fears.
A terrible despair came over him,
and a gnawing hunger for the
things he had lost. The days of
his recent youth, when courage was
a bright badge be worn proudly,
when to be young and strong was
joyful and life held meaning and
promise. The lost days, the old
days full of the certainty that at
the end of the rainbow stood a pot
of gold. Not men with haggard
faces. Not men with shiny new rifles in their hands and in their
hearts, death.
Now they were nearing a town.
It had steadily been growing dark
and lights now bobbed into view,
shinning clear and very bright in
the distance. They had come
among the hills and he could see a
barren slope a short distance from
the road. It seemed as if the darkening sky leaned on the hill, very
close and secret... Involuntarily he
thought: the face of Life is like the
face of the sky at twilight — dark,
fathomless and sinister. What was
it, that poem he had learned in
English class during the safe, longago days of high school? How did
it go now...
“Out of the day and night
A joy has taken flight;
Fresh spring, and summer, and
winter hoar
Move my faint heart with grief,
but with delight
No more — oh, never more!”
It was then that he saw the boy.
The boy was standing on the crest
of the hill, standing straight and
still in the half-come dark. He
stood bareheaded, silent, and standing there, eyes fixed on the men in


22


  


uniform within the approaching
trucks, he was saluting.
*
* *
Straight as a soldier he stood and
there was something quiet and reverent in the way he did it, saluting
the men in the moving trucks, saluting something he saw in the
lights moving through the newcome night.
Slowly the convoy passed, but
still he stood without moving or
dropping the upraised arm to his
side. A minute more and he was
gone, lost from sight around
the bend in the road. The lieutenant sighed and turned away, but
he could not shake the picture from
his mind ... the boy, standing
there in his memory, still there on
the crest of a hill against the shadowy backdrop of sky, saluting
still, still being young and unafraid
in the worship of things lost and
gone: the battle-blast of Roland at
Roncesvalles; Arthur riding down
from Camelot; the Old Guard in a
last charge at Waterloo; darkness
over the immemorial wastes of Troy.
Once he had been like that, the
lieutenant thought. Once he, too,
would have stood and, watching the
men in uniform go by, have saluted
them. He closed his eyes and it
scemed to him that he could look
straight into the eyes of that boy
back there and read his inmost
thoughts. The boy had something
he himself had lost somewhere,
somehow ... he had faith...
Faith in what?
Faith in the old, futile dream


that men were strong and brave and
were not afraid to die...faith in
glory — in Dunkirk and Blenheim
and Austerlitz — in the Light Brigade storming the guns at Balaklava — in the fierce, sharp music
of the fifes at Lucknow — in Bastogne and Tarawa — and the
sleeping fields of Bataan. Still
young, still believing that life was
a coin to be spent, gallantly, even
recklessly perhaps, before age and
wear could tarnish its bright sheen.
The lieutenant looked again at the
mountain, and somewhere to his
right a cricket began to pipe its
night-song in the fields. The churning of the truck wheels on the soggy mud of the road sounded loud
and powerful and reassuring.
He turned to the man who occupied the seat beside him, a slender
youth going for his first combat
patrol; and even in the darkness
he could read the lostness and the
uncertainty and the fear of death
that lay only half-hidden in the
soldier’s eyes.
*
*
“How clear the night is,” the
lieutenant said kindly. “You can
see all the stars.” He sat for a
while looking at the, night and the
stars and then he said, “Cigarette?”
The young soldier’s lips moved
soundlessly for a moment before he
found his voice. Yes, he believed he
would like to have one.
The lieutenant lighted the boy’s
cigarette — and as he held the
match, to it, his hands did not shake.


OCTOBER, 1950


23


SHAKESPEARES—
BUTTON AND NERVES
TURING a dull and sultry morning
in August the Senior AB-Litt. B
ciass gathered for a very brief meeting. The Senior Moderator, Rev.
Martin J. Casey, S. J. presented before the class two problems which,
though not critical, were nevertheless a challenge to the practical ingenuity of the seniors. The first
was to raise sufficient funds to pay
for the mimeographing of a chapter
on the big job ahead for students
from Father Keller’s book, "You
Can Change the World” These materials were intended for the seniors
and for bed-ridden patients in general hospitals. The second problem
was more ponderous. It was to help
finance the Aegis, the college yearbook, other than by soliciting for advertisements. A benefit performance
of the Senior one-act plays, already
due to be presented, was the means
finally chosen.
On the evening of August 27, three
minutes before the curtain rose to
open the Ateneo Dramatic Season,
members of the Senior class gathered
backstage and knelt together to pray
the Memorare. The show was on.
The rest is history. During its two
performances wherein many distin24


guished lay and ecclesiastical guests
sat spellbound, gaped or laughed, the
demand for tickets so exceeded the
supply that the moderator of the
Seniors, Fr. Casey, S. J. was constrained to play a role, too, that of
hide-and-seek with the many stage
votaries who could not obtain tickets.
WEAPON OF WIT
In the minor logic specimen held
on August 28, members of the
Freshman Pre-law class received a
little drill on how to handle the
main weapon of formal disputation,
the syllogism. A freshman would be
called to the stage armed with a syllegism. An interrogator would dismantle the weapon before him and
the minor logic “rookie” would be
asked within five minutes to identify
its parts, to asesmble the various
parts so that the syllogism as a
whole operates perfectly.
In an age when truth is often sacrificed for an epigram, when pithy
aphorisms and catchy slogans are
worth more than legitimate arguments, a training in the use of syllogisms is valueless. The next phase,
however, is to learn when and how
to employ this syllogistic weapon.
For the freshmen that will come
when they attack the various divisions of philosophy.
“  "


CLEANING-LIBRARY AND
OTHERWISE
If books are the windows of life,
then for at least a week the members
of the library section of the Campion
Literary Guild were life’s window
washers. For when the general library was reconditioned and the space
for the reference section was doubled, the Guildsmen with rolled
sleeves brushed, cleaned, shellacked
and re-arranged the shelves of reference books, atlases, compendia
and encyclopedias. At the same time
the Guild’s pamphlet section commenced to display pamphlet racks at
the door of the Ateneo chapel on
Sunday mornings, at the Pasay Parish Church and at the Manuel L.
Quezon School.
Meanwhile the Sodality’s Legion
of Decency was grappling with a formidable and determined opponent.
After receiving information that the
Astor Theater intended to exhibit a
series of condemned films, its chairman immediately mapped out a campaign aimed at cancelling the permit
of the theater. An appeal was directed to all Sodalists to flood the
members of the Philippine Board of
Review for Moving Pictures with
letters of protests. Open letters
were mailed to the different Manila
dailies asking why the theatre was
allowed to openly show indecent
films. Circulars were dispatched to
student organizations of different
schools enjoining them to help in
the campaign to boycott any theater
exhibiting immoral films and to petition government officials to revoke
the license of the Astor Theatre. It
was a very bold move, but in such a
situation only boldness can effect
results.


A FREE WORKER THAT COULD
NOT BE BOUGHT
In a Christian country where labor unions dangle at the end of puppet strings held by racketeers and
where the labor movement is identified with the Communists, there is
need for an honest, dauntless publicity organ to correct these abuses and
to rectify false impressions. In a
Catholic country where the laboring
man is ignorant of his rights and
duties and where employers professing to be Catholic openly exploit
their workers in total disregard for
social justice, an unbiased, bold organ is necessary to awaken and educate the ignorant masses and to act
as a moral check on unscrupulous
employers.
During one of its regular cell
meetings, members of the Social Order Club pondered these questions
seriously. There was a newspaper
answering the requirements, “The
Free Worker". But it was so low
in funds that it could not be bought,
so bold in its printing of the truth
that its articles were branded as subversive, reactionary and even laughed
away as fairy tales. The problem
Lefore the SOC members was to
bring “The Free Worker" into the
focus of the students’ attention so
that it might be read and discussed
intelligently—and passed on. The
Social Order Club met the problem
by staging a rally in the gym on
September 11. The editor of “The
Free Worker" Sixto K. Roxas, A. B.
'50, spoke on the history of the paper, its aims, its needs. At the finish of the rally, 300 copies of the
"Free Worker” were sold.
-ENRIQUE L. ESQUIVEL, Jr.
A. B. '51


OCTOBER, 1950


25


The Soul Of The Law


By HECTOR L. HOFILENA, AB. '51


Thinking about law often leads to
a paradox. Very often, people speak
of the law as something dead. The
law is cold. The law is unfeeling.
The law is impersonal. Nothing can
be colder than a shelf of law-books.
And is not justice, the goal of law,
represented as a blindfolded lady
with a sword?
But is the law really cold, unfeeling, impersonal? Very often, too,
people speak of the spirit of the
law. The spirit of anything, I take
it, is something that informs, something that strengthens, something
that vivifies. The spirit of the law
is that which makes the law live. It
is the soul of the law. And what, one
asks, is the soul of the law?
It can be none other than love.
And therein lies the paradox. The
law is cold, but its spirit is that
which is often represented as a heart
on fire. The law is impersonal, but
it is motivated by something that is
very personal indeed. The law is unfeeling. But its soul is love.
Whatever path one takes, one cannot help but come upon the love that
stands behind the law. Law, all men
agree, is for the common good. Laws
were instituted so that each man
would have an equal right in the pursuit of happiness. The well-being of
every man must be protected. The
sharecropper must have a fair portion of the fruits of his labor. The
workingman must have sufficient
time to rest. The child must have
someone to see him through his period of helplessness. Women must
26


feel secure in their weakness. Everyone must have life and liberty.
But why this concern for the happiness of every man? Why must the
tenant have his share of the crops?
Why must the workman have his
rest, the child its protection, the woman her security? Why? Does it
not all go back to the admonition
that we must love our neighbours
as we love ourselves? Is not the reason for all these the duty we
have of loving one another?
What reason should I have for wishing the good of my fellowmen, if ultimately I do not love them? How
can I call them my fellow-men at all,
if I do not have a certain amount of
affection for them?
The more selfish viewpoint, of
course, is that we have the law so
that each one shall be safe in the
enjoyment of his own rights. But
why should I want to enjoy my
rights? Is it not because I love my
rights? Because I love, period?
Again, the object of the law is
justice. Justice is the virtue by
which we give to each man his due.
But why should each man have his
due? Whichever way one takes in
arguing, he ultimately gets back to
the cause of it all—love. What can
justice be without love?
Perhaps this illusion of the coldness of the law arises from the
thought that it limits our freedom.
Perhaps it all goes back to the time
when we dethroned God, and, having
nought to worship, placed Freedom,
usurper, on His throne. The law
"  '


limits our freedom, and whatever limits our freedom cannot be sweet.
But freedom, we are told, is not
the absolute deity that we take it to
be. Time was when, aside form freedom, man had something more. He
had the trust and confidence and
grace of God. But when he turned
his will against that of God, he lost
this trust and this confidence and
this grace. He lost supernatural
life. He was abandoned, so to speak,
free to shift for himself. He was
left nothing but his precious freedom with which to grope, in his imperfect way, for that which previously lay clear and open before him.
And thus would he have remained
forever, but God, in all His love and
wisdom, gave the law to man. It
was to limit his freedom, but it was
to lead him back to that supernatural life which he had lost. For this
once, at least, the law was sweeter
than freedom. Christ came as a lawgiver. But is He not, too, the Way,
the Truth, and the Life?
God gave us the law because He
loved us. And this digression from
our theme, if digression it is, leads
us to a sobering fact. If love is the
soul of the law, then that law is the
best which is motivated by the great

est love. The best lawgiver is he
whose love is infinite; the wisest
laws can only come from him who
has a personal love for each and
everyone of us. Perfect Justice can
come only from Him who is the very embodiment of love.
I visited my cousin in the novitiate
at Novaliches the other month, and
in the course of my visit, he came
close to enunciating a great truth.
It started when I offered him a cigarette, and he declined.
“Don't you smoke anymore?” I
asked.
“No, it’s against the rules.
“How many other rules do you
have to keep."
“Oh, lots and lots.”
“You must lead a very hard life,
I observed.
It was then that he said, "When
you follow the law for the love of
Him, the law shall have lost all its
pangs.
His is the sweetest law to follow,
for His is the greatest love to be
found. And when one is finally united with Him, the Author of the Law,
then there is no more law. Only
Love—for He is Love.


The Rai
By ERNESTO G. ROCELES, Litt. B. '53
The rain comes like a band
Marching o'er the rooftops.
It plays a symphony,
In monotones incessant.
And then, it tramps off once again
To its unheard-of haven.


OCTOBER, 1950


27


The boy walked proudly with
Rosing because he knew he was the


Escort Of The Queen


By ALFREDO TENGCO, A.B. '51


EROM the window I saw Tony
* practicing with his marbles. The
fourteen other boys who composed
our gang were gathered around him
and they watched with admiration
every aim and
shot that Tony
a
made. Whenever
he missed, they
ta
groaned.
I fingered my
e
o w n marble.
R
Then I again
V
gazed out of the
window in time

to see Tony hit ' EESg
his decoy-marble
with a difficult
shot. A cheer
rose from the
gallery. My
E
cheeks flushed in
anger. I swore
that the first

throw I would
make during the
game that morning would be so
hard and accurate
that Tony’s marble would be
smashed into
pieces. With this
resolution I hur.
ried downstairs for breakfast.
Halfway down the stairs, Lola
called me. She said, "Well, young
man, after breakfast you have an


errand to do for me."
Thunder after lightning! I immediately realized the implications of
her command. "Lola,” I pleaded,
“Can’t I do it on another day? We
have a championship fight in marbles, and I will
defend the title.
The boys a r e
Ma
waiting for me,
and they will never forgive me
if I do not show
up.”
“You are to go
A
to the hospital,"
Lola continued,
"and accompany
Rosing home."
Wha — what
was that? “Oh,
no, Lola, please! I
will do anything
for you, even today when we have
the championship
fight. But please
do not make me
do that. Please!”
“It is not a
very hard favor
that Rosing asks
EnG
of you. It is only
because the distance from the bus
stop to here is quite far, and often
she feels dizzy."
“Lola,” I said, resorting to a last


28


“  "


defense, "Why don’t you ask somebody else to take her home? Why
not Edong, the postman? He-he’s in
love with her. He will gladly do it.
Also, the trip home will not be dull
because Edong will surely make love
to her."
It was no use. Lola’s decision was
final. I gasped. The tragedy was
complete. I would not appear at the
championship game. On that particular count I could be condemned by
the gang. But to miss the game because of a woman! Unthinkable!
Honestly, however, it was not because I disliked Rosing that I did
not want to accompany her home.
Come to think of it, the championship game was not the ultimate reason either. I liked Rosing very much.
She was a neighbor who had shown
affection for my family, and every
one of us, in turn, was deeply attached to her. No, the reason was
more than the mere whim of a boy.
You see. I never had a sister and
my mother died when I was quite
voung. Consequently, I was reared
by masculine hands to view life from
a thoroughly masculine angle. I
know my father never wanted it to
be that way, but under the circumtances, nothing else could be done.
So, whatever potential “qualities” I
may have in me, "qualities" which
can be developed only by a mother
and through the companionship of a
sister will forever, I suppose, have
to remain untapped.
The boys in my gang envied me.
I seemed to be their symbol of freedom from the subjugation and control of women. How many times had
they been dragged away from play
and forced to go to the market with
their mothers! How often had there
been "weeping and gnashing of teeth"
when their parents ordered them to


go to some place with their sisters!
I, on the other hand, had never been
called upon to leave my play behind
on account of a woman. The boys
went to the Church with their mothers and sisters. I went alone. I always was alone or in the company
of boys.
But envy me? I must confess that
I never felt more lonely and abandoned than when I saw them with their
mothers and sisters. Yet I valued
their opinion of my "independence”
The morning of the championship
fight in marbles would be the first
time that the gang would see me
render service to a woman. I hated
the thought of it.
Late in the morning, Rosing and
I alighted from the bus. Once more,
a feeling of fear and shame seized
me. We were entering our neighborhood.
"Please walk more slowly," Rosing
requested me. “I feel slightly dizzy."
I slowed down my pace. I was surprised. I was not conscious that I
was walking too fast. Was there
something I could say, anything to
break my silence? Rosing feebly held
my arm to support her weight. I
blushed and decided to remain silent.
Suddenly Rosing gripped my arm.
“There, don’t you see him? Don't
you see Edong?” she whispered excitedly.
Sure enough it was Edong the postman approaching us. Rosing murmured a few more words. I did not
understand them. For, only a few
meters away, in front of Aling Berang’s store, sat my gang. Fifteen
of them! It was too late for me to
turn back. They had seen me. I
almost: wilted at their sharp stares.
Rosing tugged my arm and I halted. Edong spoke to her. They must
have been sweet, romantic words he


OCTOBER, 1950


29


offered her. Every time Edong spoke
to Rosing, he compared her to something beautiful and lovely — to a
sampaguita, to a star. But now. I
could not bear to listen to him. I was
thinking, thinking of what ran
through the minds of my friends.
The more I thought of them, the
more I felt ashamed to be seen with
Rosing.
Edong smiled at me. “Ah!” he
exclaimed. "I see that my queen
has an escort.” He patted me on
the head and waved goodbye to us.
—Rosing and I continued walking.
With a ring of ecstasy in her voice,
she asked softly, "Did you hear
what Edong said? Edong called
me a queen. And you are my escort."
FFor once that morning, my eyes
met Rosing’s. Joy flooded her eyes.
And after a brief instant of reflec

tion, I woke up. How silly and
how foolishly I had behaved all
throughout that morning! —What
reason was there to fear and to
blush? Who, anyway, were these
boys in front of the store that I
should shrink in shame when a
woman who regarded me as a brother held my arm?
Why should I be ashamed of Rosing, ashamed to be seen with her?
Rosing was not ashamed of me, to
be seen with me! At the moment,
she fancied that she was walking
in all her majesty in the clouds
somewhere in eternity. While a
thousand trumpets heralded her
coming, while a thousand sabers
flashed in one salute, and kings
stepped aside and doffed their purples — in the magnificence of her
fantasy, I was with her. For her
lover said that she was a queen—
and I was her escort.


Wishing Well
By LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A.B. '52
Many the sights that glorify the sky:
Sundown's frescoes soft-plastered in lucent gold,
The mutable murals of Morn, drawn by cold
Dawn siz hours past, those two eastern hills
She used for ladders; the feather-cloud frills
That fair-weather the sky with a limpid sheen;
At hot noon, now, a leafy fretwork of green,
And look, look at that lone cloud lolling by!
Yes, dear ? The blue? Oh yes, the eternal blue!
Clear depth of constancy, the wishing well
Of heaven! Take this coin here. Close your eyes.
Now wish, and wish well — wait. Ill have mine too.
Now toss! (Hers, true-blue love, mine — Youth is wise -
Guess what?). Wishes bartered, how young hearts swell.


30


“  "


THE WALL


By JOHN HERSEY (Alfred A. Knoph, Inc., 1950)


HAT makes this book a bestWseller and a sweeping success is
the universality of its theme: Man,
in all his frailty, stands undaunted
and unconquerable in the face of a
cruel catastrophe. “The Wall” is
more than a novel; it is history, or a
phase of it, distilled into fiction, a
saga recreating the fight and the
fury and the folly of a persecuted
pcople.
“The Wall" depicts vividly the life
of the Jews in the Warsaw ghetto
and all that they suffered at the
hands of their heel-clicking conquerors. What they endured would
stagger one’s imagination: hunger,
forced labor, inhuman tortures, even
casual murders. Daily the Nazi soldiers rounded up thousands of ghetto inhabitants for “resettlement in
the East" they announced. Actually.
the deportation meant selection for
the gas chambers or for some diabolical scientific experiments. Yet in
spite of these brutal ordeals, the
Jews remained calm, couragcous and
incorruptible. Perchance Rabbi Goldflamm spoke near the truth when
he said to his compatriots in their
hour of anxiety, “It is nonsense to
feel humiliated by the Nazis, because
we know that our faith will survive
their presecutions.... What faith


was ever wiped out by torture or
arms or gags or faggots?...
But the real story concerns a
group of friends who had banded
themselves into one big “family” for
reassurance and protection. Their
life, their loves, their adventures,
their hopes and fears will hold the
reader, surround him, haunt him until finally he is swept in the current
of the great drama and their experiences become his experiences and he
becomes one of them, reckless, brave,
defiant, loving passionately, fighting
desperately for justice, tolerance
and decency.
Most likely, the reader will long
remember the “infant in the underground bunker where the lives of all
depend upon dead silence": or the
school children tramping merrily to
the death busses with a song in their
little hearts thinking that they were
going on a “picnic"; or the slaughter
of a skinny horse shrouded in secre«y and mystery.
Mr. Hershey has written a great
novel. “The Wall" is a lasting tribute to the greatness of a people
despised and isolated by a scornful
world.. But the book is something
even more than that: a moving plea
for Christian charity and justice for
all.—R. HENSON, Litt.B. '52


OCTOBER, 1950


31


The Dissection
Ol A feachers Heart
(If Any)
After Addison and Steele
By PABLO SILVA, JR., A.B. '53


" HAVE never been particularly interested in anatomy, but when an
acquaintance of mine who was taking up medicine invited
me one day to witness
the dissection of a teacher’s heart, I was naturally curious; so I immediately went with him.
As we entered the laboratory, a singularly
queer and alien odor assailed us, unlike anything
DE
I had ever known before.
It emanated, I found,
from the teacher’s heart,
which was laid out on
a table before a group
ot medical studens. 1 W2,
was informed by the operator that there was
no heart more difficult
to lay open than that of
a teacher because of the
many layers of stonehard substance which
made up the pericardium or outward case of
-
the heart. He called our
attention to the innumerable little nicks and ! 
bruises on the surface of
the pericardium ostensi
bly caused by the pleas,
grievances, and plights of countless
students, but nowhere could we find
the smallest opening by which any
of the nicks had penetrated that ar

mor-like covering.
With delicate care, the operator
removed the pericardium, and we
came to the heart itself. The mucro, or
point, we found to be
very cold and icy. Just

below it were the little
nerves of the heart
which are affected by the
sentiments of anger, understanding, and pity. The
nerves of anger were
noticeably worn out and
decayed with excessive
use, whereas the other
nerves did not appear to
have been used at all.
Among the several


foldings of the heart, we
saw the impression of
multitudes of faces, obviously students’, and we
noticed that all were
marred and blackened by
constant abuse.
Upon examining the
cardiac blood pump, we
discovered a tube-like
vessel with five distinct
lines marking its side,
and containing a thin
MESl reddish liquid, much like
that of a thermometer.
Some dried particles of the liquid
adhered to the upper part of the
tube. From this the operator deduced
that, when this particular teacher


32


  "


was living, this reddish liquid very
often rose high and remained at the
four and five-line levels during
classes, and seldom receded to the
one-line level.
Lastly, weighing the heart in my
hand, I found it to be much heavier
than the average man’s heart. I
soon understood why when, upon
looking into its inside, I saw many
little cavities stuffed with all sorts
of facts, figures, and pieces of general knowledge, somewhat like an


encyclopedia’s contents—all of which
tidbits struck me as trifling and useless. It is difficult to give a full list
of them, but suffice it to say that
I found a sprinkling of Cicero, Virgil, and Newman, and some pertinent facts about Hellenization and
Greco-Roman culture.
And so, having thus thoroughly examined and dissected this curious oddity of anatomy, I have ceased to
wonder at the oddity of the people
who possess it.


Rai Song
By ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B. '51


Wherever you are, my beloved,
You must hark to the pounding of rain,
For you see, it is trying to tell you
A story of shivering pain.
And listen, my love, to the lost song
Of the wind in the trembling of trees,
In the crumpled concerto of ghost leaves,
In the surge of the sighing seas.
Hush now to the stabbing stillness
Of this blear-cyed and widowed night;
She is weaving black phantom dirges
For dead hours of stolen delight.
And until you come back with your music,
Angclic and winged and light,
My heart shall know only the sad songs —
Of the wind, and the rain, and the night.


OCTOBER, 1950


33


LUIS LORENZO: "EAGLE WITH A FEZ"
Luis Lorenzo of the Atenco Blue Eagles looked as tired as a moro
pearl diver at the end of a day. After a summer under the sun, playing
in practice games, exhibition games, league games, hopping from one island
to another, after a vacation replete with picnics, fiestas, dances, he was
burned out like a piece of charcoal. His dark brown eyes were sharp and
dreamy, his face taut, but the fingers that clamped a leather basketball
were strong and relaxed. Somehow those powerful fingers refused to strain
and to get nervy when the other 160 pounds of muscle hardened; they
remained powerful and loose, a habit that underscored this player’s famed
shooting accuracy.
This year he had one big worry. This season the varsity line-up
omitted “Ning” Ramos, that hunched, freakish figure with the deceptive
tilt of the head, the simple yet magical passing, the perfectly executed
screening, who was the shadow of the glory of Lorenzo’s '49 season. Lorenzo
scanned the new list, the fifth in his basketball career and in Atenco’s
postwar hopes. He read: Jose “Poch” Estella, a fine teammate, a workhorse, a gilt-edged shooter, but could he screen? No. He read: Antonio
Chole” Gaston, tough as a stevedore, fast as a jet; and admittedly he
could screen, yet in jerks and at that crudely. He watched and admired
the coordinated play of the lightning bolts, their fast figure-cight which
attempted screening but more often resulted in sudden breaks for the
goal. For himself he hoped to make only half his usual total this season. He hoped Freddie Campos and Jose Estella would make up the difference and more, to give Ateneo at least a fighting chance.
Tired Luis Lorenzo was not going stale. But he was putting more
worry and more pressure into his heavy training, with less relaxation.
He realized the odds. Guards were getting better and better. Opponents
were more experienced. Rival teams were taller. As captain of the Atenco
varsity team he knew its weaknesses, which were only the opposites of
the enemies’ qualities. His team lacked competent guards, lacked even
ordinary NCAA experience, lacked height. He was worried and he was
tired; he was nervous. He was an Atenean, a captain, and a fighter;
he was over-anxious. He admitted sincerely and sadly that the opponents’ best guards were usually his own nerves and eagerness.


34


  '


Fortunately, when he walks onto the hardwood court, he first has
won the fight with himself. With a little faith from his coach, some
earnest help from his teammates, and a rousing cheer, he is usually able
to push bothersome emotions well back in his head, leaving him properly
relaxed, well cooled, and dangerous. In the first Ateneo-La Salle game he
showed Ateneo fans how a mental machine well-greased and temperate
controls body balance, aiming eye, and shooting arm. Rolling into the
game in the second quarter, he quickly took his first shot and missed.
But his sights were set. He took six more shots in a row, and did not
miss.
What Luis Lorenzo has reaped from basketball would stuff the dreams
of any other young man, but his barn of dreams is bigger. As a boy
in Zamboanga he fancied himself the captain of the Ateneo senior varsity. He would replace Simon LaO, his basketball idol. And in the
first postwar NCAA meet Luis Lorenzo, fourth-year high school boy, a
novice in big-time basketball, was captain of the Ateneo senior team.
Shortly after, amassing points, charming fans, fighting hard, radiating
confidence, he found that the great Simon LaO’s shoes were beginning
to fit him. But he had other stock of dreams in his barn. He hoped
to see the Ateneo crowned with an NCAA championship during his playing years.
Yet there is more to the Zamboangueno than dreams. There is an accurate sense of values. He says:
“My best games were those when I succeeded in playing the game
fair and square."
“My worst game was against La Salle this year, when I lost my temper and hit Eddie Sharruff. I’ll always regret it.”
“I prefer strict refereeing when it applies to the rules, stricter as to
intentional fouls."
"Praise from fans is very fickle and exaggerated. So I don’t pay any
attention to them."
“The guards I respect most are Eddie Decena and Rafael Hechanova.
They are the best and cleanest guards."
"Fighting spirit means giving all you’ve got in the right way.”
Chito, as his family calls him, has thrilled to the dribble, the pass.
and the shot of basketball since Grade School days. Like other kids, in
a game he screamed and quarreled most of the time and played least of
the time. He was not a star of the intramurals as "Kiko” Francisco,
LaO, and the Ocampo brothers were. He was a tot who found basketball
as exciting as football, swimming, or running a race.
During the war Chito found more time for basketball. As constant
playing improved him, he began to wonder if he might really, someday,
be able to play for the Ateneo senior team. But it was not until 1945 that
he took basketball seriously.
The Zamboangueno, dubbed “Moro" by Ateneans, developed his murderous right arm during the '48 season. He chipped his footwork into


OCTOBER, 1950


35


a smooth swinging pivot and an obedient sudden sprint, he widened his
body balance, acquiring a variety of angles for his shots. He learned
new forms of shooting, new tricks of screening.
Last year a seasoned and mature “Moro” Lorenzo entered the court
with the power of anting-anting and the threat of a juramentado. At the
end of the season Manila sportswriters elected him as the year’s most outstanding athlete in basketball, and agreed that:
“Nobody has ever been idolized by the nation’s bobby-soxers as has
Ateneo's “Moro" Lorenzo. This is easily understandable since during
the past endowed with the physical attributes of a man, he split the cords
for 34 points in a single game (Ateneo-Mapua) for a new record, and topped
the scoring list by dunking 21.2 points per game. Guards who ordinarily
would have stopped forwards of lesser calibre invariably came to grief
when assigned to apply the handcuffs on Lorenzo."
—ROBERT WILSON, A.B. '52


REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND COMMUNICATIONS
BUREAU OF POSTS
MANILA
SWORN STATEMENT
(Requlied by Act No. 2580)


The undersigned, Jose L. Santos, Business Manager of the  , published in English at Ateneo de Manila, after having been duly sworn
in accordance with law, hereby subrits the following statement of ownership.
management, clrculatlon, etc., which is required by Act 2580, as amended by
Commonwealth Act No. 201:
POST-OFFICE ADRESS
NAME
Managing Editor: ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN . . . . . . .... Ateneo de Manila
Editor: MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ateneo de Manila
Business Manager: JOSE L. SANTOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... Ateneo de Manila
Owner: ATENEO DE MANILA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ateneo de Manila
Publisher: ATENEO DE MANILA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ateneo de Manila
Printer: M. COLCOL &: CO. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 Cruzada, Manila
Office of Publication: ATENEO DE MANILA . . . . . . . . Ateneo de Manila
In case of publication other than dally, total number of coples printed
and circulated of the last issue dated August, 1950.
1. Sent to pald subscribers ........ 600
2. Sent to others than paid subscribers .... 100
TOTAL ..... 700
JOSE L. SANTOS
Business Manager
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 26th day of September, 1950, at
Manila, Philippines the affiant exhibiting his Residence Certificate No. A-2845080
issued at Malabon, Rizal, on September 25, 1950.


MELQUIADES D. SANTOS
Notary Public
Until December 31, 1950
Doc. No. 673: Page No. 45: BoOk No. II: Series of 1950
(NOTE): This form is exempt from the payment of documentary stamp tax.


36


“  "


Vol. II, No. 3
December, 1950


PRL AIENED TUARILRL.


THE CONTENTS


Page
FRONTISPIECE ....... .. . . . . . ... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .............. 2
EDITORIAL
With Hopeful Hearts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . M.V.S. 3


ESSAYS
A Christmas Gift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Meliton V. Salazar 13
Dear Jesus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Onofre Pagsanghan 26
A Thought Of Christmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Percival Olarte 28


SHORT STORIES
Complete With Santa Claus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pedro Carag 5
The Faraway Christmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... Gregorio Brillantes 16
When The Drop Fell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Gabino Mendoza 23
Mang Tembong And Santo Kulaus . . . . . . . . . ... Maximo V. Soliven 30
The Strangers And The Crib . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Alfredo Tengco 44


VERSE


Christmas Communion .
Midnight Mass .........
A Beggar And A Song.
Sanctuary Lamp ......
I Saw Three Candles ..
Manger Song .........
Sea Echoes And A Rose


Antonio P. G. Manuud
.. . . . Aurelio Calderon
.. Onofre Pagsanghan
Guillermo V. Soliven
.. . . . . Percival Olarte
... . . . . Romulo Lara
Antonio P. G. Manuud


4
12
22
29
34
37
43


FEATURES
Books . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Gabino Mendoza, Emmanuel Torres 38
Drama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Carmelo Quintero, Emmanuel Torres 41
The Arena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Robert Wilson 46
THE STAFF ....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . ... 48


Tor a tHid 15 BORil fo na,
and a Son is piven fn us,
and the government is upon flis shoulder:
and His Rlame shall he talledl,
DDondlerful, Counsellor, God the Mighfy,
the Tather of the world fo come,
the Prince of Peace.


  


WITH HOPEFUL HEARTS


WRITING a Christmas Editorial is worse than telling a twicetold tale. For the message of Christmas has been told not
twice, not ten times but a thousand times during the past nineteen
hundred years. And yet, told a thousand times, told ten thousand
times, are we in our modern age of progress forgetting the meaning of it all? We are modern. We have progressed. Proud
of our modernism and our progressiveness, we have
The Same
reared a neo-paganism blacker than the paganism
old
of old. We have cried with Lucifer “We will not
serve!” and sought to tear down with iconoclastic
Message
fury the temples and the things of God.


It is Christmas again.
We hear the Christmas Angels the great glad tidings tell.
But low comes the voice of the Angel of Sorrow, whispering that
men are dying, that men are hating and suffering.
Men Of
Silent night, holy night What about those whose
Goodwill
nights are no longer silent nights, no longer holy?
The rumble of guns sounds distant but it grows
daily nearer. In the heavens of the east appears, not the Christmas Star, but a great Star Red as blood. Peace on earth to men
of goodwill. Are there no men of goodwill left? Is there no
peace?


It is Christmas again.
And, truly, there is peace. It is the peace in the hearts of
Christian men even as they march to do battle with those who
hate the Child of Christmas and reject His Love. It is the love
in our hearts as we kneel at the manger and try to forget even
just for a while that man can hate, that man can kill. For if
the message of the neo-pagan tide which threatens to engulf the
world is hate, the message of Christmas is love.


DECEMBER, 1930


We do not doubt the outcome of a struggle between love and
nate. The tyrants have come and gone, glorying in their armies
terrible with banners. They tried to rule menBetween
and now they are gone—forgotten and despised.
Love And . To reign is to win a person’s heart. Unless the
Hate
hearts of men are won, no domination is complete,
no sovereign power irresistible.
With hopeful hearts, therefore, we approach the manger of
the Child en Christmas Eve, in the Holy Year of 1950. All
about us the nations marshal their armies. The Angel of Death
broods with dark wings over the earth. But we know that the

iron laws of history” which the Communists proclaim
vaunted
cannot prevail against the inexorable cycle of Christmas, Good
Friday and Easter. For we who believe find joy and hope in
Christmas, strength in the passion and suffering of Good Friday,
triumph and resurrection in Easter.


—M.V.S.


CHRISTMAS COMMUNION
By ANTONIO P. GELLA MANUUD, A.B. '52
Glory to God in the Highest...
"Stir tha hillside's holy calm!
Wake! This day of Jesus' borning!
Sainted brightness of the morning,
Rouse the world with choric psalm!
"Day-star, Hosts of Heaven: numb,
Numb my heart with glad rejoicing;
Let me hear the angels, voicing:
Father of the world to come!
“Give the steeple tongues of gold!
Loudly sing with praise unceasing!"”
Still the world, witn eyes forbidding,
Casts out Jesus in the cold.
But a stable I shall be,
Housing Him from midnight danger:
"Jesus, make my heart Your manger,
Jesus, for eternity!”
..And on earth, peace to men of good will.


4


  


Short Story Contest: Special Prize


Complete With Santa Claus


By PEDRO CARAG, Law III


1.
WE were at Olimpia's Eaterie. Ben
plays the tiny, battered piano
there for a living. At that time
of night hardly any customers
come to the place. Ben drew on
his cigarette and stared at me as
a physician would stare at a patient.
“You don’t enjoy being alive anymore, do you?” He asked, reaching for his glass of beer and puffing some more.
I reached for my own glass. I
hate beer. I take it only when I
want to talk to Ben or listen to
his piano-playing. It is my only
concession to his art, and his philosophy.
“So you need a feature story
badly,” Ben continued "How do
you expect to write when you have
lost the capacity to love people and
things? There are a hundred stories around you, if you know how
to look for them."
“Exactly — how do I look for
them?”
“If you had a feeling for people,
a knack for loving, if you believed
in the inherent goodness of things;
if you could only feel sufficiently
het up over one thing, one idea, one
fellowman; if you only had the


faith that moves mountains and the
charity without which faith is as
nothing — then you would easily
fill up volumes and volumes with
stories and stories."
“That’s a pretty big order,” I
remarked, and leaned back in my
chair.
Ben turned to the piano, shrugging slightly, and started improvising.
2.
There was a shout of “"Merry
Christmas!” from the door.
Ben and I turned around to see
Eddie coming in, looking like a
Christmas card illustration. He
was up to his nose in Christmas
odds and ends. He marched towards the table at the center of
the wide, low-ceilinged diner and
laid everything carefully on the table, reiterating: "A merry Christmas to you!”
“What’s so merry about it, aside
from the beer?” I inquired cynically.
“My dear fellow,” Eddie explained painfully, “Christmas is always
merry:"
'Why?” I persisted.
“Because it’s Christmas, Scrooge,”
he retorted, tearing open a box of


5


DECEMBER, 1950


tiny electric bulbs strung along an
electric wire with a star at one
end.
“Perhaps he doesn’t believe in
Christmas,” Ben offered in explanation, coming over from the piano to help Eddie affix the bulbs
and bangles on a small Christmas
tree.
“My poor friend!” Eddie cried
in mock despair, “that is more
than shocking, that is sacrilegious
—shockingly sacrilegious!”
“If I owned your maroon convertibte with those chromiumed doodads stuck all over it, and vour
screaming maroon jacket, perhaps I
would,” I answered back.
Ben fastened the pieces of wire,
the silver balls and vari-colored
frills, to the branches of the Christmas tree with scotch tape, and
searched around the room for an
electric socket. He discovered one
beside the piano, inserted the plug
and laid the glowing tree to shed
its watery brilliance on the varnished surface of the piano top. Ben
and Eddie surveyed the result of
their efforts with satisfaction, and
then they proceeded to decorate the
place with studious industry. I stayed seated, nursing my beer, tossing
them crumbs of criticism now and
then, keeping the banter bouncing
among the three of us.
When they had finished, Eddie
went to the biggest box on the table. He carefully brought out a
Christmas crib and set it down beside the Christmas tree on the piano. Then, once more, they stood
back in admiration.
I watched too, unimpressed. It
was the kind you get for a few
pesos downtown.
"And does that make Christmas?"
I asked in studied innocence.
6


“No,” Ben answered patiently.
“No, these are only its manifestations. Christmas is many things,
symbolism is only one of them.
Christmas is really in the heart."
Ben sat down at the keyboard
and struck into Silent Night. Eddie
started singing the words to the
carol, and after a few bars Ben
joined in with his steady baritone.
They sang with feeling. The music floated comfortably around the
room, softly and gently, and Ben
and Eddie gazed at the crib as they
sang. Then I joined in, too. I join.
ed in only because I believe I do
have an excellent bass, after a bit
of beer.
When we ended the song, Eddie
said in sudden remembrance: “Oh,
yes! The pair of shoes!"
Eddie dug out of the pile on the
table a small box and handed it
to Ben. Ben opened the box with
as much awe and tenderness as
Fred had exposed the crib. He disclosed a pair of shoes, the size for
a ten-year-old, and raised it appraisingly towards the light. It was oxblood in color, of excellent leather.
“Is that the one you wanted?” Eddie asked, his arms crossed before
him in satisfaction.
“Yeah,” Ben assured him, replacing the pair inside the box.
“Thanks.
“Now what?” I asked in consternation, wondering how the leather
was going to waste.
"I’ve told you about Tony, haven’t
1?” Ben asked me.
“You mean Tony your son?”
“Yeah. He wrote Santa Claus for
a pair of shoes.” Ben turned to the
piano and played Joy to the World.
I thought of Tony. He was Ben’s
only son, born in the hills during
the war. When he was five or there“  "


abouts he had a fall, and he never
walked since then.
“Why should he want a pair of
shoes?"
“Just for Christmas.
“Ow!” I protested, "buy a drawing book for him, buy toys. He
doesnt need a pair of shoes, he
can’t wear it, you know that.
“He has already written Santa
Claus for a pair; that’s what he'll
get from Santa.
"What nonsense! Don't
tell me you



M
still feed your

—E
—
S
kid all that
I
bosh about
2
Ma
-
Santa Claus?

And this is
E
what you get.
E
Ben... at our
NO
Pa
s
time and age
N

GO
A
T
.."
“He believes
in Christmas,

—
and Santa
 
E
EN
Claus. It’s a
  

ibeautiful beE
 E
i ef, y ou
2—

—
should s e e
E

it.
— 

2
E 
"I think

you’re crazy,"
I concluded,
and walked
to the bar for some peanuts. "And
how will you deceive this poor kid into believing that Santa Claus himself received his letter, and will send
him the pair of shoes he so desires?”
I questioned smugly.
"Santa Claus will bring it to him,
personally,” Ben clarified dispassionately.
“Now even you believe in him.


In a moment, you will have me believing in him."
“You could, if you wanted to —
as a symbol. Anyway tonight, for
Tony, you will be Santa Claus.
“Hey, wait a minute! Now I know
you’re crazy. I don’t even care to
think of the fellow, and I refuse
to have anything to do with him.
“You’ll have to, because Tony
doesn’t know you. You have the
complexion and the height — we’ll
take care of
the build.
And it’s no
joke!"
3.
From the
s truggle
which followed, I emerged
breathless in
the conventional red
suit with

white trimmings, homemade boots
of cardboard
and black
S
E
E
cloth, a wide

EE

belt tighten27
M
—-

ed obstinatea
E2
ly to keep the
pillow for a
paunch from
slipping, and the usual bearded
cap. I felt hopelessly ridiculous. Ben
glowered over me.
“You make a fine Santa Claus,
he observed through clenched teeth.
“If you kept at it with a bit of
effort, you might make a better Santa Claus than a Schopenhauer, you
heathenish, frustrated journalist."
If you had been forced into that


DECEMBER, 1950


7


getup, with the whiskers exploring
your nostrils and the beard creeping intimately under your ears and
around your neck, the tip of the
cap bouncing impishly between your
eyes, a pillow warming your paunch
and feeling absolutely silly in
red — I bet you would be beyond
protesting, too.
I straggled out to the bar and
consoled myself with the fact that
my utter degradation had been
brought about at a time when no
customers were expected at OlimDia’s.
Eddie was wrapping up the shoebox. The wrapping paper was gay
with prints of holly and mistletoe
against a background of immaculate
white. Santa Claus, riding in a
cute gift-laden sleigh drawn by
eight pairs of reindeer, raced wildly all over the view. Snowdrift
whirled breathlessly in his trail.
Eddie tied up the box with a glossy red ribbon, and under a strand
he secured a big card addressed to
Tony. It was rather good work,
neatly done, and I suspected that
the feeling of warmth that ran
through me was neither from the
previous physical exertion nor from
my heavy costume.
Ben came out of the back room,
looking jolly in spite of a stiff white
coat and an old black bowtie. Eddie grabbed me by the arm and led
me out to the sidewalk. When we
stepped out a group of urchins saw
me. They shouted "Santa Claus!
and converged upon us, striking up
a melody of Christmas carols on
their crude instruments. A couple
passing by looked me over with
amused admiration and called out,
“Merry Christmas, Santa!”
I jumped into the car and shrank
into a corner of the back seat. Ed8


die let down the top of the convertible, over my frantic protest and
to the squealing delight of the
children. Ben tossed a few coins
to them. The tinkle of the coins
and the laughter of the kids were
a merry send-off.
We had to go through Quiapo and
Quezon Boulevard to reach Ben’s
place. All the way, it was much
noisier than at the neighborhood of
Olimpia's. The atmosphere dripped
and crackled with Yuletide. A million people, it seemed, of all ages
and all walks of life, joined and
mixed and streamed about in the
manner of their own intent. The
clamor of their revelry rose and
resolved into one distinct melody,
and the music was of pure merrymaking.
In all that glorious medley of
sight and sound, I could not help
but be conspicuous still. People
pointed at me and shouted in spontaneous cheer, and wished me a merry Christmas, good will and good
cheer, and a thousand other pleasant thoughts. I had never been
wished so much boon by so many
people before, and I got into the
spirit of the thing in spite of myself; so that I stood up in the car
and waved my arms around, shook
a bunch of sleighbells that had been
in the bag, and raised my voice in
the greetings of the season with a
bountiful heart and the first pure
joy I had ever felt.
That was the mood I was in by
the time we took the turn, at the
tip of Dewey Boulevard, for Baclaran. Where I had been forced to
come to fulfill a disabled infant’s
fancy, here I was standing up on
the back seat singing Adeste Fideles
at the top of my voice. I must have
been a quaint and merry sight, but
“  "


I would have been the last to consider it strange.
About fifty yards from Ben’s
place, Eddie brought the car to a
stop and managed to tone down my
exuberance.
“We’ll go ahead in the car, and
you follow,” Ben instructed, handing over the shoebox. “Remember,
tonight you’re Santa Claus. You
better make it good. It’s near midnight; be there on time!”
I nodded unquestioningly — with
a touch of enthusiasm, in fact.
4.
In a few minutes, I reached the
gate of Ben’s little home. The
other houses in the neighborhood
were still alive with lights, and at
every discernible window glowed a
star-shaped lantern. The night was
one for the nursery books.
There was no doubting it, Christmas had settled like a cloak over
the land, warming every heart with
virtue. It was a time for goodness,
and beauty, and all the other truths
Ben loved to talk about but which
to me had until then been only
words.
I paused at the gate and preened myself like a coquettish old maid.
I opened the gate quietly and advanced on tiptoe up the footpath
leading to the stairway. The house
was all alit. Lanterns and bunting streamed in every window. I
could hear the voice of someone
talking evenly, relating the ageless
story of the Christ Child born in a
manger in Bethlehem on the night
of Christmas.
"And it came to pass while
they were there, that the days
for her to be delivered were fulfilled. And she brought forth
her firstborn Son, and wrapped
Him in swaddling clothes, and


laid Him in a manger, because
there was no room for them in
the inn.
For the moment, I was lost in
childlike wonder at this tale which
bore with it a new wondrousness
and beauty, coming to me as it did
at that time and place. Then I
started towards the flight of stairs
that led up to the porch.
But something in me balked at
the thought of Santa Claus coming
in through the door like any other
ordinary visitor. That could not
be. Santa Claus was somebody different. Santa Claus was somebody
special, now that I seemed to have
cultivated his acquaintance. The
lack of a chimney in the conventional Filipino architecture stumped
me, however, so that I was momentarily lost in the predicament of
my own whim. A guava tree by a
window gave me an idea. I started
climbing slowly up the tree.
The voice intoned: "And suddenly there was with the angel
a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God and saying 'Glory
to God in the highest, and peace
on earth among men of goodwill!"
The story-teller was well into the
coming of the Magi by the time
I had climbed to a branch overhanging a window with all the
stealth my load and costume permitted. I sat astride the branch
and peered inside.
I was entranced by the scene
spread out before me. Ben was
seated at a sofa facing my direction, talking to Tony who was on
his lap. The boy’s head leaned
sleepily oon his father’s shoulder.
Tony had a husky build from the
hips up, but the limbs below his
trunk were frail and seemed ready
to wither. Ben’s wife, whom I saw
for the first time and recognized


DECEMBER, 1950


9


as having the clean beauty of pure
women, was seated beside them,
holding the boy’s hand in her
palms. Eddie was on a cushion on
the floor. At the far wall behind
them, a tall Christmas tree seemed
to shed a holy light on the room.
There was a peacefulness about
them. They had their gazes fixed
towards the wall in my direction.
Ben recited on: “And when
they saw the star they rejoiced
exceedingly. And entering the
house they found the Child with
Mary His mother and falling
down they worshipped Him. And
opening their treasures they offered Him gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh.
I leaned out in an attempt to see
what they were staring at. It was
a Christmas crib, complete with
angels, shepherds and kings, big and
real as life. It sprawled in a corner, taking in about a quarter of
the living room.
I realized, of a sudden, that Ben
had discontinued his narration. The
Magi were supposed to depart, but
no words came from Ben to send
them off. I tore my gaze from
the crib and looked at the group
in the house.


Ben was staring in amazement
at my vision
through the window. I had leaned out too far,
and the light that
streamed from the
room revealed my
presence where
Ben had least expected to see me
—where anybody
would least expect to see the
apparition of San

ta Claus.
I straightened up frantically, and
teetered perilously on my perch. I
felt for the branch underneath with
my feet. I lost my balance instead,
and fell through the window into
the room, shoebox and all, raising
an unholy clatter as a clock in the
house struck twelve.
Distant churchbells proclaimed
Christmas to the world around!
5.
I cannot say who among us was
shocked the most.
Ben had not moved a hair. Eddie
had shot upright, although in a moment he was hurrying to offer me a
hand. I had fallen on the bag I was
carrying, holding up the shoebox as
if my life depended on its being unharmed.
Ben’s wife was torn between astonishment at my entrance and the
sight of Tony jumping up and
down with glee, clapping his hands
and shouting “Santa Claus! Merry
Christmas, Santa Claus!" over and
over in overwhelming delight.
"Tony, sit down. Sit down, Tony,” the boy’s mother admonish ed with a mixture
of worry and awe,
holding the boy
by the shoulders
and slowly letting
him down into the
sofa. Tony sat
down but continued pumping his
feet up and down
against the floor.
For the first
time, we remembered that Tony
was supposed to
GNPa have been crip

10


“  "


pled.
"It’s Santa Claus, Mama!” he
cried, clapping his hands and pointing at my abashed figure on the
floor.
"A merry Christmas to all!” I
stammered, struggling up, rubbing
my posterior and checking my ribs.
“Do not be afraid... Tony sat still
and hung with open mouth upon
every word I had to say, ... for behold, I bring you good tidings of
great joy which shall be to all the
People."
I knew that I was mixing up my
lines from the slightly dented poise
with which I waded into my role
in this little play. However, the
only thing that mattered at the moment was the fact that the boy believed in me, and I could not let
the little fellow down for lack of
drama.
I stroked my beard, laid my hand
thoughtfully on the slipping pillow,
and said: “I have seen His star
in the east and am come with gifts.
Let the heavens rejoice, and let
the earth be glad before the face
of the Lord."
With that, I approached Tony and
ceremoniously handed the box to
him.
"Oh, thank you, thank you!” he
shouted delightfully, "is it the pair
I wrote you for, the red pair? May
I open it now?”
“Yes, my boy,” I chortled, and
tightened the belt to size forty
across what should have been a sixty-inch waist. I helped Tony untie
the ribbon, then we watched him
read the card and open the box.
When he saw the pair of shoes,
he gasped with joy and looked at
me with a trace of tears in his
eyes. There was a bit of wistfulness there, and there was all of heavenly joy, and if you looked deep


enough you could see Christmas
there without any trappings.
May.. may I put them on?” he
begged.
“Sure. Try them,” I ordered,
feeling the others start in alarm.
I motioned them to stay seated, and
knelt on the floor to help Tony
put onthe shoes. They were a per.
fect fit. I led Tony towards the
Christmas crib. He moved his right
foot gingerly. He stared at the
shoe, carried it forward. He pushed the other foot to the front, and
the other again. As we held our
breath with the seconds that
stretched into separate eternities, his
feet carried him forward in gathering confidence and strength. When
we were almost across the entire
distance I let him go. He stopped
for an instant and lifted his eyes
towards me.
“Wish the Child Jesus a merry
Christmas. Go on, I directed, pointing at the manger.
Tony looked towards the crib and
started walking again. I followed
closely behind him. He reached the
crib alone and then he leaned on
the manger, staring at the little figure of the Child. The others got
up and came to stand silently behind us; I knew that we were all
praying, singing in our hearts the
praises of the Lord.
Tony turned around and smiled at
us.
“Oh, I knew you would come,
he said, “I prayed to the Child
Jesus that you would come, and I
just know you would come. And I
also prayed that when you brought
me the pair of shoes you would
make me walk. Oh, I knew you
would, come!”
Now, who could have anything to
say to that?
Tony tugged at my coat and suddenly said, "Show me your sleigh,


DECEMBER, 1950


11


and your reindeer."
“Er. they’re out in the street.
" I looked at Ben helplessly.
“Come, no... Ben interfered,
“Santa Claus has to go soon, he’s
got to bring gifts to the other kids
too. Don’t bother him about his
sleigh now."
He carried Tony in his arms and
hugged him to his breast. His wife
kissed the child on the cheeks, then
she approached me. Holding my
hand, she murmured with emotion,
"Thank you, my good man."
She was ready to cry.
"Make him walk,” I said. Ben
looked at me hesitantly. "What,
man,” I barked, "do you lack the
faith you preach to me about, the
one that moves mountains and
makes crippled children walk?”
Ben lowered Tony to the floor
and the child walked back to the
manger as if he had been doing
that all his life and was merely
weak from a long illness. The kid
had really done a lot of praying
about this Santa Claus business, you
could see that.
I went to him and said: "Put
them on anytime you feel like it,
and when you wear them out I’ll
give you another pair, special deli

very.”
Christmas was in my heart this
time.
“I must go now,” I announced.
Ben said, “Stay, we’ll go to
Mass and then throw a party."
“I have to go, but I’ll see you at
Mass, I promised. “I have a story
to write, remember? My tongue is
the pen of a scrivener and writeth
swiftly. Alleluia, alleluia!"
I kissed Tony on the cheeks and
said, "Merry Christmas to you all!"
They wished me likewise. I climbed
back through the window, caught at
the guava branch, and shouted
back "And as Tiny Tim said, God
bless us, everyone!”
I slipped once more and fell to
the ground. I struggled up and ran
to the car.
Eddie was waiting for me. Before getting in, I waved down the
road and cried: “Now, Dasher! now,
Dancer! now, Prancer and Vixen!
On, Comet! on, Cupid! on, Donder
and Blitzen! Dash away, dash away
all!"
“Dash you wonderful, wonderful
Santa Claus — you’re trying not
to cry,” Eddie stuttered.
We drove away in silence, sniffing thoughtfully.


Sanctuary Lamp
By GUILLERMO V SOLIVEN, A.B. '53
Flickering red
Within a crimson jar:
Lonely little flame,
Lovely little star—
Bathing dusky shadows
With purpureal light;
Watching in the silence
All through the night;
Would that I were like youTimorously brave,
Praying in the darknees
Beside the cradled Babe,


12


“  "


Narrative Essay: First Prize


11 Onristmas Sift
By MELITON V. SALAZAR, A.B., '54


EXT MARCH, Mr.
NGeorge Staker's book
on Philippine folk music
wli be out, and if you ever
get hold of a copy, you
will find that Mr. Staker
has dedicated it “to the
memory of the late Felix
Silvestre, who alone understood his country’s music and was alone understood by his country’s
young.
Perhaps you will wonder over the story behind
it, for you can always
find a story behind everything that is anything, a
story of hatred or love,
bitterness and despair or
joy and hope; a story with
any kind of theme, but a
story. This tale is properly Felix Silvestre’s to tell,
but he is no longer with us, and
even if he were, I am sure he would
refuse to do so. Felix had a million
yarns and a million songs, but not
one about himself. So I am telling
this story now, because, like George
Staker, I feel that the world owes
too much to Felix Silvestre, — and
has given him too little.
Moreover, it is Christmas-time,
and there is that electric feeling of
good-will in the air. We know that


feeling, you and I; but Felix, he lived
in it.
San Ignacio is a little town in
Southwestern Leyte. It is like any
other little town, except that to me
and to a few others, it is a home.
It has one asphalted street:
they called it Calle Rafols when I
was young, but two years ago they
changed the name to Quezon Avenue.
It starts at the foot of the rickety
pier and ends where the earth begins


DECEMBER, 1950


13


to swell upwards into the first gentle hills. And just before the asphalted section ends and the rutty
third-class provincial road begins,
there used to be a clearing. I don’t
know how it looks now, because every
time I try to imagine a playground
in that clearing, I get confused. Mr.
George Staker is in charge of the
transformation and he wants me to
visit San Ignacio in time for the formal opening of the "Silvestre Memo
rial Playground” this Christmas eve.
I don’t know I think it is wise not
to go at all. I want to remember
that clearing as it used to be: the
trellised vines, the tall corn, the cold
stream, and Felix singing.
Yes, that’s what I want to remember. Felix singing. He lived in song,
and he will live on,—in song. George
Staker has assured me of that.
They called him “Bobo" in the
town. He was a little old man, harmless and inoffensive, doing odd jobs
for the townsfolk when he had tended to his clearing. I hated to see how
people would treat him with the sort
of contempt they reserved for
“queer" men. Maybe it was his meckness that invited their taunts, may
be his ragged clothes and the peculiar stoop he had when he walked.
But the residents of San Ignacio never understood him,—they still don't.
We used to spend half our waking
hours in his "farm" That was long
ago, ten years, maybe more, when I
and the world around me were young.
On vacation days and Sundays especially, when the morning chores
had been done and the liquid heat of
summer had already wilted the
youngest leaves on the corn-stalks,
we used to sit under the thick canopies of squash vines and listen to
the murmur of life around us, the
far-away chirp of birds in the bamboo thickets, the drone of bees, the
14


busy cluck of a mother-hen, and the
beat of a woodcutter’s strokes. And
then Felix would begin to sing, or
tell a story, and the summer world
around us would fade as his words
or his music came out, rich and sad
and beautiful.
His stories were mostly about the
wood-spirits, or the fairy of laughter, or of Juan Putong, who once
grew so tall that he was burned by
the sun, and once so small that he
floated in the air like a grain of
dust. The boys around him would
listen, rapt and wide-eyed, their
thoughts far, far away, among the
seven hills of treasures, or the sunset home of Ballena, the whale queen,
or in the cave of the enchanted ring,
guarded by a four-bodied serpent.
But in the evenings, especially, Felix
would bring out an old guitar and
begin to sing. And it is his songs
that I cannot forget, the same songs
that George Staker has determined
not to forget.
They were songs of a country and
of a people. They were history in
music, not the way a historian would
tell it, cool and distant and impartial, but the way the people told it,
the farmer to his children at night,
when the evening star hung large
and low and the supper fires flickered redly; the sailor to his mates,
the trader to his fellow-travelers, as
he stared at the warm blaze of a
camp-fire.
In them, in those songs, I saw and
I felt our people, struggling and fighting for a nation they would never
see; laughing with the sheer fullness of life, laughing like the wind
in the hills and the afternoon tide;
crying with the sadness that is part
of the theme of life, like the mournful sigh of a mountain stream. There
was power and beauty and hope.
Ours is a great race, but a sad his“  "


tory. In those songs, I read everything: the full, fertile years, the joy
of harvest-time; the thrill of the
sea’s yield; the clash of battle
shields.
I went away shortly afterwards.
I went away because I was no longer young, because I had to begin
living as a man, to put my shoulder
to the wheel of life. But the young
stayed on in that clearing, listening
to the songs I had heard over and
over again, and never tired of hearing them. And the young grew and
in their turn, went away, but there
were other boys to take their place.
There was always that crowd of
youthful faces around him, as Felix
sang and grew old, thanking the
Lord in music for the wide-eyed
friends and the strong life growing
all around him.
I found Felix very old when I returned to San Ignacio, two years ago.
But the clearing was just as green,
the boys were just as young, and his
songs were still the songs I knew.
I walked straight to his farm from
the pier. Calle Rafols had disappeared, and in its place was Quezon Avenue, broader, busier, dirtier. I found
Felix pruning a new “atis" tree on
the far edge of his clearing. In the
very center, where the leafy rafts
of summer vines had floated, was a
dusty rectangle of packed earth. and
I was astounded to see a basketball
goal adorn each end. Felix smiled
at me, a strange, crinkled smile, and
motioned to the court.
“The young ones enjoy themselves
there,” he said. “I have never seen
them so happy as when they are
playing there,” he shook his head,
" I wish I had known sooner.”


“But why have you done it?” I
asked him. “Your farm was more
pleasant, more beautiful, as it was!
Why did you change it?”
He smiled. And when he spoke
again, I knew that it was the Felix
I had known. "I am getting too old,"
he said, "and I will not be able to
entertain them for long. Let them
have something else to do in the hot
afternoons. You do not grudge them
that, do you?"
Later, he told me about George
Staker. He was an American agent
for a music-publishing house in San
Francisco. He had come to gather
material for his book on Philippine
folk songs, had stayed at San Ignacio for almost a year. “The book
company has promised me thirtythousand pesos in royalties, Felix
said with a satisfied smile. "I will
have something to leave to your sons,
when they come to this clearing."
Felix Silvestre is dead now. But
on Christmas night, a new playground will be formally opened to
the youth of San Ignacio. The music book has paid for it.,
"I want to make this playground
a Christmas gift,” George Staker
wrote to me, "from Felix Silvestre
to the youth he loved so well. It will
be the most fitting memorial to his
name, besides the music book. Felix
wanted the grounds finished as soon
as possible, and I managed to make
my company advance Felix’s sharc
of the royalties. So I hope you are
here, but if you can’t make it, Merry
Christmas and a Happy New Year.
No. I am not going back. I want
to remember the clearing as it was,
not as it is.


15


DECEMBER, 1950


Short Story: First Prize


The young man searched for Christmas,
and a girl helped him find it in the melodious
ringing of church bells...


The Faraway Christmas


By GREGORIO C. BRILLANTES, Litt. B. '52


JE had dreamed of going home for
44Christmas. But Santa Maria was
far away to the south, across the
sea. He did not have the money
for the fare. It was the year he
was twenty. In October, he had left
college to look for work. Now, he
was just beginning to earn. He was
beginning to send money to his mother. His father had died long ago.
He could not afford the money for
the long journey. He had not been
home for a long time.
One evening in early December,
they had started singing Christmas
carols in the boarding house. The
boarding house was a small, unpainted house, with make-shift partitions
between the rooms. It was Luis, his
room-mate, who began the singing.
The evening the singing began, Luis
lay in bed, smoking a cigarette. Then
Luis got up and said, "Hoy, Ben,
it’s almost Christmas!” There was
bright laughter in the voice of Luis.
“Yes,” he said, looking into the
smiling eyes of Luis. “It’s almost
Christmas.” He tried to sound like
Luis, happy and full of hope. He
tried to sound as if he were going
home for Christmas. But he only
felt empty inside. He tried to smile.
16


Luis began to sing "Silent Night.”
He did not have a good voice, but
he sang with great feeling. "All is
calm, all is bright,” he sang. He
stood in the middle of the narrow
room, singing with strength and tenderness.
He watched Luis singing. Then
Ramon and Tony, who stayed in the
adjoining room, came in. They were
both working students. They sang
“Silent Night” with Luis. He sat on
his bed, listening to Luis and Ramon singing. He did not join them.
He just sat there, listening. The
song made him lonely. To him, their
young voices were sad and beautiful.
Later, in the night, he and Luis
lay awake, talking. Their cigarettes glowed in the darkness. Through
the window drifted the faint nightsounds of the city. For a while, they
talked aimlessly about their work.
Luis clerked in the City Hall. Then
he was telling Luis he was not going home for Christmas. He knew
Luis was going home. Luis came
from Tarlac, a few hours’ ride from
the city. Ramon and Tony were
also going home.
He found it easy to talk in the
darkness. He imagined Luis listen“  "


ing to him intently. He told Luis
about Santa Maria. Acacia trees
lined the walk across the plaza of the
town. The deep river flowed in silence in the sun. Beyond the town
were the green hills and the tall
mountains. His father had been a
farmer. His mother washed the
clothes of the rich of the town. His
sister Elena was eighteen now. His
brother Miguel was a soldier.
He remembered Christmas in Santa Maria. The memory belonged to
another time. “My cousins from San
Jose would come to the house, he
said to Luis. “I was but a child then.
We played all day. In the evenings,
we went from house to house, singing Christmas carols. The people
gave us rice-cakes. Once, my godfather gave me a fountain-pen. I
lost it later in school. On Christmas Eve we all went to church. The
altar on Christmas Eve was a thing
to see. My grandmother would tell
me to keep still and pray—
After a long moment, he closed his
eyes to sleep. Sleep was a long time
coming. He kept seeing the altar of
the church in Santa Maria on Christmas Eve...
*VE worked in a gray, impersonal
14 building. He formed columns of
numbers with an adding machine.
These he copied into the blank pages
of record books. He did his work
carefully. He was afraid to lose his
job. He worked so hard sometimes
his head throbbed painfully. As he
bent over his desk, his eyes smarted.
His fingers became numb from pressing the keys of the adding machine.
The electric fans that hung from the
ceiling only stirred the anemic air.
Type-writers clicked dryly around
him. Dust whirled and beat against
the windows. The loud voices of his
office-mates jarred his ears. Their


laughter disturbed his concentration.
He tried to think only of his work.
There was Mr. Navarro, the Assistant-Manager. Mr. Navarro was a
huge man, with thick; hairy arms.
He liked to walk up and down the
aisle formed by the tables, attacking the officials in the government
in his loud voice. He would gesture
furiously with a cigar in his hand.
There was Mr. Bagcal, the Treasurer. Mr. Bagcal cursed vehemently and regularly. He seemed always
to be cursing something. His eyes
were full of hate. Mr. Hermogenes,
one of the book-keepers, enjoyed telling obscene stories. The women in
the office giggled when Mr. Hermogenes told them his stories. The
women were Sonia, Lilia and Margarita. They were attractive in a
ruthless manner. Margarita was the
private secretary of Mr. Benigno, the
Manager. She was the prettiest
among the women in the office. But
there was something snake-like
about her. Her eyes sometimes
flashed like a snake’s tongue...
It was the day before the Christmas vacation. He was called, with
the other office-workers, to Mr. Benigno’s office. There had been more
than the usual volume of work. He
rose stiffly from his desk. His head
whirled. Tiredly, he joined the
others filing into Mr. Benigno's office.
Mr. Benigno, the Manager was
an important-looking man. He talked in a metallic voice. He wore
hand-painted neckties. A big diamond sparkled on a short, bloated
finger. He smoked a pipe. Now,
he leaned back in his swivel chair.
His belly puffed out like a balloon.
He stood there, in Mr. Benigno’s
office, with the other employees. He
could feel their excitement. They


DECEMBER, 1950


17


seemed to lean forward eagerly.
They waited for Mr. Benigno to
speak. When Mr. Benigno smiled,
he noticed the gold teeth.
"I’m throwing a party on Christmas Eve, Mr. Benigno said. He
smiled patronizingly. “You're all
invited."
Margarita gave a faint shriek of
delight. Lilia clapped her hands.
“Merry Christmas, somcone said.
Voices rose and fell in Mr. Benigno's office. The voices were eager
and excited. “Christmas... dancing... food... drinks,. see you
there, Joe.. bring Rosie...
He stood there, in Mr. Benigno's
office. He felt detached from the
crowd, from the excited voices
around him. He wondered vaguely
why they were so excited. He began to feel warm in the room. He
wanted to be out of the building.
He was very tired.
“I want everybody to be there,”
Mr. Benigno was saying. “Understand? Everybody.” Mr. Benigno
laughed suddenly. “I might even
call the roll.” The four o’clock
whistle began to wail in the sky.
Outside, the afternoon lay on the
streets. He walked slowly. He
tried to imagine how the party
would be like. Perhaps, he would
enjoy this Christmas after all. He
allowed this thought to relax his
mind. The numbness began to flow
out of him. He looked around him.
Shop-windows were decorated with
tinsel. He saw a man in a Santa
Claus costume in the doorway of
a department store. People hurried on the street. They carried
gift-packages in their arms. Then
he heard a Christmas carol playing in a record-shop. A woman’s
husky voice sang of Christmas in
an alien country. Snow there was
18


a white silence upon the land. He
stood in the glare and tumult of
the street and listened carefully to
the song. He remembered Luis and
Ramon and Tony singing in the
boarding house. Before the song
was finished, it was cut abruptly.
A raucous guaracha blared from
the record-shop. He moved on hurriedly. The jeepney drivers shouted their destinations. People rushed on the sidewalks. The dust
lingered over the shattered street.
In the boarding house, in the evening, he sat by the window of his
room. He was alone in the room.
Luis had left in the morning. He
smoked a cigarette. The night was
huge and dark. He thought again
of Christmastime in Santa Maria.
He told himself to stop remembering. It made him feel lonely. He
did not like to feel lonely. He had
nobody to tell his loneliness. He
began to think of Mr. Benigno's
party. He tried to imagine the
lights and the music. But the
thought did not stay long in his
mind. He thought again of past
Christmases. Finally, he lay down
on his bed. The past washed over
him like ocean-waves...
R. Benigno's house was a big,
gquat bungalow in the suburbs.
It was surrounded by an iron fence.
A concrete driveway ran into the
street. The house had grilled windows. The neighborhood was rich
and fashionable. Identical houses
lined the street.
The living room was filled with
people. It was Christmas Eve, the
night of Mr. Benigno's party. All
of Mr. Benigno's employees were
there. They sat on the upholstered chairs and laughed and talked.
Mr. Navarro and Mr. Bagcal were
there. They laughed and talked
“  "


with the others. A group was gathered around Mr. Hermogenes. Mr.
Hermogenes told them his riotous
stories. They were stories he had
told them before. Sonia, Lilia, and
Margarita were there. There were
also other women. Cigarette smoke
hung thick in the air. Empty bottles of beer rolled on the floor. An
artificial Christmas tree made of
wire and paper stood precariously on
a low table. There was much noise
and laughter. A wine-glass fell to the
floor suddenly and broke with a
tinkling sound.
He sat alone in a corner of the
room. He had come in his only
white suit. When he arrived, the
living room was
already filled
with people.
Couples were already dancing
to the music of
a radio-phonograph. Mr. BeA
nigno had met
him on the
porch. He had
stood uncertainly on the porch,
looking in. Mr.
Benigno then
had staggered
out to the porch
and asked him
come in. Mr. Benigno had been
drinking. Now he watched Mr. Benigno dancing a rhumba with one
of the women who did not work in
the office. The woman laughed shrilly when Mr. Benigno tripped and
almost fell. Mr. Benigno’s eyes were
blood-shot.
Food had been served carlier on
cardboard plates. Now he watched the people in the room. He sat
in a corner and watched the couples dancing. He heard Margari

ta’s voice above the music. He
wondered if she were also drunk.
The music suddenly stopped. Mr.
Hermogenes had shut off the phonograph. Mr. Hermogenes was so
drunk, he swayed on his feet.
"Let’s sing some carols, Mr.
Hermogenes said. "Let’s sing, everybody. It’s Christmas Eve.
There was a chorus of approval.
Mr. Hermogenes began to sing. Mr.
Benigno placed a hand around Mr.
Hermogenes' shoulder and sang
with him. He watched the two men
singing. He began to feel sick inside him. "Saa-haylent Night, Hoholy Night,” the two men sang.
The people in the living room laughed at the two
men. He did not
laugh. The men
looked sad and
pathetic to him.
Confusedly, he
remembered Luis
singing in the
boarding house.
He felt again
the old loneliliness. He rose
and walked out
to the porch.
The porch
was long and
narrow. Vines
clambered up a
trellis. Here it was not so bright.
There were shadows. He heard the
drunken singing cease. “C’mon, let’s
dance,” the shrill, high voice of a
woman said. Dance-music began
to play again.
He walked to the farthest end of
the porch. Then he saw the girl
and the little boy. The boy lay on
the sofa, crying. The girl sat on
the edge of the sofa.
The girl’s back was turned to him
as he approached. She did not see


DECEMBER, 1950


19


him. He heard her speaking softly to the boy. “Stop crying now,
stop crying now,”" she said in her
soft voice.
She turned around suddenly when
she heard him approach. She gave
a startled gasp. She was seventeen,
perhaps younger. She wore a white
dress. He saw that she was beautiful.
He stood over them. He tried to
smile. “Hello,” he said. He was
afraid they would be frightened. He
noticed the veil and the prayerbook in the girl’s hands. Her hands
were white and slender. The boy
had stopped crying and stared at
him.
For a moment, he did not know
what to say. "Why is he crying?’
he asked the girl uncertainly.
For the first time, the girl smiled.
Her smile was like her voice. It
was sweet and soft. "He doesn’t
want to go to church,” she said.
“He wants to sleep."
“He can’t sleep with all the noise
going on," he said. He sat down on
a chair opposite the sofa. Dancemusic drifted from the living room.
He heared the sound of glass breaking. The night outside was clear.
The stars were many bright points
of light. He saw the girl looking
at him. She looked at him with
the curiosity of a child.
"Why aren’t you there with
them?” she asked.
“I like it better here,” he said.
“It’s cool."
“My uncle loves to have parties,”
she said. "Do you also work in
his office?'
“Yes,” he said.
The little boy sat on the sofa.
He was about seven years old. He
blinked his eyes sleepily.
She noticed him looking at the
boy.. “He’s my brother,” she said.
“He’s called Tommy.. She . looked


at the boy. She looked sad when
he looked at the boy. She was more
beautiful when she was sad. Then
she turned to him. "What’s your
name?” she asked. Her eyes were
like the curious, wondering eyes of
a child.. She was beautiful and
slender in her white dress.
'Ben, he said. The girl reminded him of a book he once read.
The girl in the book was good and
pure. He liked the thought. A
burst of harsh laughter rang out
from the living room.
“I'm Lisa, she said. "My mother was called Lisa, too. She
paused and looked at the veil and
the prayer-book in her hands.
When she looked up at him, her
eyes were shining with a hint of
tears. “She and Father died in
the war, she said.
For a while, she did not speak.
The boy began to whimper. She
put her hand around the boy’s
shoulder. The boy snuggled closer
to her. The voices rose and fell in
the living room.
He watched the side of the girl’s
face. In the soft light, it was
white and smooth. Now it seemed
he had known her for a long time.
The accidents of many years had
brought him to her again. Her
heart was pure and good. It was
like her white dress. The thought
played on his mind. He wanted
fiercely to believe in it. The girl
was looking at him again. Her eyes
were like the clear, curious eyes of
a child. He saw the goodness and
the purity in them.
“It’s Christmas Eve," she said.
She said it with a catch in her
voice. In the living room, they
were beginning to sing again. Their
voices were loud. Somebody laughed loud and long. A chair crashed on the floor. “It’s Christmas
Eve—" she said with a kind of des

20.


  "


peration. She turned her face away
and stared into the darkness beyond the porch rail.
He watched her helplessly. Suddenly, he wanted to tell her many
things. He wanted to tell her that
she was beautiful and good. That
it was Christmas Eve, and there
should be soft, familiar voices singing. There should be warmth and
love. There should be prayer and
the nearness of Christmas. He also wanted to tell her that he had
wanted to go home. He wanted to
tell her about the altar in the
church in Santa Maria on Christmas Eve. He wanted to tell her
about his lying awake nights, remembering the Christmases he had
known. But he could only look at
her wordlessly. The things he wanted to tell her were many songs that
choked in his throat. She was looking out at the night. It seemed as
though she were waiting for someone to appear from out of the darkness. For a long moment, he sat
there, wanting to speak. A stray
breeze ruffled her hair The little
boy whimpered beside her...
“It’s almost midnight,” she said.
She stood up. She was tall and
beautiful. The prayer-book and
the veil were in her hands.
"Are you going to church?” he
said.
“Yes,”" she said. She lifted the
boy from the sofa. She set him
on the floor and said, "Let’s go,
Her voice pleaded
now, Tommy.”
with the boy. "Let’s go now, Tommy,” she said.
"Ill go with you, Lisa, he said
suddenly. He had not thought of
going to the Midnight Mass. He
had thought of going in the morning. Even that was something unreal and remote. Now his voice
sounded new to him. It was like
something that had been dead ln


him and now was alive again. He
looked at the upturned face of the
girl. She was looking at him with
the clear, wondering eyes of a child.
He began to feel as though he were
on the verge of something vast and
magnificent. "I’ll go with you, he
said.
He walked with the girl and the
boy down the street. The music
and the loud laughter faded behind them. The night was clear
and cool, and he felt close to it.
The old emptiness began to flow
out of him. Then they took another
street. There were nipa shacks
instead of rich, identical houses.
Lanterns of many shapes glowed
warmly from the windows. There
were many people going to the
church. Men and women and children hurried with them. The
sound of many feet was like the
murmur of a deep river. At the
end of the long street, he saw the
church on a hill. The church was
brightly-lighted. A big lantern the
shape of a star hung from a pole
in front of the church. Then the
bells began to ring. They filled the
enormous night. He walked beside Lisa with sure-footed steps.
Lisa stopped for a moment for a
girl who had called out behind her.
The girl joined them. “This is my
friend Jo, Lisa told him. “Merry
Christmas,” he said to the new
girl. He heard Lisa laugh now
Her laughter was melodious like
the bells. He wanted to tell her
many things. The stream of people surged forward. On the hill,
the lights of the church shone
brightly. He felt the December
wind on his face as they walked
forward. He remembered again the
altar in the church in Santa Maria
on Christmas Eve. As they neared
the church, he heard many soft voices
singing.


DECEMBER, 1950


21


Poetry: First Prize


A Beggar And A Song
By ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN, A.B. '51
My rags tonight are purple robes
Cascading in splendor untold;
My tin cup gleams like a thousand stars,
And my staff is a sceptre of gold.
There is a carpet tonight 'neath my weary feet,
And my battered straw hat is a crown.
As I pass the dark castles of rich men tonight,
Why, cven the stars bow down.
For tonight I go to a kingdom walled
With the wind and the stars and the sky,
Where the music of seraphs and angels blend
With a donkey’s sleepy sigh,
Where a manger of straw is a golden throne
And a stable, a bastion of might,
Where beggars are greater than kings, but alas!
A King is a Beggar tonight.


22


“  "


Short Story: Second Prize


He loved the stage and hungered for great
dramatic roles, and as Santa Claus, he was at his best...


When The Drop Fell
By GABINO MENDOZA, A.B. '53


LD Mr. Caray threw a long sha dow over the pool as he watched
the spray leap from the little water
fall and gather on a leaf of the Bandera Espanola that nestled perilously
close to the babbling water of the
creek. It was dusk. The sun was
sinking. Even the blades of grass
that grew on the road that one could
but faintly discern through the
green, threw shadows. Mr. Caray
watched intently as tiny drops of water slid and gathered at the leaf’s
pointed tip. As the tiny drop hung
there, it seemed hopefully, joyfully
eager to join its fellows in the pool
below. But its time had not yet come.
The droplet grew larger as more water was sprayed on the leaf. The
dying sun, for a moment, made it
glint like the shiny white top of an
old man. Then it fell. The darkening water rippled and rings formed,
bigger, bigger and bigger still, until
they reached the end of the pool and
then, the ripples traveled still farther
away with the hurrying creek.
Old Mr. Caray looked steadily at
the tossing water till he no longer
saw the muddy water of the creek
but the dark green sea that had
swirled around the rocks, one day
long ago. He listened to the rustling
grass and the singing shallow creek
till he heard inside, deep in his memory, the slap and splash of salty


water on moss-covered rocks. Old
Mr. Caray delved deep into his memory until there lived once more,
the Freshman, Teddy Caray, who had
gone to the beach to practice in solitude his elocution piece.
At the deadly sea, he had shouted,
“No! let me taste the whole of it,
like my peers,
The heroes of old,
Bear the brunt in a minute pay
glad life’s arrears
Of pain, darkness and cold."
Next day, he shouted those same
words at a sea of murmuring faces
and he could see grown men grow
tense, even as he was tense. He saw
them wet their lips; saw them bewitched by the daring magic of
Browning and the smoothly flowing
magic of Caray. And he loved it,
loved all of it: the thrill of holding
a hundred eyes, the thrill of playing
on a hundred hearts.
Then it was done.
As he descended from the stage,
every nerve tingling, his hands
strangely trembling, he felt a sudden
desire to go back and perform before
the crowd once more, perform forever if he could. But he realized
that his moment of glory was gone.
"Ill be back there,” he resolved to
himself.
It was after tryouts for the annual
play, "Hamlet." Teddy was lounging


DECEMBER,,1950


23


in the smoking room awaiting the
results. Ben Paras, a bench-warmer in the basketball team, came in
and collapsed beside him.
"How'd tryouts go?”
Wanting to impress the uncouth
athlete, Teddy paradoxically replied,
“As tryouts go, it went.”
The athlete who was uncouth,
looked properly impressed. Then he
gushed, "Mr. Rus would be off his
rocker if you don’t get a plum in this
play. Boy, I’ve seen you on the
stage, and you’re good."
Teddy smiled condescendingly, surprised that Ben knew the use of the
understatement, for it seemed unthinkable that Ben had actually
meant just what he said, and no
more. So, feeling that all was right
with the world, he gave Ben a peek
at his dreams, in the manner, for all
the world, of a big brother initiating
his baby sister into the mysteries of
first grade arithmetic.
“Well, I don’t expect to get Hamlet, he said modestly. "I’d be satisfied with being the King. You see,
that’s a very important part and it
demands great acting. I have it all
figured out. I know just how the
cunning, sly king should be played."
“Oh."
“To be on the stage,” this melodramatically, with eyes lifted up to
the dirty ceiling, he almost whispered, "that is living. To instill fear in
the audience with a slight twist in
your smile, to stamp awe on their
faces with a flick of the wrist and
a play of the cape—that is life.
“Hey! Teddy!" shouted Pete from
the door. “You’re in.
Teddy looked at Ben with a comradely smile, then with a smile in his
eyes looked back at Pete as if to
say, “We expected that all along.
“Yes," continued Pete, "you’re to
be Osric.
“Who's he.. Ben started to ask
24


but one look at Teddy warned him.
He mumbled, "I got to... and walked out with not another look, not
another word.
In spite of . his disappointment,
Teddy played Osric. And strangely
enough, next to Raul’s Hamlet, the
boys in school remembered his Osric best.
“When I get back on that stage,
I’ll have the lead,” he promised himself this time.
He got back on the stage all right,
when they presented "Pinafore”.
But though he enjoyed singing,
“What never? What never?” to the
skipper’s "No, never" and "Hardly
over,” he was not satisfied, for he
was just a bit player called Deadeye.
And so it was, all the time. For
four years, he was in every play
the High School presented yet he never was given the lead. He always
aspired for the great dramatic roles
and always received the comedy
parts. He had the hunger for the
stage which every actor seems to
have deep down inside of him. And
though he fed it constantly, still it
asked for more and more.
“Stage-struck, Mr. Rus the drama director said of him, "but...
“Stage-struck,” they branded him
in the Year Book. They predicted,
“One day, we shall watch Teddy on
the stage, doing Cyrano.”
Old Mr. Caray sighed and again
a droplet fell from the bandera leaf
and roused ripples in the pool.
What fragile gossamer stuff our
dreams are made of! His were ripped by the death of a father in his
Freshman year, and a sister’s sickness. Broken dreams, all unfulfilled!
But while he tramped the streets
looking for work, and while he trudged through the suburbs selling brushes, and while he sat at a narra
desk dictating to his secretary, still
“  "


he dreamt of treading the boards as
a melancholy Hamlet, or as a traitorous Judas or even as a pathetic
Cyrano.
He never did.
Once again, a drop of water hung
at the leaf’s edge. But this time,
though, it looked hopefully, joyfully
eager to join the water drops
sympathetically. "You’ll fall. You’ll
get your wish in the end. I know it’s
hard to hang there, but you, in time,
will fall. I never will. I shall hang
and hang and never fall, and never
get my wish. O lucky, lucky waterdrop.” At length, perhaps encouraged by soft words, the droplet fell into the pool and again sent little
waves rippling to the edge of the
pool and I do not doubt, to the end
of the creek.
“Merry Christmas, Mr. Caray. It
was Timoteo Guevarra, Mr. Caray’s
next-door neighbor. He was a pleasant young man, as young men go
nowadays. He was one of Mr. Caray’s few "talking-neighbors.” “Mr.
Caray, how are the fish.... Heh...
By the way, are you doing anything
tonight?”


A dry, flat, "Why?”
"You see... well, it’s like this...
I need an actor and...
The old man’s face lighted up.
Eagerly he asked, "Well?”
“You see er... won’t you come
in and talk it over inside?”
Gladly.”
Gladly, Mr. Caray smiled as he
put on his costume. Gladly he muttered in his beard, “To stand before
men, and transport them to the land
of make-believe, to make them weep
with you, to make them laugh with
you—that is life and living," as he
stealthily climbed his neighbors"
fence. Across a moon-lit backyard,
he flitted; through an open window
in the cellar, muttering "Prancer
and Dancer" he slipped; cautiously
up dusty creaking stairs; with a deep
breath he stood before a door and
carefull grasped the door knob. He
could hear the hum of voices on the
other side, and the occasional clinking of wine-glasses.
He threw the door open. Everyone
gasped.
How he enjoyed the look on their
faces! And how they changed! First
there was fright; then amazement;
then joy. And he laughed aloud, a
hearty laugh, a fat man’s merry
laughter, the laugh of one who has
all he wants, the laugh of one who
has much to give, the joyful laugh
of Santa Claus The baby heard it
and laughed. Victor the little imp
heard it and laughed. Laughter
spread in the room like the rippling
wavelets in the pool and it grew and
grew till it hit the walls; then it traveled still farther away, out of the
window into the starry heavens and
the merry earth.
His drop had fallen at last. At
last he had the lead. He was Santa
Claus and it was Christmas night.


DECEMBER, 1950


25


Essay: Second Prize


Dear jesus...


Dec. 23, 1950
Dear Jesus,
The clock has just struck ten and
as I look out of the window, I realize I have never seen so many stars
jostle with each other in such a little patch of sky. I suppose even
stars have to get "standing room" reservations for the one thousand nine
hundred and fiftieth showing of “the
tenderest story ever told.
My table is littered with the cards
I am sending this Christmas-time. I
was running over the names on the
envelopes when a thought occurred to
me. There is a card for the teacher
who pounded so hard on the blackboards during Latin classes that even
St. Peter must have heard. There
is one for a happy musician who
found out You wanted him to be a
Carmelite, and another for a sad exseminarian who will need You so
much on Christmas night. There is
one for Cesar who "sprinkles" when
he reads, and another for Lola Beriang who cannot read at all. There
is one for Mr. X who professes he
hates Christmas cards. ( I don’t
blame him, Lord. He has never received a Christmas card.) There is
one for Florinda. (You know her,
Lord. I have told You so much about
her.) There is one for almost everybody, except ... except You, Lord.
That is why I am writing this Christ26


mas letter. You are Christmas and
very many people will forget Christmas on Christmas day. But I don't
want to tell You anything that will
make you sad on Your birthday...
no tears, no complaints, no big words
on Your birthday. So, Lord, I want
to tell you about some boys in Balic-Balic and there shall be no tears,
no complaints, no big words.
Let me make a guess, Lord. One
of the places in which You will enjoy Your birthday most is Balic-Balic. It’s a “hick” town, Lord, but
“hick” towns like Bethlehem seem
to be Your favorites. There is a
bunch of barefoot boys there, Lord,
with whom You will have a great
fun celebrating Your birthday. They
are a bundle of little "squirts" with
big eyes and big smiles and big
hearts.
Take Alon, for example, Lord. His
hair shines as if there were a halo
floating on top of it. I wouldn’t be
surprised if there were.
Then there is Eddie, Lord. I
haven’t heard a cherub sing, Lord,
but Eddie’s voice must be pretty
close to it.
I know You will not want me to
forget tiny Rogel because he must
be very close to Your Heart. He may
have to stand on tiptoe to see You in
the manger... but no, Lord, I think
“  "


Your manger is little enough for the
littlest child to reach You. It is we,
the "big” people who have to bend
our knees and become as little Rogels
if we are to reach You.
These boys will be singing Happy
Birthday songs to you on Christmas.
They sing out of tune sometimes,
Lord; and their "Silent Night, Holy
Night" may be anything but silent
and everything but holy, and yet 1
know, Lord, that they will sing
straight into Your Heart.
Russia is blood-red, Lord, so is


China and Korea, and many parts
of the world have turned pink. But
there is still a blotch of shining
white somewhere atop a “hick” chair
loft, in a “hick” church, down the
“hick" roads of Balic-Balic.
Give me, Lord, and this "grownup” world, the grace to be like Alon
and Eddie and Rogel on Christmas
and make everyday of the year a
Christmas for us. Happy Birthday,
Lord, and good-night.
With all my emptiness,
ONOFRE PAGSANGHAN


-O

Et Verbum Caro Factum Est
By LEONIDAS V. BENESA, A.B. '52


The midnight wind was blowing strangely cold
Across the Judean hills.
Amidst their sheep,
Shepherds wondered, "What means this wind that chills, yet thrills
Our hearts to leap
With a strange joy?
And from afar,
With gifts of myrrh and frankincense and gold,
Three Kings drew nigh, led by a fiery Star.
"Whom seekest thou?
‘We come upon a heavenly quest,
For we saw His Star gemming the West.
That night of nights, Time humbly knelt in wonder,
A wide-eyed child before
Eternity,
And while wine-and-sin-soaked empty men cursed and swore,
Lo! suddenly
An eagle rose screaming to the sky
As heaven with song seemed to have burst asunder:
Glory, glory, glory to God on high!"
In the midst of which the sweetest, fairest, beautifulest
Word lay upon the Virgin's breast.


DECEMBER, 1950


27


Eseay: Third Prize


Thought Of Christmas


By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52


COONi we shall be keeping the anN niversary of the greatest day that
ever dawned upon the race of men—
the birthday of Jesus Christ. We
shall recall the memory of the grandost fact that ever wove itself into
the web of human history — the
fact that the Son of God came in
the lowliness of human nature to
save humanity. And we shall hear
Him spoken of, in the liturgy of
the season, as the Long-Expected, the
Desired of nations, the Star Whose
rising watchers had been straining
their eyes to see.
This thought will lead us to remember that the sublime event of
Christmas Day links together all the
dispensations of God in His merciful dealings with mankind.
The old order was time of preparations, the new one of fulfillment;
the one shows the finished pedestal,
the other the faultless statue. What
to the Patriarchs and Prophets was
promised, for us has been fulfilled.
What they longed for, we have.
The Star which they stretched forth
to see has arisen for us, and shines
upon the pathway of our lives in
Jesus Christ, Whose birthday we are
to keep.
One thing, at least, is very plainly written down in the record of
man’s doings before the Messiah
came; sin everywhere abounded and
the evil one was triumphant. The
very nations which marked the limits of civilization were sunk in


low depths of depravity; and the
power of their statesmen, the songs
of their bards, and the very wisdom
of their sages could only lead to
lower depths yawning to engulf
them. Rome had lost almost every
trace of the sanctity of family life,
and Greece, with her Plato and her
Aristotle, could not measure or understand the dignity of simple motherhood. Slavery, with the horrible
woes it entailed, was like a rank
weed growing apace and stifling the
air with its poisonous vapors. Crime
was personified and worshipped,
with disgraceful orgies; and the
earth recking with sin, seemed to
cry for the justice of the Deity to
come and smite dishonor and loathsomeness.
Meanwhile, God in the sublime
height of infinite holiness unassailable purity, was thinking thoughts
of peace. Like the snow-clad mountain peak which rises ever in unstained grandeur while storms riot
at its base, the adorable Trinity was
calmly surveying the sad havoc which
sin had wrought in the great heart
of humankind. The iniquities of the
earth cried to heaven for justice.
but the bountiful goodness of God
sent forth winged mercy, not to
strike, but to offer terms of peace
and to save. And so justice and
peace met and kissed in the union
of life; and the outcome of this
union was Jesus Christ.
We men rejoice because by Him
man was raised up and deified; while


28


  


God stooped in lowly condescension,
to lead humanity into the sure way
of salvation. We rejoice because the
old truth which mankind had almost
entirely lost was, in the beauty and
purity of the Gospel teaching. once
more securely restored. The immortal with its lofty aspiring, was
raised anew to its old-time dignity:
the understanding was cleared and
the will re-established in the might
of its majesty; because the Babe
of Bethlchem deified mankind out of
a love which is worthy alike of God
and man, altogether worthy of the
God-man.
No wonder if we feel, at Christmas
time, the gladness and the mirth of
redeemed souls; no wonder if we
look upon Christmas Day as the
dawn of everything which gives to
civilization its beauty and its charm.


For if today there be a spot on
earth where honor is held in esteem
and virtue wins its rewards; if
there be in the heart of man a
throb which beats in compassion
with the suffering, the aged and the
helpless, it is to Christmas Day it
owes its birth.
At Christmas time let wrongs be
forgotten and griefs buried. Remembered wrongs and unrelieved
griefs are the relics of man fallen
and disinherited; whereas the Christmastide calls upon us to glory in
the fact of man’s restoration.
“Merry Christmas” is our watchword, and the words must bring
gladness to our hearts not for some
shallow reason, but because we remember with wonder that God became Man, in order that man may
be as God.


Midnight Mass
By AURELIO CALDERON, Litt.B. '52
Midnight Mass...
Soft strains of barrio music are in the
air tonight.
Come, my friend.
There is a blanket of silver loveliness
over lands and seas, beyond the mountains
and far away.
The moon shines bright.
The town is dressed in her silver gown;
and there is great joy in the pealing
of the bells.
Come, my friend, for the stars and the
lanterned streets are calling us away.


DECEMBER, 1950


Soon,... the wail of a new-born Babe will
fill the air.


29


Short Story: Third Prize


It was Christmas Eve, and Mang Tembong
prayed to Santa Claus for a new carabao...


Mang Temoong
By MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51


“NGNORAMOS!" cried Mang TemA bong in a voice of thunder, accompanying this exclamation with violent gestures. Mang Tembong, who
was a farmer, was right now a
very angry farmer.
"Gago yourself!" Mang Andong
his next-door neighbor just as passionately retorted, glaring across the
sagging bamboo fence which separated the two adversaries.
“Are you picking a quarrel with
me, ha?” threatened Tembong, pulling up the sleeves of his barong
menacingly. “Maybe you want a
fight, ha? On the night before
Christmas even. What kind of
Pasko do you think you will have?”
“What do you expect," Mang Andong protested hotly. “You are
making fun of my knowledge. Aba,
I reached second grade. I know
that you are only first grade graduate!' He punctuated this statement with a sniff of disdain, confident that he had delivered the perfect squelch.
"Aha!" Mang Tembong chortled
in sudden triumph, “You will lose
the argument after all. I will ask
my son, Tony, who is right — you
30


or me. My son Tony," and he
swelled with pride as he spoke, "is
in first year high school. Why,
he is almost a college man!"
“Whatever you say, I will never
believe you until you can prove it
to me," said Mang Andong stiffly,
deliberately turning his back on his
neighbor to signify that the interview was at an end.
Muttering imprecations under his
breath, Mang Tembong retreated
from the scene of battle and retraced
his steps to the door of the nipa hut
which he called home. As if in
answer to a prayer, he found his
son, Antonio, sitting on the bamboo
steps of the dwelling.
Immediately he threw the question
at him: "Antonio, is there Santo
Kulaus?”
“You must mean Santa Claus,
Tatay,” Antonio corrected.
“Yes, yes, Santo Kulaus. You
heard what I said," Mang Tembong
replied impatiently, "Mang Andong
and I just had a big argument on
the question: is there or is not there
Santo Kulaus?
"And which side did you take,
Tatay?” Antonio asked, secretly
amused.
“  "


“I said that there is none Santo
Kulaus,” the old man declared stoutly, "And I am right, am I not?
“But, Tatay,” Antonio replied
gravely, "I am afraid you are wrong.
There is a Santa Claus.
“Huh? Where? How?” Mang
Tembong asked, surprised. “But
Juan, my compadre, told me very
definitely that there is none Santo
Kulaus.
“But Juan never went to school,”
the boy insisted. "In our school
they teach that there is a Santa
Claus.
“How does he look? Aber, describe
him."
"Santa Claus, Antonlo said solemnly, proud of the knowledge as
only a first year student can be,
"is a Santo.
"Santo? Is that all?" Mang
Tembong said impatiently. “If Santo Kulaus is nothing more than
just Santo, he is not so important
after all. There are many Santos,
you know why. there is San Jose,
Santo Tomas, San Pedro, San Pablo,
San...”
O
"No, no,
E
Antonio inOA
terrupted the
litany, "I’m

not finished
7
.
—G
yet. Santa
Claus — is—
e
is — a dis 
gifts."
“Gifts ?
W hatis
LL
gifts? And
what is disp en ser?"
Mang TemDong asteo (PUZCAMNN
puzzled, for a
farmer is not
PO
too learned a
man. "Ang


salita mo naman ay mahirap. Easy
talk, naman. I only reached first
grade, you know."
"What I mean, Tatay, is that he
gives regalos every Christmas, The
book describes him as a short, plump
man in a red suit, whose long white
beard reaches down to his breast.
He is a very jolly Santo, Tatay."
"Aba!" Mang Tembong exploded.
“That is something over Mang Andong. Andong says that nobody
ever saw Santo Kulaus. But it
turns out that the book has seen
him."
“No, Tatay,” Antonio replied,
“The book did not see Santa Claus.
Mang Andong is right. They say
nobody ever saw Santa Claus.
“How then can you say that he
is dressed in red, with beard, and
fat? If the book never saw him,
why does it know how he looks?
Making only the carculation, ba?"
"I really don’t know,” Antonio replied in confusion. “But let me continue. In some countries they call
Santa Claus by another name: Saint
Nicholas.
“Santo INiLo
kolas? First
he is Santo
Kulaus— now
Santo Nikolas!"
Mang
T e mbong
broke in,
X
"Aba, every
time his name
changes, huh?
Now, he even
has the same
name as my
grandfather.”
“Yes, Tatay,” Antonio
c o n tinued
e
meekly, seeing
S that his father’s condi

DECEMBER, 1950


31


tion was hopeless. "At Christmas
time, this Santa Claus rides in a
sleigh drawn by reindeer. His sleigh
glides through the air, Tatay.
"Aba!" Mang Tembong began
again, "What is sleigh, and what
is reindeer and what is glides?'
"A sleigh is like a kariton, Tatay,
Antonio explained. “The kariton of
Santa Claus is pulled by reindeer,
which is a kind of animal found in
cold countries. These reindeer carry the sleigh-through the sky. They
fly high.
“This reindeer must be very good.
Now they can even fly," Mang Tembong remarked, imagining himself
trying to plow his fields with flying
reindeer or waving to his friends
below when the reindeer pulled
his kariton. "And this Santo Kulaus must be rich. He gives regalos
every Christmas.
“Yes, Tatay, Santo Kulaus is
generous. If you want anything,
you can just ask him and he will
give it to you for Christmas. But
remember, Tatay, Santa Claus
gives regalo to good people only. He
only likes people who do not quarrel
with their friends, and who are
kind and generous like him.
Mang Tembong sprang to his feet
and snapped his fingers. "Sayang!"
he exclaimed remorsefully. "And
I have just been quarreling with
Mang Andong.
“You can still make up for that,
Tatay,” Antonio counseled, wanting
to please his father. "Santa Claus
also likes people who admit their
mistakes and make up for them."
A great sigh of relief escaped
Mang Tenibong and a broad smile
spread across his wrinkled features.
He turned and called into the house.
“Let us kill that pig of yours and
roast it, Teria, he addressed hiswife who was busy cooking Gulaman
in their tiny kitchen. "And let us
give half of our Lechon to Mang
32


Andong. Now what do you say?”
He intended to offer the Lechon as
a peace-token. Already hewas
thinking of the regalo Santo Kulaus
would give him.
"Why... all right," long-suffering
Aling Teria answered hesitantly.
She had overheard part of the long
conversat: n and guessed that something unusual was afoot. “But 1
think you are taking too much to
heart what Antonio has been rel.-
ing you alout Santo Kulaus becuuse
you are becoming "Santo' yourself.”
Despite Aling Teria’s obvious reluctance, the pig that she had been
fattening up for the New Year
feast wos butchered that very afternoon, und Mang Tembong personaily
brought the other half to Mang Andong.
“Andong,” he suid amicably, "Merry, merry Christmas. I apologize.
There pala is Santo Kulaus. Let
us be friends again.” And all the
time he was thinking of the gift
he wuld receive from good Santo
Kulcus on the morrow.
That afternoon, Mang Tembong
was generosity personified. Having
Santo Kulaus always in mind, he
overwhelmed every visitor with
large helpings of Lechon and all
his friends were only too glad to
get a secondhelping of Aling Teria’s prize pig. When night came,
and the visitors had left, the family
prayed the Rosary and Special Novena to Santo Kulaus, doubling
their evening devotions.
Mang Tembong’s eyes were closed
in earnest prayer and he was praying to Santo Kulaus for a new carabao, because his old carabao was
now burdened with age. Aling Teria was confiding to Santo Kulaus,
also, that she was badly in need of
a new dress. After their devotions,
Aling Teria and Antonio went to
sleep. But Mang Tembong decided
that he would not go to bed that
P
“  "


night. Eagerly, he sat awake, awaiting his new carabao.
The clock solemnly struck ten.
Mang Tembong waited on. Three
hours passed, and still no Santo Kulaus appeared leading a carabao. Not
even a kariton drawn by reindeer.
Mang Tembong began to get restless. Suddenly he heard a crash
from the kitchen.
“Ay!” He exclaimed, “That must
be Santo Kulaus. I hope he has not
hurt himself."
Mang Tembong tiptoed to the kitchen because he feared he might
frighten away his red-suited benefactor. But he only found “Superman" the pet dog of Antonio, who
had tipped over a pot containing
Sinigang. Mang Tembong upbraided
the poor dog angrily, careful however not to do any cursing for the
Santo might not like that. And then
he returned to his post. He prostrated himself before a picture of
Santa Claus which Antonio had
clipped from his English book and
prayed and prayed with all his
might that the Santo might hurry
and come sooner because he was getting tired. He so exhausted himself
in this ridiculous position that he
soon fell asleep right there on the
floor.
Came the dawn. Antonio, coming
downstairs, found his father sleeping soundly in that ungainly position. He looked at the tie-rope
which Mang Tembong had prepared
for the new carabao he expected
and at his own sock which he had
hung out for Santa Claus’ coming.
Both were empty. He tripped
against the overturned pot in the
kitchen, and the noise awakened
Mang Tembong.
Hastily, Mang Tembong got up
and rushed to the tie-rope. There
was nothing there.
"Wala maskina ano dito!” he
cried in dismay, concluding that


there must be something wrong.
“Teria, Teria! Come quick — Call
the Barrio Municipal! Tell them
to send Polis here. Somebody has
stolen my new carabao!"
Antonio tried to calm his father
down. “Now, now. Tatay, he said
soothingly, "Nobody stole the carabao. Maybe Santa Claus couldn’t
come after all.”
“If he did not come after all the
trouble I took, what kind of Santo
is he?” protested the other.
“Maybe he could not find our
numero. Aling Teria suggested
“I always told you to put numero on
our house, even if it is only nipa
house.”
"Aba, woman, Mang Tembong
said gloomily, "What do you think
I am — extravagance? Numero
costs money."
Then he said. “Well, I was right
after all. There is no Santo Kulaus.
Mang Andong was mistaken... Ha!
I will go and see him right now.”
All the protests and explanations
of Antonio were to no avail. He
stamped over to Mang Andong’s
house. Ten minutes later he returned in triumph. "Mang Andong’s
faith in Santo Kulaus is shaken
also," he announced. "Mang Andong
prayed for motor-boat so that he
could fish every Sunday. But none
motor-boat came from Santo Kulaus."
“But Tatay, Santa Claus can’t be
expected to grant such ridiculous requests,” Antonio argued.
"Aba, ridiculous, ha. Since when
am I making ridiculous requests?
Mang Tembong replied indignantly,
“I do not understand what happened
to Santo Kulaus!”
“I do not understand also, Aling
Teria said, “But maybe the reindeer
that pulled the Santo’s kariton got
tired. Our place is very far from
heaven, you know."


DECEMBER, 1950


33


Poetry Contest: Second Prize


I Saw Three Candles Burning Bright
By PERCIVAL OLARTE, A.B. '52
I saw three candles burning bright.
Oh, why do the angels sing?
Because of the Maid and the man and the Babe
Who is a king.
Like lanterns in the snow they were
Under a wide white sky;
And Mary was like a candle alight
Waiting her Baby's eryNever was snow so white as she,
And never was day more fair
Till the sun and the moon and the stars were set
In the light of His haloed hair.
I saw three candles burning bright.
Oh, why do the angels bow?
Jesus and Mary and Joseph are there
In Bethlehem's stable now.
I saw three candles burning bright.
O wonderful grace to sea,
For the Sun and the Splendor of Light is there
Upon the Maiden's knee.


34


“  


The Poetry Of Merton
By JOAQUIN LIM, A.B. '51


WHEN Thomas Merton stepped out
from the anonymity of his cloister
into the literary world, men gasped
at his mysticism and sang for his
poetry. There is wisdom in giving
parity of praise to both qualities.
For the mystic and the poet are
kindred souls in apprehension. The
mystic has intense realization of a
barrier-burning unity in all things.
Thus, the poet who is also a mystic,
anneals his song in this intensity.
Merton achieves intensity in this
manner. His poems ever echo the
highest unity that any poet—whether
he has a faith or not — can find
in his seeking into the heart of
things: the unity of all things in
the Divine Unity. Like Plunkett
who saw "His blood upon the rose”
Merton sees in nature’s resplendence,
the “fiery footsteps" of Christ and
His angels tramping in the woods.
The ripe wheat on a field finds fulfillment in surrender to its harvester; we find our own fulfillment in
surrender to the Divine Harvester.
The cocoon’s metamorphosis prompts
Merton to shed old ways, to let
disobedience die like the moth, and
be transformed by sleep in Christ.
With such a habitual vision of the
Unity, Merton charges with intensity whatever he touches.
Only an imagination that is used
to the exacting adjustments required in mystic contemplation can
bring to a focal point of utter purity,
the deprivation of the damned together with the radiance of the blessed on Judgment Day:


“And Thou in the armor of Thy
creed’s most solemn articles,
Rising tremendous in the black
gates of death's empty Senegal,
Lead out Thy Bride still breathless
with dazzle of release
Still fluttering with the ribbons
of the cities' mile-long flames."
Only a mystic who has felt the
pain of Christian anguish can describe Clytemnestra as “The soldier
Agamemnon,/Bleeds in her conscience,
twisting like a root". Only a passionate lover of God can picture ...
when His lady Mother leans upon
the crib. /Lo, with what rapiers/
Those two loves fence and flame
their brilliancy".
The great critics like to compare
Merton to T. S. Eliot in the realm
of mystic poetry. However, like
a puny chime to a wide sky, we would
hold a contrary opinion.
The distinction, more than anywhere, is in their philosophies.
Eliot flounders between Christian
composure and pantheistic alarm;
Merton lives in the peace of the
Unity. And from a difference in
the wells of mysticism there should
come some difference in expressive
intensity. After all, intensity of
realization (which should affect intensity of expression) is greater when
directed constantly to one object than
when fluctuating between one object
and many uncertain others.
Perhaps, Merton approximates
Eliot (or ten other poets, for that
matter) in this, that at times he
just as weakly succumbs to using


DECEMBER, 1950


35


modern poetic devices for their own
sweet sake. Here and there he inserts simile after simile without any
apparent adequate motive, not even
for studied monotony. He also has
a furtive love—as many, many modern poets have—for the bizarre in
imagery when the natural, the unaffected, will do as well or better.
In some moment of erratic modernity,
he may even take some mechanical
cliche and attempt to give it lifewith sorry results:
“This is the end of my old ways.
dear Christ!
-Now I will hear your voice at last
And leave the frosts (that is:
the fears) of my December."
Or:
“This warm home-haven,
better than a Riviera."
These may evoke exclamations of
“bold!" “clever!" unexpected!" and
the like. But being bold, tricky and
unpredictable is hardly the function
of a poet—unless he wishes to be
another F. P.A.
Some poetic peccadilloes of Merton
are reminiscent of freshman college
compositions. There is this Disneyish description of the dramatic arrival of Theseus in "Ariadne":
“Suddenly, dead north,
A Greek ship leaps over the horizon, skips like a colt, paws the
foam.
The ship courses through the pasture of bright amethysts
And whinnies at the jetty.
The whole city runs to see:
Quick as closing your hand
The racing sail's down.
Then the drums are stunned, and
the crowd, exalted, cries:
O Theseus!. O Grecian hero!
There is the rather cute yearning:
“Thus did the great St. Anthony
Make your discovery
Saint, who of all great saints,
oh! I most envy!”


But then, these do not detract
from the glory of his poetry. Cardinal Newman once drew a necessary distinction in this regard. He
said that writers do not forfeit the
name of poet merely because some
passages in their poetry do not
meet poetical requisites, but that they
are poets only insofar as meeting
those requisites. And Merton is
certainly, in the words of Newman,
very “far forth”
If Thompson, Chesterton and Hopkins are enthroned in the kingdoms
of lasting poetry, we have sufficient
reason to hope for Merton’s accession.
He has caught up the merits of
his predecessors in the throb of his
modern idiom.
Who will not at first be deceived
into “recognizing” the Thompsonic
grandeur in his song to Our Lady:
“Because your Christ disposed
Orion and Andromeda
And ordered the clean spheres,
And interplayed the chiming suns
to be your toy,
Fired the fair stars with argent
for your raiment,
And charged the sinner's tears
With clean repentant lights—
(As on the day you found me in
the dens of libraries
And crushed the jeweled head
of heresy)-
Chesterton, the master of surprise.
may well have been surprised himself by:
“The steel is cleaner than ice,
The blade is sharper than thought:
The curve is like an intellect, neat!
He lifts up the sickle, and the
stars cry out in alarm"
In the characteristic Hopkins manner, Merton piles upon the reader,
picture after picture, simile upon
personification, metaphor upon apostrophe, bringing the fabulous ima

36


“  


gery to the bursting point of deamong the lovers of Merton as they
light before clinching everything make ambitious plans for him. Mawith a significant finale. Another ny have nominated him for the title,
Hopkins device, Merton has sharp"Poet of the Century" on the dream
ened to pencil-point trueness. To basis of what he could do, not what
rival Hopkins’ "lovely-dumb” and he has done. We are sure that this
"wimpled-water-dimpled not-by-mornway of thinking is perilous. But on
ing-matched face,” Merton has the the basis of his present versatility,
"waterspeech of beads” “the swanintensity and originality, we can
world sing", and Captain April be just as sure that Thomas Merton
"walking like the wind/ Breeding the shall not like the Arab, fold his lihappy swordlight of the sun".
terary tent and silently steal away
Literary tiffs have sprung up from the hearts of men.


Poctry Contest: Third Prize


O Jesus mantled in flesh for man
And bared to the thorns of the blast,
Creator whose infant breath becalmed
The sighing of seers from the past,
No star more radiant has spiralled down
From the silvery shingles of sky;
More welcomed dew never blessed this earth,
Than has showered tonight from on high.


My Maker, ah! must these hands of slime
Enfold Thee hallowed and whole?
Creator cradled within these arms,
Art cleaved to my sinful soul!
Thou art my brother sharing with me
Thine and Thyself for eternity.


By ROMULO LARA, A.B. '53


DECEMBER, 1950


37


LATE HAVE I LOVED THEE
By ETHEL MANNIN, Putnam’s, 1948
"Is my gloom after all,
Shade of his hand outstretched caressingly?”
This Francis Sable was able to say, but only after many years of
living a life of sin and sensuality and enjoying it immensely, ("I slept
like the besotted.") and only after suffering tortures untold at the hands
of vengeful remorse and doing penance and sacrifice for his fellowmen
and for the world.
"Late Have I Loved Thee” is a love story. It is the story of a witty
author who catered to the crowd and was adored by it because he wrote
'clever" trash, a man who "fled down the labyrinthine ways" of the world
while his mother and his sister wept and prayed and hoped for him. The
death of his beautiful sister and a remorseful conscience shock him into
thinking deeply thoughts of life and death and the purpose of life. At
first he rebels and like Thompson complains "O must thou char tht wood
ere thou canst limn with it? In the end, however, he falls in love with
Christ and serves him. And Christ seeing his love gives him the privilege
of performing miracles.
Some may call this book prosaic and say that the story has been
told before. Others may consider part of it at least, daring and shocking and much too frank. But no one will consider it dull.
Two characters stand out very clearly in this novel. Strangely enough,
the hero, Francis Sable, is not one of them. The first is Cathryn Sable,
his sister, whose character has been so lovingly painted, almost as lovingly
as she portrayed her brother as Francis of Assisi, that we may very well
say that she is one of the most attractive and lovable persons we have
met in modern writing where heroines usually have to be wickedly immoral to be interesting. The other character who catches our attention
is Francis Sable’s secretary, an officious fellow, straight from Horace’s
satires, an eager and conceited snob who is thoroughly convinced that big
words and only big words can contain big thoughts. But unlike most of
his egoistic, pseudo-literary tribe, he hero-worships Francis Sable, the witty,
famous author, sincerely.


38


  ”


There is, however, more to this book than just mere picture-painting or
character portrayal or the relating of a spiritual Horatio Alger story.
“Late Have I Loved Thee” is a frightening appraisal of our modern
world, "Men are hurt, men are despoiled, men are oppressed..... not by
lions, not by serpents, not by scorpions but by men.") a picture of the
holocaust that is in store for the world in the symbolic drunken spree of
Francis Sable, and a warning that only by turning to God can the world
survive the “obliteration" that Nagasaki, “the lost city” experienced when
the atom bomb fell.
The author ends hopefully by quoting St. Augustine: “We need not despuir of man, as long as man lives."
GABINO MENDOZA JR., A.B. '53


FRIAR FELIX AT LARGE
By H. F. M. PRESCOTT, Yale University Press, 1950
While today the Holy Year in Rome is drawing Catholic pilgrims by
the thousands, many never realize the many difficulties which beset the fifteenth-century pilgrim to the Holy Land. In those days, each pilgrim had
to scale mountains, make his own provision, book a passage in a galley
over waters teeming with pirates, not to mention the petty bickerings
among fellow passengers and the hardships encountered in the Holy
Tlaces themselves among the hostile Mosloms.
Based largely on the Evangatorium by Frater Felix Fabri, a Dominican who made two such voyages to Jerusalem, this book recounts the
perils and excitement of those medicval pilgrimagas in fresh detail. Born
about 1441 at Zurich, Felix was possessed of an insatiable thirst for knowledge, a boyish zest, and a mild if whimsical nature. One bright spring
morning of 1480, he mounted his horse for Venice, great port of pilgrim
travel, and crossed the towering Alps. Chartering an "old and stinking"
bireme bound for Jaffa, the pilgrims were quartered in an unlighted
cabin, just above the bilge. The place reeked with the stench and smoke
from the kitchen, and ran with rats, mice and fleas. Food on board
was bad, "feeble bread and feeble wine and stinking water so many
times ye will be . . ... fain to eat of your own." Pilfering among passengers was common even in broad duylight after sundown; Felix found
little peace in the mad scuffle of making beds, the snoring of his neighbors, the stamping of the penned animals. To add to the goodly friar’s
chagrin, the ship’s captain was seized by the Turks, and the pilgrims
vere given but nine days during which they “rushed around the Holy
Places in utmost haste, making pilgrimages both by day and night, and
pardly given any time to resi.....


DECEMBER, 1950


39


So unsatisfactory was the whole voyage that Felix decided to make a
second trip in 1483. Bading farewell to his superiors at Ulm, he took a
better galley in the company of German nobles. Moreover, ample time
was allotted to tour Venice and different ports of call — much to the
unbounded delight of the jolly friar. Their sojourn in Jerusalem, however, became a series of ordeals. Each one had to secure a bullette (passport), “bundled” into a dripping cavern which smelled like "stable ground",
later mobbed by merchants.
Nevertheless, once on foot in the Holy Land, Friar Felix rejoiced in
visiting every landmark in his itinerary, including a tour of the Mount
of Olives and Mount Sion where the Last Supper took place; a camel’s
ride to Bethlehem; a dusty journey to Jericho (full of "scented grapevines and many fig-trees”). The most significant event was the pilgrims'
vigil in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher. But by the third day, a horde
of peddlers would bother the procession of pilgrims with wares of damask
cioth, beads, and silk, almost causing a near riot., Many among the
vigilants resorted to name-scratching on the temple walls, others "swilling...till the bottles were empty”, and even the priests disputed as to
who would celebrate the Mass.
H. F. M. Prescott, an Oxford scholar, carefully preserves the beauty
of Felix’s fresh descriptive details, his observations of the sights and sounds
and smells of the Near East. He quotes many passages straight from the
friar’s account of the journey, full of Felix’s bland, innocuous humor,
good sense, theological learning, and razor-edge insight. In its present
form, which runs to 227 pages, one can share the vivid experience of those
journeys as if Felix himself were relating it by some pleasant fireplace.
Best of all Novelist Prescott gives a lively, engaging picture of the jolly
personality of Felix who would have fared well in the company of Chaucer’s Canterbury pilgrims. Of interest to the historian, the present volume captures accurately the faith and spirit of the Middle Ages, a glorious, throbbing period of pilgrimages, Crusades, Renaissance culture and
art, St. Joan and Marco Polo. It was a time when Friar Felix’s fiber,
simplicity, and Deo Sit Laus in spite of ordeals rise as a Te Deum in our
troubled century. Friar Felir at Large, in the last analysis, is raw, firsthand adventure at its very best.


40


  


THEY DID IT AGAIN
Recently, the Undergraduate Thespians had their share of trials as
they managed their respective class offerings for their own Dramatic
Evening. Following the popular stage success of the Senior class last
August, (the Seniors’ comedy "When Shakespeare’s Gentlemen Meet” is
scheduled for a benefit performance in Bacolod City this coming January),
the Undergraduates presented a well-balanced presentation of three oneact plays. After some measure of uneasiness and a great deal of hard
work, the Undergraduate Dramatic Evening finally came off with a wellrehearsed if belated performance. All the plays turned out as expected,
but our bouquet of roses goes to the Freshman offering: a capably acted,
spontaneous, and faithful interpretation of Arthur Hopkins’ classic “Moonshine" which easily won the audience’s whole-hearted applause.
THE POT-BOILERS
Flamboyantly theatrical, “The Pot-Boilers” was humorously given to
such old fashioned footlight lunacies as. bold arching gestures, pun-ridden
dialogue, grand-mannered strut and dash, nervous eye-rolling and similar
melodramatic hokum.
A bristling satire on the eccentricities of back-stage life, the scene
opens upon a playwright-director’s painful and uncertain attempts at rehearsing his still unfinished play. Confusion ensues when the rehearsing
"actors", all lost in the bliss of madness, eccentrically dressed and temperamental, troop on stage from the orchestra aisle itself, drawing first
laughter from the audience.
In spite of their success, however, we somehow feel that the Juniors
could have taken a finer pace of interpretation—brisk and consistently interesting. This ideal, we realize, is not easily attained. Some actors
were weakly rhetorical, and some were too colloquial where contact was
most needed. The general lack of voice was apparent. But others did
what we hardly expected. Victor Diaz as the “black” Mr.Inkwell, definitely saved the play from going to pot. 'Finesse and experience shone
throughout his performance. As Inkwell’s brother, disguised as the butler, Mr. Pencil (Fred Cledera) was no less electric. Rodolfo Siojo, as the
harmless and helpless young Master Ivory struck us as indeed helpless,


DECEMBER, 1950


41


but too colloquial. Mr. Sud, the director-playwright, was interpreted by
Aurelio Calderon rather indelicately without taking advantage of the subtle power of tone and cadence changes. For poise and stage presence,
however, he was with the best. Resurrecion achieved effective contact because he played Mr. Ruler perfectly “dead-pan". Jaime Dy Liacco was commendable for his “corniness" as the wealthy gray-haired uncle, while Mr.
Wouldby (Gabriel Manalac) unfortunately gave the impression of not acting at all.
Where the actors were deployed upon the stage, (and part of the orchestra section), brisk cueing and the use of harmoniously centralized
stage lines and props would have greatly helped establish a pleasing unity,
at the same time leaving the stage free for action. And if our standards
seem too harsh with regard to this play, it is only because in such a production of slightly different form, one would naturally expect something
good, perhaps better than that to which we are accustomed; here the Juniars almost had it.
MOUNTAIN MOONSHINES
“Moonshine” is Ateneo’s second attempt since liberation to stage Arthur Hopkin’s comedy apout a cool-shooting, revenue-hating hill-billy, who
let his "revenooer" talk his way out of captivity and imminent execution.
Kentuckian Nathaniel Gunn, though at times inconsistent with his otherwise easy southern drawl was the embodiment of a lazy-going, beardscratching Luke Hazy. His interpretation carried the play through. But
at times he failed to register reaction to the lines and actions of the "revenooer”. The second nighters, however, found a more improved Carolina
hill-billy.
The good-humoured audience easily awarded “Revenooer” Andres Felix’s precise and well conceived acting with "well done" applause. Though
at times fauity with his diction and vocal control, he nevertheless responded to the stage action with considerable skill. And with more experience,
he will surely rise to commendable artistic heights.
In most ways, the Freshman play exhibited the best combination of
intelligent acting and consistent interest. This easy success was, among
other considerations, perhaps due to the small size of the cast (there were
only two) and the simple movements demanded by the script. But above
all, success and applause should be given to fine direction and interpretation.
THE SOPHOMORES
When the distinguished English playwright, Sir James Matthew Barrie, wrote “The Will” he was obviously prepared to please and English audience of post-Victorian sophisticates. In the Sophomore production, however, the British atmosphere was discarded in favor of a local setting,
with equivalent dialogue and background, while successfully rekaining
much of Barrie’s deft flair for dialogue and brilliantly subtle humor.
Although lacking in “action", it had a finely contrived plot which elo

42


  "


quently brought out the moral of the play. Deliberately, the tragedy was
divided into three scenes representing an interval of twenty years one from
the other. Hence the four major characters of the drama showed a remarkable versatilitiy of vocal alteration, a physical task which reflected
largely the effect of passing time.
In the role of Felipe Vergara, a man of materialistic ambition, was an
impressive newcomer. Irineo Ranjo, as the husband who amassed a large
fortune whicn led to his final ruin, was remarkably effective throughout.
He had as his chief asset, a deep voice which gave force to his satiric
lines in the closing scene. Gabino Mendoza handled the role of an old lawyer easily, if at times woodenly; he redeemed himself well in the third scene
as the feeble man who delivered the moral of “The Will” in a clear, steady
voice. Armundo Mirasol, as the old lawyer’s son, uttered his lines with ease.
His excited vocal expression at the start of the play, however, was too strident to be distinct.
Servando Pesarillo’s portrayal of Mrs. Vergara’s mannerisms amused
the audience. His role of a wife possessed by wordly ambition provided
the interesting angle of the story. Each time he strutted on stage, his womannish gestures provoked appreciation from the audience in a roar which
threatened to drown out the other characters’ lines. Renato Tanada, as
the doomed clerk dying of cancer, performed creditably. He was deliberately colorless and flat, presaging the tragic finale.
While the production deserved the highest honors in effort, in “The
Will" there seemed to be something wanting. And yet, even in the original, the play lags in action while attempting to compensate for the lack
in rich dialogue. In the first performance many failed to experience the
impact of the theme due to a faulty first scene where the actors could
scarcely be heard properly. In spite of it all, Pesarillo’s and Ranjo’s individual performances made much out of a delicate material to make this
artistic vehicle lively enough to be followed.
-EMMANUEL TORRES, A.B. '53
CARMELO QUINTERO, A.B. '53
Sea Echoes And A Rose
By ANTONIO P. GELLA MANUUD, A.B. '52
When the winds at last are quiet (and day—at the threshold of sleep)
And the skies westward burn russet where the stars come out to weep.
List, love, to my heart’s lost throbbings (do they echo the sighing sea?)
For in fevered risings—fallings—of you will my last thoughts be;
In fevered risings—fallings—of you... and a spurned plea.
Should I ery in the lonely gloaming, and with eye bathed in crystal espy
The stars’ silver teardrops falling on the colors of sunset that die
At sea? No, my heart is joying, though speared by a loveless guile—
Does the red rose’s cheek turn paler—when the flower is plucked in wile?
Does the blush of the bloom grow redder at the favor of a smile?”


DECEMBER, 1950


43


A True Short Story


The Strangers And The Crib
By ALFREDO TENGCO, A. B. '51


"WHAT a lazy bunch of people,"
Don Teodoro described us. “It’s
almost February and the Christmas
tree in their sala has not been thrown
away and it’s all dried up. Their
“Belen' has not even been stored
away."
In a few days the whole neighborhood knew about the lazy family,
which was too lazy to put away the
Christmas trimmings, the Crib, and
to burn the dried up Christmas tree.
February came and the dried up
Christmas tree and the trimmings
and the Christmas tree were still in
the sala.
"Pa, shall we put them away?”
"What, son?
“The Christmas tree and the trimmings and the Crib!”
"No, let them stay there.”
I wilted. "But why, Pa? Why?”
Pa just smiled at me. “Come here,
son," he said, leading me to the sala.
The sala was a mess. On the floor
were a sack of rice and bags filled
with food. There were boxes which
contained our clothes. In a corner,
one of our dogs slept with her puppies. And there was the Christmas
Crib.
“See the Crib?”
“See it, Pa? I’ve seen it since the
second week of December, and I’ve
heard about it from our neighbors
day in and day out!”
“Lovely Crib, isn’t it?”
Certainly, it was lovely. But, I
thought sourly, a Crib has no place
in a sala in February, when people
44


have nearly forgotten about the past
Christmas, and the next Christmas
is, ohh—ages away!
“Lovely Crib, isn’t it, son?” Pa
repeated. "Many a stranger who has
not been home for Christmas for a
long time would be touched deeply
when he enters this house and beholds this Crib.”
I frowned. All the neighbors who
saw the Christmas Crib still in the
sala called us lazy.
“Maybe,” Pa continued, “This
doesn’t mean anything to you. But
if and when strangers do enter this
house — you’ll realize what I am
saying."
He stared in prayerful meditation
at the little images of the Holy Family. “You know,” he whispered,
"one of the dreams your mom and
I shared when we were married was
to have a Christmas Crib. We wanted a statue of Our Blessed Mother,
with her face expressing the radiance of a mother as she kneels
beside her baby. And the Image of
the Child Jesus? Ah! We wanted it
to be the most beautiful thing in
this house.”
He remembered other things, “It
took us about four years to save
enough money to have the images
made. And year after year," he
said, pointing to the animals, "We
have added the lambs and an ox.
Perhaps when the war is over and
I have my old job back again, we
will be able to add some shepherds
and of course the Three Kings.”
We stood silently before the Crib.
“  "


It is twilight. The rattle of machine-gun fire and the crack of rifles
no longer echo in the distance. Now,
the firing is somewhere in the
neighborhood.
In the damp and dark air-raid
shelter in the garden, we sit trembling.
My brother stirs. He turns to all
of us, then leaps and rushes to the
entrance of the shelter, looks outside and shouts, “The whole neighborhood is burning! Oh, God! Let’s
get out of here! Let’s get out of here
before those Japs get us!”
“Come back here, you fool," Pa
shouts angrily at him. “Come back
here and sit down before I knock
you out cold!"
My brother returns to his place
in the air-raid shelter. The firing
continues.
I listen. Lord! Did I hear voices
cutside? Did I hear the gates open?
Do I hear the trample of hobnailed
boots
Slowly we rise and one by one
we leave the air-raid shelter. Outside, we throw up our hands.
Japanese soldiers surround us and
point their gleaming bayonets at us.
Their leader snarls at us and rushes
to the barred door of our house and
blasts at it with his rifle. His men
help him with their rifle butts.
The door splinters under their
pounding and the soldiers bring cans
of gasoline into the house. My family takes a last look at the house.
Soon it will be in flames.
But wait! The soldiers stop cold.
They face us, then turn again to
the sight in the sala. Silently they
gaze at the dried up Christmas tree
with all its trimmings. And there’s


the Christmas Crib and St. Joseph
Our Blessed Mother... and the little Baby Boy lies in the manger.
The Japanese strangers are motionless before the little Christmas
Crib... Cruelty and Barbarism cannot move before the little symbol
of kindness, of gentleness and love.
It is Sunday morning. The Churchbells ring for the first time in many
days. Peace has come to the neighborhood.
Don Teodoro sits in our sala,
with an expression of disbelief on
his face.
“So, they also set fire to this
house, he says as he looks at the
wooden ceiling that has been blackened by the flames.
“But the flames died out a few
minutes after the soldiers left, and
the house was spared,” Pa replies.
"And no one in your family was
shot or bayoneted?”
“No one. Even the dogs sleeping
in the sala escaped unscathed.”
"And you did not lose anything at
all?"
“Everything was saved... except
.. .the Image of the Baby Jesus.
We don’t know how we lost it.
There is a pause.
"Hum," says Don Teodoro.
“Strange that the Japs did not harm
your family when all over the neighborhood they were shooting everyone
in sight.
There is another pause.
“You’re sure the Japs set this sala on fire?'
“Yes.”
“Well, perhaps the flames died out
because the windows were shut and
there was no air inside?”
"Perhaps,” Pa answers — with a
smile.
"Perhaps, I answer with a smile.


DECEMBER, 1950


45


“THE EAGLE CAN KICK, TOO"
For the La Salle booters, the series of ten games in the NCAA Soccer
League was for many years a mere formality. By 1941, the Green Archers had lined up an impressive record of more than a dozen championships
hit unerringly year after year. But for Atenco de Manila, in contrast,
the soccer field had taken on the look of a grave-yard packed with the ashes
ot lost hopes and frustrated never-say-die atempts.
In 1941, the reign of the Green Archer ended, or so Ateneans and the
other competing colleges hoped. That year, the Blue Eagles staged a
spectacular upset and climaxed a whirlwind season with final victory. For
more than six years, until 1947, the Soccer Football Trophy remained hidden but honored in one of Father Hurley’s trunks, by privilege of the unchallenged, because a war had started suddenly and dragged on protractedly: all of which things, anti-Atenistas suspected, were provoked and stimulated by Father Dowd.
To the chagrin of our Alumni, the war ended. And the NCAA soccer
league was resumed. The very first year, Ateneo lost all rights to the
trophy, which passed on to the hands of San Beda, making the Red Lion
King of football. The brave beast, however, was lanced by a knight the
following year. The era of competition had begun.
The most interesting and salient symptoms of league competition are
mis-predictions of sportwriters and other so-called soccer experts. Last
year, because of Ateneo’s utterly amateurish line-up, no self-respecting
soccer fan believed that the Ateneans would unbelievably accomplish the
feat of climbing out of the pre-season “cellar” to which they had been consigned by sportscasters and bid for the NCAA crown. Even the fact that
master-goalie Louie Javellana was counted among the amatcurs was no
excuse for hoping that Ateneo would come out of that cellar. The impolite Eagles, however, set sportscasting back ten years by doing just that,
and in turn gave all the other teams a lesson in soccer good manners, the
lesson of the fighting spirit. Even when Referee Tronqued gave his controversial decision, though the spirit was daunted, the fight was not gone.
This year, to the discomfiture of many, the predictions are the other
way around. Arturo “Bong” Tanco claims that we now have such a team
that has “all the ingredients; the coach, the men, and the fighting spirit.


46


  


All that we need,” he goes to say, "are a pinch of luck and a generous
seasoning of practice. With Coach Erenchun doing the stirring, out will
come the Ateneo 1950 soccer champs!”
If he is wrong, “Bong" offers one solid reason: “With the soccer season closely following the basketball games, the basketball players eligible
for the football team were kept from practice. Also, of those who could
come only a handful would occasionally show up for practice."
For the 1950 program “Bong” introduces the Atenco amateurs...
“Last year’s half-back line of Luis Sison, Jose Ma. Gonzales, and Rudy
Tupas was wiped out by graduation. Fullback Antonio Diaz was deserted
hy Serge Montinola who flew to the States and by Tito Ordoveza who took
up a more useful line of effort. Tony Diaz’s co-fullback is the law-school’s
Ben Benito. Tony himself is best described by Willie Hernandez as “devildog” or “the man with a kick like a mule.” To replace the half-back line
are Luis Lorenzo on the right wall, Jose Ma. 'Kalawang’ Cacho by the
draw-bridge at the center, and on the left wall are Nat Gunn and Arturo
Tanco alternating each other. ‘Moro' is where his strong kick will wham
the most efficient effects. "Kalawang’ with years of playing for the
Ateneo and the famed Turba Salvaje behind him, is one of the team’s
outstanding members. Both Gunn ann Tanco are speedy but without experience.
“Undoubtedly this year’s forwards are the fastest the Ateneo has
ever had. Coordinated effort and determination are more evident this
season than last year. Shifting in attack from left to right and vice-versa
has been steadily growing during the recent practice games. The two outs,
lanky Olegario Orbeta on the left and Jose Estella on the right, display
bright offensive techniques. Both would improve the team by adding more
speed in order to keep up with the shooting meteors of the forward line.
Ateneo’s Sunday-punch is the fast-hitting trio of 'Minging' Imperial, Louis
la O, and Tony Javellana, with alternates Antonio Gaston and Alex Thorson."
The man behind the scenes — the man giving the team drive and "knowhow" and inspiration is Coach Teodoro Erenchun who last year almost
gave the Eagles their long sought-for victory. The coach has faith in his
team. To quote him: “This year, your team can beat any other team in the
lcague."


Antonio “Chole” Gaston who admits that the Terminal soccer players
vere big fellows (“compared to me, of course; I’m very small."), gives
his impression of the Spanish-born coach, “I consider him a capable coach
and a grand fellow. Capable because he knows the game thoroughly and
how to manage the team. Grand because he is understanding and patient.”


—ROBERT WILSON, A.B. '52


DECEMBER, 1950


47


THE STAFF


Editor-in-Chief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... MAXIMO V. SOLIVEN, A.B. '51
Managing Editor .................... ANTONIO G. MANUUD, A.B. '52


SECTION EDITORS
Enrique Esquivel Jr.. A.B. '51
Robert Wilson, A.B. '52


Hector Hofilena, A.B. '51
Leonidas V. Benesa, A.B. '52
Gregorio C. Brillantes, Litt. B. '52


Gabino Mendoza, A.B. '53
Emmanuel Torres, A.B. '53
Carmelo P. Quintero, A.B. '53


Ernesto Gorospe, A.B. '53
ASSOCIATE EDITORS
Onofre Pagsanghan, A.B. '51
Rodolfo Olivares, A.B. '51
Francisco Borja, A.B. '51
Percival Olarte, A.B. '52
Hector Quesada, A.B. '51
Guillermo V. Soliven, A.B. '53
Ricardo Henson, Litt. B. '52
Meliton V. Salazar, A.B. '54
Eduardo D. Lachica, Litt. B. '52


Business Manager ........................ JOSE L. SANTOS, A.B. '51
Circulation Manager ....... . .. ... .. ...... RAYMUNDO SAYO, A.B. '51


  , a literary magazine, is published four times annually
by the College of Arts and Sciences of the Ateneo de Manila. Its editorlal offices
are at the Ateneo de Manila, Padre Faura Street, Manila, Philippines; its publication
office at M. Colcol &: Co.. 878 Rizal Ave., Manila. Subscriptiori rates are four pesos
yearly, single copies one peso.
This publication was entered in the Post Office of Manila as second class mailing
matter on September 10, 1949.


48


  "