


NOLIX - n9.4
CONTENIS


5.


ADULT EDUCATION - THE FOLK'S SCHOOL ............1
ADULT EDUCATION IN BATAAN THROUGH
THE "SAMAHANG PAMPUROK".......... 3
By Artemio C. Vizconde
EDUGATIONAL PRACTICES AT HOME............. 9
By Pedro T. Orata
BRINGING NEW LIFE TO SICK REGIONB ............... 13
By. C. J. Opper, Director of Unesco's
Fundamental Education Project,
Marbial Valley, Haiti
TRENDS AND PRACTICES IN ADULP EDUCATION
ABROAD  30


ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES ..... 24


ADULT EDUCATION - THE FOLKIS SCHOOL


Education should determine its objectives and plan its program of activities on the basis of the needs, interests and idiosynoracies of the people whose life it seeks to serve and promote.
And in determining such objectives and plans every opportunity
should be given to the people concerned or their leaders to participate and contributa their thoughts and experiences to the
formulation of the program. There is a need for such a procedure
in education, and for that matter in adult education, if it is to
gain a lasting foothold and populor support.
Adult education in the Philippines is heing promoted in the
manner of this fundomental consideration. The sociol problems
and living conditions of the people are token into account in
evolving plans and in laying out the different lines of attack
to help the adult masses in general end the small communities in
particular. But the process goes beyond that. It works with the
people of the communities by utilizing whatever valuable contributions and adult experiences they possess to build up a real
program suitable and effective for their own improvement and growth.
Thus, through the adult-educntion councils, the leaders and members
of porent-teacher associations and individual citizens, materials
ere obtained, evaluated and incorporated into the system.


2


As a result, the adult eduestion program especially during
the last two yeurs has been able to stimulate active literacy
work with thousands of elasses for illiterates having been opened
in communities where the adults had been indifferent to instruotion before. Townspeople and barrio folk are becoming more conscious and more responsive as regards the condition of henlth and
sanitation in their communities so much so that they take the
initistive ond responsibility to keep elean not only their homes
but also their surroundings and publie places. Productive sahool
work, mhich used to be done only by school children, has gope out
of its way to become projects and activities of parenta and adulta.
Thus, there has come s steady inerease in poultry, piggery, gardening and homecrafts in the homes, bringing relief and happiness
to individual fomilies and more income to the communities.
Indeed, this program, unique by itself, appears to fit vell
into the community improvement program, offering abundant promise
for the underprivileged elements and folk in the homes.


ADULT EDUCATION IN BATAAN THROUGH THE
"SAMAHANG PAMPUROKS
Artemio G. Vizconde
(A Report on Visit to Bataan)
Bataan has proved the effectiveness of the "zone" plan in the way
of improving home and community life. Through systematic campaigns
inaugurated barely six months ago the publie schools in Bataan have
been able to launch into action a province-vide adult-education campaign. Every community in the nhole province is divided into smaller
districts or "zones" generally called puroks. In each of these puroka
an organizstion purely civicin nature is organized. Presently there
are no less than 350 purok organizations throughout the province widely
knoun as "Samahang Pampurok". Each of these organizations has been particularly alert to the needs for improvement of the community and has
adepted definite project activities nith particular emphasis on the literacy, citizenship, economic, cultural as vell as social aspects of community life.
As observed gamahang pampurok with their program definitely directed as mentioned above have eventually consolidated and bound the
people in each "zone" vith a common interest and desire thus giving the
schools greater opportunity and esse to reach every home for community
service. They function more than the ordinary parent-teacher associations for unlike the latter, they embrace every family irrespective of
whether or not it has a child in the school in(the conmunity. They are
not looked upon as an agency to support the school, but rather as an
agency Ahrough which the school puts into action adult education in its
varied phases. Hence, they have become a basio need in any adult-education movement in Bataan.


4


Through these conmunity orgenisations the rural folk have come
to know their own problems and needs. They launah their oun project
sctivities. Although some of their projects, measured by urban standards as I have observed, are often crude, yet they evidence an intellectual resoureefulness and vigor surpesaing that of many men and
vomen in cities and urban areas. There is every indication that the
growth or progress they have attsined has come only through the efforte of the people themselves. The activities in esch purok have
becoma and are nou self-imposed among the members of the organization who have realized not only their importanoe but also their essentiality in home and community living.
Speaking from the point of view of outsiders or local residents
whom I met during my visits the program as laid out by each purok
erganisation is one upon which they pin hope for improvement and social
amelioration. To them the entire movement appears as a herald of cultural renaissance leading to the esgerness of every purok resident for
material results. The following observations bespeak of the attitude
of the local residents toward the different activities of the organizations:
"Our puxok officials, especially the president, have been serving as our consultants on our problems and petty troubles."
"In several instances our gamahang pampurok helps in the execution of municipal ordinances without the use of police force
and court intervention."
"Gambling and other vioes detriment to the progress of our com

5


munity are gradually diminishing, especially here in Samal. This
is due to the establlahment of community reading centers where
the residents find more profitable ways of spending their lelsure time."
"TIme will come when industries such as piggery, gost raising and
poultry raising will be found in every home here because of the
rapid increase of the number of families who follow the examples of the teachers, purok officials and leaders in this locality."
Generally, this attitude among the people results from the insistent, tactful and painstaking approsch made by the public school teachers.


ACTIVITIES AND ACHIEVEMENTS
Foremost among the activities and achievements of the different
purok organizations are the folloming:
1. Promotion of Health and Senitary Condition - Improvement of
health and sanitary conditions in all the places I visited is
certsinly commendable except in the fishing village of Orion.
In my visits to the different zones or districts I have been
impressed of how the people maintain the cleanliness of their
surroundings and keep their pigs and other animals from roaming around. Proper use of garbage or trash cans that are placed
along the road and on corners of streets is evident. I have notioed the effects of home improvement brought about by the
teachers'systematic home visits, carry-over ntrmomioen


6.
and evalustion of findings. As a means to creste initistive, model homes are picked every month and given creditable mention.
This has been done consistently with the use of “home cards" that
shou record of improvement made on the different aspects of
home life.
2. Establishment of Reading Centers - One thing certain in its way
of accomplishment is the elimination of the feeling of rural isolation among the people because of the rapid grouth of Reading
Centers in the province. Reading centers are established in almost all the puroks. Some ere in private houses; some in barber
shops and drug stores; and some are in improvised buildings built
for the purpose. Reading materials such as Manila dailies, weekly magazines and comio pamphlets in Tagalog and English are made
aveilable for the residents of the purok. Among these periodicals, the "ang Bataan", a local organ supported by the different
purok organizations for the purpose of stimulating incentives and
activities in different districts toward the promotion of community life, is available.
3. Promotion of Occupational Activities - In some sections native
erts and crafts especially embroidery and baaketry have been revived and taught. Dressmaking, vegetable gardening and poultry
and pig raising ere also introduced and have been keenly realized
by many as effective means of improving economic living.
4. Promotion of Literaoy - Although literacy work does not seem to
attract the interest of the leader in each district it has been


--


generally undertaken as need arises in connection with other project activities. In Orani a tencher has been serving as itinerant supervisor of literacy work which has been undertaken by the
purok literate members with the use of "each-one-teach-one" method.
FOR FURTHER IMPROVEMENT
Due to the success of "Samahang Pampurok" on adult-education movement in Bataan, these local organizations should receive more support and
encouragement from the school euthorities and toun officials. I should
say that every organisation should continue reviving and expanding local arts and crafts and explore possibilities for neu home industries.
They should intensify their plan and program of community educstion
based on the practices of everyday life so as to stimulate even the
man-in-the-street to choose and begin working on his way of life.
For further integration of school and community activities for
the promotion of community life, the following suggestions are specially
offereda
1. To enrich further the supply and kind of reading materials in
the different Reading Centers, adult reading materials prepared
in the General Office should be placed in these centers. For
a complete list of these materials, please refer to General
Memorandum No. 39, s. 1950.
2. An important industry that hos grent possibilities for the
conmunities along the sea is oyster forming. For information


- 8-
and guidance on oyster culture, please refer to General Memorandum No. 46, s. 1950.
3. Industrial Arts and Home Economics classes may prepare samples of bric-e-bracs, kitchen cabinets, cupboarda, utensils,
and the like to be displayed in community centers for the
people especially the housekeepers to see and emulate in their
respective homes.


In this dey and age no educated citizen
can afford to be ignorant of the problems of
the norker. Ne all knos that the material
progress of our country, if not of the whole
world, is due in large part to the contribution of those who work vith their hands. The
food we est, the clothing se veor, and the
houses that shelter us-all we owe their being
largely to the norker's efforts. Even the book
ne read has had the intervention of the printer
and the bookbinder before it comes to us. Let
no one, therefore, slight or ignore the importonce of work experience in our scheme of educution in our democratic society.


- Dr. Cecilio Putong


-9 -
EDUCATION'PRACTICES AT HOME
Daily Bulletin, Jenuary 15, 1951
(The Bactad Program of Adult Education)
by Pedro T. Orata
I had an interview with a fen of the leaders of the Bactad "model
barrio" project, and asked them the manner in whioh they led the family
heads to want to impreve their surroundings and to go shead in making the
needed improvement. I aaked them especially what they did in case a person did not want to "co-operate", as they callit, and nhat they did sith
"philosophers" as those persons who always object to any kind of community project are called. This is what they told me.
Following some of the suggestions made in the Pangasinan Educator
and Philippine Educator and other sources, a fen of the adults under the
leadership of the teachers met to aak what could be done to carry out the
suggestions in order to improve living conditions in Boctad. They decided to make a survey of the needs of the community, among which they
thought were sanitary toilets, a drainage system under the kitchen to destroy breeding places of mosquitoes, o strong fence to protect the plants
from pigs, goats and chickens, more food for the family, and sources of
supplementary income to enable the members of the family to engage themselves profitably after planting (rice) season and harvest.
It was decided to form effective organiastions to implement the sug—
gestions and to enlist the interest and co-operation of already existing
organizations towards the sume end. A Community Council nas formed, with
24 members, the function of shich vos to formulate policies, to develop
plans of action, and to integrate the work of the various organizstions.


10


The adults and young people out of achool formed their own organisations,
one for the eastern part and another for the western part of the barrio.
As I said in the first article in this series, there are 47I family heads
in the barrio - at the average of six persons per family there are approximately 2,826 persons in this barrio, whose main occupation is farming. To deal direotly with making the barrio a model community an organizetion called Bactad Model Association was orgenised consisting of o
mixed group. The Parent-Teachers Association, an organisation of very
long standing, and the Barangay association, organised chiefly for selfdefense in case of "invasion" by subversive elements nere lined up and
invited to participnte in the project. The combined membership of these
organizations includes nearly all the adults and young people of the barrio, each being resolved to do something to help in its improvement.
Each organization met to plan what it could do on its oun account,
Three projecta were selectedi (1) building a strong and artistic
fence around each yard; (2) a drainage aystem under the kitchen; and
(3) constructing sanitary (antipolo) toilets. To start, the teachers built
their oun fences, drainage systems and toilets. Visits by adults and
young people were made to these places, folloved by informal discussion
of such questions as these: Why do animals destroy plants in the yard,
and what can and should be done about it? Why and how is the place under
the kitchen to be made dry and free from rubbish? What is the danger
of human naste being indiscriminately thrown where animala and flies may
alight or feed on it? How mueh does it cost in time and money to make
the necessary improvements in order to minimise the dangers noted? What
should be done in the case of a family that has not the means to make
the needed improvements?


11


A few family heads resolved to stort right away, which they did.
Meonwhile, specifications vere developed - the height of the fence, the
distance of the pit from the place where the water dropped under the
kitchen, the dimensions of the toilet hole and the seat, the direction
of the toilet from the place where the family ate or sleptin relation
to the prevailing wind and the direction of the sun, and other considerstions. The teachers took their classes to these places during and after having taken up relevant problems to prepare them to observe constructively. They drew the things that they observed, measured the height
of the fence and the dimensions of the pits for the toilet and drainage
system, and again ansuered questions that mere earefully prepared by the
teachers the night Lefore and included in his lesson plan. This interest
of the young people tended to lead other femily heads to start and keep
going. Again visits were made, sometimes one elass breaking up into two
or three groups in order to visit all the homes thet reported ready for
observation.
Some family heads decided to work together, using the familiar system
of "gamal", sometimes on Sunday and after working on the farm, and always
in the spirit of hilarity. Where the family head is a woman, and there
is no one among the male members old enough to do the work alone, the
verious associations decide to lend a helping hand by asking volunteers
to help out - which they always did. hhere the family is too busy to do
the work, the option wus made whereby the amount of tro pesos was to be
paid sith which to buy a bottle of vine for the men who volunteered to
do the work for nothing. In every case, the able-bodied pupils, besides


- 12


helping do their own work with their parents, volunteered to help families that needed their assistance. In some cases, the family needed bamboo for the fence, or if they had bomboo they were not able to provide
the nails. In the latter case, the parent-Leacher Association or some
relatively vell-off individuals came to their rescue. They all soon
found out that the work required or the material needed was not nearly
so much as was feared. Before they know it, the work was startod and
once begun and they saw the advantages to be derived from it, they
went ahead to complete, sometimes in a hurry. The fen "philosophers"
in the group soon oaught the spirit of the oscasion and many of them
became staunoh supporters of the program. ....


ANOTE: - The Bactad Progrem is anly one of the many plans of odult
educetion and community service used in the provinces.
-OPeace is not merely an absence of war - a refuge for cowards, a cave for hermits, a playground
for idlers - a kind of surrender in the face of the
enemy. Peace calls for heroes, who do more than
hold their ground and rest on their fading laurels.
It comes from the power, the courage, the intelligence of man, age-old wespons agsinst the traditional enemies of men - war, famine, pestilence, ignorance.


Unesco Courier
November, 1950


- 13


BRINGING NEN LIFE TO SICK REGIONS
by C. J. OPPER
Director of UNESCO's Fundemental Education Project
Marbial Valley, Haiti
Fundamental eduestion, which means a mass attack on poverty, disease and ignorance is one of the most empirical of activities. Like
the making of tribal lays, there are nine and sixty mays and every single
one of them is right - or can be. And as the United Nations programme of
Technical Assistance for Under-Developed Areas gets inte its stride ve
shall hear more about plans fer uhat is variously called mass, basic,
social or fundamental education.
It is a melancholy thought that three-fourths of the world's people
are under-housed, under-clothed, under-fed and illiterate. Or, as Sir
John Boyd Orr hes said, a state of partial famine is affecting nearly
half the population of the world. The problem confronts us in its massive simplicity. No seciolegical survey is necessary to perceive naked
bodies bleated by intestinal worms, crippled by yans, or stunted by malnutrition. If ve take a plane ticket to almost any country lying within
the tropical belt-(and to a great many others besides), and then get off
the boulevards into the countryside, we shall soon come face to face with
the world's under privileged areas. Within the next year or so me are
likely to see a big expansion of efforts first to expose the problema to
be faced ond then to work out plans for bringing new life into these sick
regions.
Areas are under-developed because they present problems which have
so far defied solution sith the locally available resources. Bhile there
may be a great number of different approsches, there are definitely no


-M -
short-cuts. The effects of diseases which have stricken a region for generations, habits of sloth springing from physical debility, superstition
penetrating to the very roots of society, cannot be cleared away in a month
or a year, no matter hon determined and vigorous the attack. Because fundemental education is by definition a thing of organie gronth, its impact
is not readily demonstrable. To the nenspaper reporter or the film newsman out for a story of big adventure, enterprises to make the deserts flover overnight, the shole business may seem quite inadequate in soope and in
the sense of urgency that animates it. The approach should surely illustrete rather the blitzkrieg of overwhelming force than the war of attrition or the guerilla cumpaign planned in terms of a five or ten year's
strategy.
Fundomental educstion, must aim at changing lives from within. It
must not impose on a community large social and economic development
schemes but lead the people patiently and unobtrusively to work for their
oun improvement, using as far as possible their own social institutions
and their oun leadership. For people fighting a losing battle against ignorence, disesse and poverty, there is no drematie action that can turn
defest into victory at a single blow. Resource surveys, mobile film units,
bull-desers and teams of imported technicians all the paraphernalia of
large-scale development schemes have their place, but if the people themselves ore not active pertners, everything will vither away as soon as
the alien resources ore withdrawn.
while there is no magic formula and no stereotyped plan for the establishment of a fundamental education scheme, a knowledge of the people
themselves is essential to succeed. It is not enough to have lived amongst


- 15 -
then, to like them, to speak their language; this may ensure sympathy but
mot necessarily understanding. It is therefore usual to start nith t survey by a troined anthropologist. This provides the educators rith an intimate knouledge of the indigenous culture and of any special locel problems.
It permits comparisons betveen conditions before the educational programme
ond those that might come into existence several years later. The anthropologist's special competence is derived from the fact that he is
trained to look at a total culture from the point of vien of the interrelations of its various aspects and that he thinks not in terms of a single
culture but of the different patterns of social life thet exist throughout the world. He looks for the sources of social behaviour and ways of
thought, he tracks down forces thut make for cohesion or disintegrstion.
His experience enables him to indicate the strength and weaknesses of a
given situation and what elements in the existing secial orgamization oan
be made use of. Fundamental education must more forward in the streom
of the people's culture. The anthropologist shows where this current
flows strongest.
Working with existing social and ndministrative organizations means
very different things in different areas. In many parts of Africa where a
tribal organization still exists fundamental educstion may aim at reinforcing the leadership of progressive chiefs and at trying to penetrate
the whole structure of local authority and the culture in which it is rooted. In this case the fundamental education campaign may find a coherent
if rigid fremework in which to work, but at the some time poverful forces
of conservatism and prejudice te overcome. Elsewhere there may be no such


-18 -
tribal authorities but in their plage a system of representative government and a developing sense of social service and community organisavion
which reveals itself in cooperatives, Nomen's Institutes, AH Clubs (Head,
Heert, Hand, Health) and the like. Here the ground is already prepared
for the fundamental education project. Other sets of circumstances are
found in the mission field, the industrial area, the plantation, ench
with its separate organization. Other problems exist in areas where tribal outhority has weakened or broken doun and nothing sith roots in the
people's oun culture has grown up in its place.
The usual and most suceessful approach to fundamental education is
through the team. Sometimes the leader chooses his oun teom, sometimes
its members are appointed by the vorious agencies collaborating in the
Project. These may be missionary societies pooling their resources in a
common effort of Government depertments ench providing a techniciun as a
member of a Community Development team, or as in the case of the UNESCO
Pilot Project in Haiti, Specialized Agencies of the United Nations working with the local government.
The leader vould probably hope to be able to assemble a team consisting of an educationist, an agronomist, s dostor, a woman secial worker, and an expert in smallindustries. These would be his mainstaya, each
responsible for a vide field of human ectivities, pushing out his enterprises in every possible direction, impinging on but not overlapping the
work of fellow-workers. The whole plan would gradually take ahape in the
field.


-17 -


A literacy programme must be the foundation of the team's operations.
Literacy awakens the mind, provides incentive for further effort and makes
it possible to impart knonledge about the team's objectives. The adult
elass also becomes the forum for discussion, an important development in
ensuring that plans are prepared not for the people but with the peopleThe literate has to be kept fed with reading matter or his new skills are
soon forgotten and the provision of simple booklets, a monthly journal and
ocessional leaflets on special subjects, is one of the team's most important tasks. Since illiterates must be taught through the medium of their
mother tongue, the pgoduction of reading material may well involve orthographical experiment and resesrch into local folklore and legend. The
members of the team vill provide much of the raw material for book production and a competent local trenslator vill be essential. From the
primary schools vill spring youth organizations, from the adult or literacy schools will germinate cooperatives and perhaps some cultural or
recrestional clubs.
The sgronomist must take care of the soil, what grons on it and the
domestic animals it supports. He must make plans for soil conservation,
reforestation, irrigation, the improvement of farming methods and animal
husbandry. He norks by demonstration rather than by homily. Peasants
are the same the world over, cautious, wedded to custom and suspicious of
innovation; but a healthy crop growing on a terraced hill-side or a two
and a half ounce egg speaks louder than words.
The doctor's most important task is health education, a programme of
village sanitation with attention to such public health undertakings as
cleaner markets, improved water supplies, and anti-mosquito campaigns.


18 -


The provision of medical attention at the Project's dispensary should not
be a first call on his time. Yet at the beginming he may find the treatment of disease too exigent to leave him much time for preventive work.
This is a phase that passes and one which has a high propaganda velue for
the project as a whele. Modern treatments of some tropical diseases are
quite dramatic in their effects and this medical magic provides a favourable
background for the team's other activities.
Nork amongst vomen is highly important as it reaches out to the whole
family although often much neglected owing to the special difficulties it
presents. A nurse vith training in public health and domestic science is
a godsend. An entry to the peasant home is made most easily through the
kitchen. Sewing classes and talks on baby care at the dispensary get at
the younger women and influenoe the newer families. The older women are
a problem but as they usually have much influence in family counsels, their
good-will is vell worth seeking.
Under-employment is a serious problem in rural areas in the tropics.
Often the cultivator is obliged by climatic reasons to remain idle for
more than one-third of the total working days of the year. With so much
time going to waste there is much scope for secondary occupations. The
teom must seek ways of using local materials in cottage industries to
bring some relief to the universal poverty of these areas. The development of local crofts makes life a little richer and perhaps more colourful.


- 19.
There is certainly no blue-print for fundamental education. Everything vill depend on the team resources available, the human resources
of the people and the way in which these tuo forces are brought together.
Patience, sincerity, a strong sense of missionary spirit and an occasional
lucky break can work mirseles in places where nothing short of miracles
vill do.
The world vill also have to be a little patient. Many world problems call for drastic and urgent solutions and there is sometimes suspicion of enterprises that seem to lack this sense of urgency. Ne are
often reminded that the imperial age of too little late hes passed.
But fundamental education is not just bull-dozers, penicillin and cinema
vans: it is bringing ney life to a people. And in these sombre days
mending a life is a for tougher job than ending it. (UNESCO)


Credit:
Press Division
Department of Mess Communication
UNESCO, Paris


 OTo the schoolteacher, civic education is a means for promoting civicideals and inculenting the duties and responsibilities of citizanship. To the social scientist, it is a device for explaining the structure of society, the elements of
economy, the processes of government, and the nature of the
community. To the educator primorily interested in helping
odults solve their problems, it is also a means for promoting, defending, and improving our way of life.
- Russell H. Exing


- 20


TRENDS AND PRACTICES IN ADUILT EDUGATION ABROAD
The Sahool Co-operative Movemont in Broxil
The pioneer of the school co-operative movement in Brasil is Dr.
Fabio Luz Filho. Since 1931 he hud started a school co-operative campaign and the firat school co-operative in the country was set up in
accordance with the new lan on co-operativos in the city of Cruzeiro,
State of Sao Paulo.
The Brasilian los on oo-operatives provides for the orgenisation of
school co-operatives in public and private schools und universities; some
states have issued legislation suprlerientery to the federal law in order
to stimulate the promotion of school co-operotives among the stato eduectional institutions. This non law so encouraged the people that in
Bresil today about 3,000 co-operntives of all types have been orgenized,
600 of which are school co-operatives.
The nims and purposes of school co-operntives in Brasil are summarized as follows:
1. To mould, develop and select rural leaders, vith a strong understunding of local conditions of rural life and the ability to solve
proctical problems of farms and farmers.
2. To ereate, develop and generalize a 'co-operative consciousness!
in rural communities.
3. To shon, practically, to the students thet it is esay to solve
common problems and carry out community plans by co-operative effort.
4. To strengthen the links between the school and the children's
families.
5. To take oure of the school and improve its environment; to make
the school e pleasant centre for social, reerestional and educational
activities in rural areas.


21


6. To help the community in social, economic and educstional campaigns; Red Cross, hospital, sanitation, library, museun, reforestation, recreation, etc. (These types of activities develop a public
mind in the children.)
7. To promote school parties, sports and excursion of educational
or recreational value.
8. To organize a library for the children and a museum for the
school.
9. To accustom the future members of the community to work together,
to discuss in meetinga, to explain freely and frankly their onn idess,
to say clearly what they need and what they want, to claim their rights
as mell as to fulfill their duties.
10. T promote 'learning by doing' prectical things, 'learning by
praotising) co-operation, and to develop a conscious pride in being
o member of the co-operotive and a useful member of the community.
(From Fundamental Education Bulletin, April, 1950)
Community Development in the Abuia Emirata
Abujo is a district in the Niger Province consisting of 28 Gwori
villages. The Qweries are a backwerd and primitive tribe, unresponsive
to progress. There are 67,000 Gweries inhabiting Abuja which has an area
of 12,337 squere miles, Many of the villages have little or no water,
The houses are too close together, and mater-borne diseases ore common
because of the poor and unprotected water supply. That is the condition
of abuja which the Emir, the talented and energetic ruler, expects to
improve through his personally supervised project of community development.


The Emir of Abuja outlined his campaign in the following projects.
(1) Ingreased agriculturel production, (2) Introduction of cosh orops
as vell as subsistence erops if necessary on communal farms - rice
proved the most suitable, (3) Mass literacy, (4) A model layout in accordance with approved sanitary standards, (5) An elementory school,


- 22


(6) a medical dispensary, (7) a suitable number of fruit and shade
trees - 600 for a village of 50 familiss, (8) a fuel plantetion, (9) 4
village drainage system, (10) Contour farming as a measure against
erosion, (11) a village hall, (12) Concrete-lined wells, (13) Oottage
industries. (From Mass Eduestion Bulletin, September, 1950)
An Imoromptu Outdoor Film Theatra
Trrohoma is one of the most widespread diseases in China, whose
people call it "Sha Yen" (sand eye) because the pain it causes makes
its victims feel as if grains of sand huve got into their red-rimmed
watering eyes. One day a group of Unesco health educators arrived at
Shih Tse Hsiang, a prominent town of Sseahuan, far in the interior of
Chins.
Children stood around, wotching with delight as out of their car
came a generator, a transformer, a gremophone and equipment for filmstrip projection. Some of the shildren, and the grown-ups who watohed
from further away, didn't see as well as they should have; they had
trachoma.
About 1000 townapeople and formers, young and old, were in the
impromptu thestre in front of the encient temple whose stone steps made
an excellent gallery. First there was Chinese music. Then an educational filmstrip about the Pehpei mission's fight against trachoma was
shown. The film brought to many children, women and men with sore eyos
e simple tale of what they needed to do to be oured and to prevent others
from suffering.


The film tells the story of Nang San, a olever carpenter, who caught
trachomo from public tovels he used to vipe his face each time he visited
a tea house. The tovels had baen used previously by people suffering from
the diseose. Nang San neglected his eyes untilit was too late to qure
them, became blind and so lost his job. Then, because he and his wife used
the same tomel, she also caught the disease. However, vith proper trestment, as the filmstrip illustrotes, she was cured.
as the filmstrip enda, the cormentator gives some final advice to
the sudience.
"Frienda, please remember: Do not use public tovels to wipe your
eyes. When your eyes feel urong do not touch them with your hends, but
go to a doctor for treatment. Use your oun towel and vash your face with
clean water in s clean basin to proteet yourself and others from begoming
blind.” (From Unesco Courier, April, 1950)
The Vives! Course
A course for housesives is conducted every year in Kenya under the
suspioes of the Social Nelfare Organization in Kenya, Africa. The olass
is composed of 50 women who ottend lectures and discussions for five
months. Another elass has been organized for the wives of social welfare
workers. The course is prastical, based on the homes of housewives.
Bousevives are taught methods of improving homecrafts, cooking hygiene,
infont care, making of eloth, eto. The wives of social velfere, workers
huve put up a number of spinming and neaving, sewing and knitting
olasses at community centers. (From Mass Edusetion Bullotin, Sept. 1950)


- 2-
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES
CaDin
Adult classes have been organized in many districts in Capiz, aocording to a report of the Division Superintendent of Sehools. The districts in which adult education projects are successful are New Washington,
Numancia, Capis, Ibajay and Pilar. The Division Superintendent advocates
for a more vigorous campaign of adult educstion by putting up in every
tonn and centrally located barrios, cormunity schools for adults where
they can be taught trades and vocations aside from literacy.
Community assemblies have been held in many parts of Capiz. The
topies generally discussed concerned problems on peace and order, planting of vegetablea and fruit trees, health and sanitation, duties of citisens and improvement of ferm eccupations. The school principals and
district supervisors with the cooperation of local officials have been
exerting efforts to hold community meetings even in remote places.
Sorsegon
Practical courses for adults are scheduled in the adult educstion
olasses conductad by the Sorsogon High School according to a report of
its principal, Mr. Angel M. Instrella.
The subjects scheduled in their weekly program are as follons:
Monday -
1. Child Care (for nomen)
2. Principles of agriculture (for men)
3. National Language (for both)


25


Teusday -
1. Nutrition (for vomen)
2. Business Arithmetic (for men)
3. National Language (for both)
Wednesday
1. Food preperation (for women)
2. Practical Electricity (for men)
3. Bigol - Reoding and uriting (for both)
Tkuraday
1. Dressmaking (for women)
2. General Sheet Metal Work (for men)
3. Bicol - Reading and wriving (for both)
Friday -
1. Retail merchandizing (for women)
2. Nooduorking (for men)
3. Philippine Civios and History (for both)


Batanea
Regulor elasses for adults have boen opened in the four principal
municipalities of Ivuna, Sabtang, Itbayat and Dyugan. There are in all
169 adults receiving literecy instruction. Citizenship lectures are
discussed in adult elasses for the purpose of improving the conmunity.
The lectures are ordinarily delivered by government officials, surervisors, principals and school teachers. The torios treated are: The Rights
and Duties of Citizens, Hhot Our Government is Doing for the People, The
Danger of Communism, hhy lie Should Pay Our Taxes Promptly, How to Improve
Our Agricultural and Animal Produets, Why Every Home Should Have a Sanitory Toilet, Why we Should Intensify Our Food Production, eto.
Teachers and studenta in the different schools help in the literocy campaign by using the "each-one-teach-one" procedure. The institutions which successfully gave instruction under the tutorship plan in

- 2h -


cluded the Batanes High School, Itbayat Elementary School, Ivana Elementory Sehool, Mahatao Elementary School, Sabtang Elementery School and
Uyugon Elementory School. A totel of 94 adulta were tutored under the
Veach-one-teach-one" method.


Polanan.
In a short and concise paragraph Superintendent Villaflor vividly deseribed the activities of his division in the adult education campaign. "In spite of handicaps, adult educotion in this division continued to progress. Nith the school-community service work the adults
are being led to construet toilets, to have their houses more sanitary
and nttrootive, to spend the lsisure time in a more wholesome manner,
and are being taught homekeeping and home industries. The number of
adult elasses increased during this period.
Lloilo
bholesome and tangible results of adult education in the form of
employment and inereased vocational efficiency has been renorted by Mr.
Fermin Tarue, Principal of Iloilo School of Arts and Trades. 'It is
gretifying to report" according to him, "that the instruction me have
been giving to adult students had helped them find jobs. Of the ten
who completed their troining in July, eight were able to segure employment immedistely after completing their training."
Adults who vere enrolled in the wooduorking class have been assigned
to different student-contractors. The adults therefore are able to eorn


27


while studying. There are many cases of adults who have started as helpers in the manufacture of furniture but are now esrhing as mueh as the
experienced carpenters of the toun.


Pangasinon
The Pangasinan Trade School has opaned ita doors for adult education servicg to the province. According to its principal Mr. Cornelio
E. Casaclang a total of 57 adults have been registered with the sehool.
The adults are elassified as follows:


Housekeepers ......... 19
Tenchers ............ 10
Drivers ....... 7
Carpentera ... A
H. S. Students ... 4
2
Maids .......
Businessmen ...
Storekoerers .....
Cabinet Maker .....
Storeowner................ 1
Laborer ............ 1

Mechanio .....
Others ..... 2
57


Oocupational and vocational instruction is given to adults who
select the phase or phases of aotivity in the shop which will imrrove
their trode or calling. The different activities taught to them include sutomobile and battery repair, plumbing, making of hollow blocks
and vindon grills, knitting, embroidery, dressmaking, cooking and fruit
preservetion.


Marinduqua
Community assemblies and open foruma are the techniques used in
adult education in tha five big barrios in Bosc, Marinduque as reported
by Superintendent alarooa. Yor the improvement of sommunity life the
following topies have been discusseda peace and ordor, vegetables and
short season erops, poultry, hog and goat raising, sanitary toilets,
caponizing and child care.
In order to set examples to the community, the tenchers engagud cetively in the different food production projecta. Of the l11 teachers
in Boac, 21 are engaged in poultry, 3lin piggery, 6 in duck raising
and 83 in vegetables and fruit reising projeots.
In the District of Torrijos, all vaoant lots vere surveyod befero
the opening of sehool. The district supervisor and teachers mode a community cammaign for food production. Tuo months afterwarda obout 97 lots
vere planted to bananas and short season erops.
A community librory was started in Matuyatuya barrio sehool. Adults
come to the library and read magazines, novels and other adult publisations
Sulal
"a cautious approach to the problem", is the method emloyed by
Superintendent Escolante in the adult eduention campaign in Sulu. To
begin with, adult educution sctivities vill be started in the central
schools first. The barrio sahool teachers ere given the option of undertaking the adult progrom at their oun initiotive. Mr. Escalante


29 -


opines that the program vill develop progressively as the community
school concept becomes better understood in the communities. Mr.
Escalante believes that "the average Moro is individualistig. He
is an isolationist, and he is also a suspicious individual, characteristios that negate the community-school concept. It nill take time to
develon a genuine sririt of cooperation, fellowship, helpfulness and
civio mindedness among the backward communities in Sulu."
Pamoanga
Adult sducstion councils have been organized in the different placos in Pampange in order to sponsor adult education projects. Such councila have been formed in Mobalacat, Forac, Minalin, Apalit, Macabebe,
Floridablanca, Lubao, Mexico, Bacolor, Gusgua and Sexmoan.
an interesting account of some adults attending literacy elasses
was made by Mr. Bortolome Evangelista, Adult Education Supervisor as
follows: "I nas able to see in my travels seven adults who had undertakon the course under the "each-one-tench-one" method. They said that
at first thay did not like the idea to be taught by their small children,
but as the children were insistent they finally soceded to their wishea.
They said that half interested at the beginning they learned very slonly.
In due time they became really interested and in about four months they
were able to reod and write. Now they said they could road the local papers and other materials in the vernacular, even though not as fast as
those who learned the gartilla and gaten. They are proud of their acoomplishment and would prove that they really could learn to read and write
through the efforta of their children."


Og
W
C


E







E
PE A
A
BA Md g
A L
1
EA
ESED
8
1."
A
LARA ROR I
RRTNIVON



SSGU
LRTAS
Mawl s 1ost
61 606s3
MAWAVA
O
AAA

NAN!"
FOUCATIOS
IL
2
E

P2
eee
E LL
2
SIT
A
T
be.
RAL AE
  ENy I


E

S

IL
E

PE
AFA

E
E
'E
O
E
m
aaigany
EA
HEE
IliPROI

MbE
A 


E




*
WE
E
E
E2
A
Ao

WSA
2
E
VA
E

AA
E
E
kak o Ve
e
I MA DEd
E
SEO LA OOUSG
EOO 3
OSA


S


Va
SVOL


JAGI
IX. - 71o. 2 MARCH M9-TO

CQHIENIS


Paga


Editorial: Adult Eduestion - A Transformation


fron Traditional Literacy


1


Adult Eduestion - The School of the People .......... 3


11


Adult Education In Batsan


By Juan C. Laya
Mping Out Illiteraoy In Romblon .................... 14
By Fructueso I. Ilar
A Program of Adult Education in Palawan ............. 17
By Alfonso Villaflor
Adult Eduestion in the Canlubang Sugar Estste ....... 19
By Emilio Avenido
Factors Responsible for the Suecess of Adult
Efucation Program in Cagayan..... 21
Methods and Teshniques in Adult Educstion ........... 27
Tenching an Illiterate Hos to Read and Frite
in Engliah r 31
Trenda and Practioes in adult Eduestion Abrosd ...... 32
Adult Eduestion Aotivities in the Provinces ......... 36


ADULT EDUCATION - A TRANSFORMATION FROM TRADITIONAL
LITERACI
It is difficult to erase the old impression that adult educstion
is nothing more than instruction in literecy, tesching the illiterates
and adulta to read and write names and a fev lines with little or no
functional and lasting value to them. This opinion is held by many and
they have reasons for believing so. Inevitably there haa really bean
some undue concentration on litersay teaching in the past, and thet methed of instruction is still being folloved in a number of adult-oducation elasses. But adult education in the Philippines has definitely
assumed nen trenda and has embarked upon a new progran of functional educstion beyond mere literuay. The stigme of the traditional system is
bound to disappear. As presently projeoted and conducted in many provinoes adult education for the welfare of the masses has asserted itself and is working into the areas of economic, health and social life
of the people as well as their educstional and literacy problems. Nith
adequete facilities and means, the new program can be made to function
more effectively in this direction.
In fect there are now adult classes for dressmaking which trsin
housevives to sew their oun dresses and the dresses of their children
and at the same time enable them to learn a trade. There are barrios
where the citizens under the leadership of the teschers are engaged in
the promotion of health and sanitation of their community. In other
places the old folk are taught by the poultry and piggery teachers to
innoculate and caponize animals and to feed and select stocks in the
right nay. Practical farming is one of the most useful adult educstion


courses. Small farmers and tenants in agricultural districta are encouraged by the principal or supervisor of the schools to take the course
which is usually conducted right in their own conmunity by the government agricultural supervisors. Household industries are taught in adult
elasses held in centers and schools. Other activities and edusational
projects for the improvement of community life, such as the establishment
of reading centers, radio listening, making of compost pits, training of
ualioensed midvives, etc., are included in the program.
Latersoy, of sourse, is still a part and parcal of the adult education program, but it is made meaningful by relating it to life sctivities. The use of reading materials for adult alasses depicting useful
famdly and conmunity ways of living is emphasised. The adults are encouraged to learn reading and writing as a means of getting information
and enlightenment about occupations and business in which they are engaged. Thus, in all its aspeots, including the teaching of reading and
writing, the adult eduestion program of the Burean of Public Schools is
being carried out on the basis of functional interpretation in adultat
ectivities. Literaay in the traditional sense is not the prime purpose
or "sine que non" of adult eduestion. The objectives of this educational servioe are realistically conesived and implemented in the light
of enriched life of the individual and improved standarda of conmunity
living. And as a teehnique, litereay in its narron concept camot cope
vith this broad function.


-3-
ADULT EDUCATION-THE SCHOOL OF THE PECPLE
The present program of adult education of the Bureau of Public
Schools is a movement in community improvement which tries to meet
actual needs and problems of the people in rural and urban areas,
particularly those in the rural aress. It deals vith various aspects
of community life, namely, health and sanitation, economic and productive efforts, citizenship, literacy and cultural phase. The teachers
take the lead and initistive in ushering in the movement vith the
interest and velfare of the communities as its objective.
MHAT IS NEE IN THE LOVEMENT?
The community improvement program is in a way the history of the
Bureau of Public Schools ever since its establishment. It has begun,
hovever, to take on a more definite form and follor the progressive
trends of adult education in recent years, sith Iloilo and Cagayan
emong the fen provinces leading the movement. It has gained vide soceptance among the schools and laymen vith the enunciated policy of the
present Director of Public Schools to broaden the relations of these
schools mith the people by throring their gates side open to all and
utilizing the best that the communities can offer in the way of vitalizing education among the people.
As its work progresses in a number of divisions, the program has
been developing a technique of its own, which is unigue in the history
of the Buresu. Consciously or unconsciously, the people of the communities take the program as something springing from themselves and
something of their oun. As the ideas and pictures of community im

-


provement are unveiled-by the blueprint of the teachers, the youths and
adults, ordinary citisens, professionals; businesssan, farmers, housevives, officials and, in fact, the people of all walks of life, bond
themselves with a commen purpose to support the preram and, like the
barangays of old, carry out its varied forms of assivities. Group action, cooperative efforts, and sharing of responsitility have become
binding upon the residents and families of the comanity on all levels
of life for their velfare and common interest.
And the program is one of contagious community operstion. As one
barrio or district comes up with the showing of its projects well accomplished, the next and adjacent barrios make efforts to put up and
excel in like activities or go earnestly into the other phases of the
conmunity improvement progrom.
Indeed, no government regulations or munidipal ordinances can be
more effective in promoting such community interest and in stimulating
such cooperative action as are inspired by the spirit of the nen school
for improved community living.
AND ITS ACTIVITIES
In Pangasinan
Visit places and witness hon the community school program is working its way into the life set-up of the people.
In Pangasinan there are model barrios from which the start is made.
a visitor who comes to look over the model barrio community is met by
a pleasing sight of the rural roads kept clean by the families living
along those roads. With a real sense of pride the people seem to bring


-5-
to the attention of the visitor the healthful surrounding of their homes
and the bamboo fenees huilt ty them which ere included among their coh-¬
munity projects. as he, atrolla around end gsts inside the heme yards,
:
he finds in each borrio projects, elther, a vegetable gardeni a banana
gnatat ag
grove, a brood of dueks or chickens or a couple of pigs, all indicative
of the keen sense of economio life. The enimals sre trested or innoculated by the barrio kendol teachers and pupils to guard against animal
diseases, a service rendered by the sehool in aecordance vith the sommunity program.
In dome other barrios of this province, one finds radio sets run
by batteries installed in social centers which have been constructed by
the residents. Farmers and laborers, men and vomen returning from work in
the afternoon and evening listen to news and musical broadcasts. These
radio seta are loaned to the centers by members of parent-teacher asabcistions or cemmlinity councils. Thus, the barrio folk living in these
out-of-wey plaoes keep themselves up-to-date nith the happenings of the
world and heor programs of wholesome entertainments, all under the auspices of the community school movement.
In Cotabato
In Cotabsto the teachers of a sehool in a rural tonn have started
the community improvement program by taking a oensus of the adult illiterates among the families. These are non being given literacy instruction. But this is not all. The teachers are also norking to keep
the town elean and sanitary, with the people doing the job themselves.
Besides these, the program includes the promotion of poultry, piggery
and vegetable gardening by the families in the community. Some very
mutive breeds of chickens are found in their peultry projects.


--
This rural toun is a fertile ground fof the commumity school pregram,
as many people are sustlers fros Luson and the Visayan Ialands who have
come in real earnest vo seek better conditions of life in Mindanao.
In Gagayan
In Cagayon, the demmunity-school program has aroused among the
people a very high degree of cooperative spirit and cosperative action.
This is shoun by various community projects and activities which are
undertaken by voluntery and joint efforts of fomilies, groups of men,
vomen and children for the improvemant of their barrios or "sones" of
their barrios.
There are barrio ronds and streets in the touns of Cagayan that
have been repeired or improved by the people through voluntary labor.
along the sides of these roada are placed big garbage cans, which have
been denated by civic organisations or certain families to keep public
plaoes tidy and safe for the health of the community. Think of the saving of government funds which are ordinarily spent for these purposes
and of the real interest sroused omong the people for their oun good.
It is citizenship educction of a high order.
In one barrio conmunity where pottery is the occupation of the womenfolk, the adult school has stepped in. Some of the earthwares made
here are real ortistic pieces of work valued for decorative purposes.
But vith the munipulation of market vendors the vomen had been making
little from their business and had been victims of exploitation. The
thoughtful berrio teachers invited the pottery makers to a conference


7


vith the proposition of allowing the intermediate pupils under the
guidence of the teachers to do the paint-flmishing on the decorative
pots and the school to market the wares for them. Now, these vomen are
getting better returns from their occupation, while the school children
are receiving a share of the gain besides the practical education that
goes with it.
To get an iden of how much the community school has been embraced by
all the elements of the pepulation in this far-nwey province, a visitor
should go around to see the various community improvement projects. It

is not the teacher nor the principal of the schcol that takes hin to
the places where these projecta are located. The president of the
adult-educotion council or a member of the local board, who may be a
farmer, a barrio lleutenant or leading citizen, accompanies him to show
and explain the progress of the place. In one instance, a physician
took a visitor to see the fruit-tree projects, small banano plantations,
poultry and other home projects of the families in his "zone". Cagayon
is fest developing the type of adult educntion, in which the school is
the school of the people.


In Bataon
Batoon has the temper and the historical background very conducive
to the gronth of the community school. This ia notably a division ghere
the literacy and the cultural aspects of adult education are develloped
hand in hand with the promotion of the economic, practical and family
life in the communities. More systematic and concentrated efforts are
made in promoting literacy instruction than in many other places. This


- 8-
province has a publication knoun as "Bataan", the mouthpiece of the local councils and civie groups that sponsor and Bedster the cormunity
school program. It helps in making the people in the towns and barrios
nore conscious of an assertive in conmunty-velfare work.
The "purok" plan of community organisstion ig the outstanding achievement of Bataan. Bach "purok" or section of the toun or barrio has its
oun local council which takes charge of establishing a sosial and reading center, promoting the censtruction of model barrio houses, keeping
up senitation and rehabilitating home and local industries.
MHAT OF THE OTHER PROVINCES?
The expansion of the commurity-achool ides as a result of the policy
to furkher broaden the eduestienal influence of the publie schools is
reaching provincial communities se mueh so that various community-improvement projecta are being developed faster than are realised by the schoolmen themselves. Bulacan, Isabela, Occidental Negros, Capis, Batangas and
other provinces are engaged in promoting one or other phases of adult education more or lesa actively in their different communities. In some
provinces, the local progroms include campaigns against dynamite-fishing,
tax evesion, usurious practices, and other similar social problems, es
vell as campaigns to improve the services of local midvives, infant care,
fomily diet, soil fertilisation, practical ferming and other services
and projects intended to better family and conmunity living.
The progrem of the comaunity school aims to improve every phase of
indi-iduel and community life, but it connot go thorovghly as it envisiena in its objectives. There are limitations to its progress, the


9


most serious of which is the laak of financial provisions for personnel,
equipment and facilities to carry eut the program.


THE FACTS ABOUT THE PROGRAM


The folloning recorda of the first semester of this school year
shon partial accompliahments as well as the nature and objectives of
this new movement!


A. Prometion of Functional Literacy -
Enrolment from July 1 to Decembor 31, 1950 ......... 111,808
Number promoted ..... 8,108


Number of literacy reading materiala including
leaflets published in major vernaculars ......... 248,608
B. Nature of Cormunity Improvement


—Prolecta undertaken


INo. at SoncelelNe. or Ferwon:


la On Health & Nome Lifo


f Engagedini


1 Participating


a. Proper Disposal of Gerbage


2,252


195,128


b. Toilet Construction


1.340


1 193,555


c. House Construction & Remodeling


with Plans


1,237


30,364


d. Home Beautification


S41


29,107


e. Other Health & Home Lifo


Agtivitlg




921


AIEl


TOl a


9,403


1 425,005


mprovemel
turo.
On
I
1 Cult
Ra



a. Organising Oenter Libraries


35


T EN


b. Literary-Musical Programs


2,009


1 254,657


o. Home Decoration


1,051


1 71,304


d. Audio-Visual Education.


(Use of Films)


103


1 28,272


han
tiAg
I

kias
Yi



AA


1L92I


Total ...


9,192


283,5n


3. On Economic Imorovement



a. Poultry Projects


3


110,TO


b. Piggery Projects


3,11e



123,223


6. Home Crafts


1,732


 56,562


d. Trades


660


13,326


e. Vegetable Gerdening


1,091


81,799


—La Other Agtivitia—


1160


 A1.312.


Total ....


11,336


1 186,092


-10 -


4. On the Promotion of Gitisenahip


INo. of Sandela!No. of Porsons
IEngagad aa 1 Partiginating


a, trvis cis aromiatian


2,960


223,681


b. Discussion Grotios


1,089


7,942


6. Cooperatives


303


18,431


d. Community Assemblies, Open





ma 
K
Mana SemarenRas
—ES





1 784,4l4


TA






BASORS—LLalO3. 271


These figures eft by no means absolute and dategorical due to some
overlapping of entrios. Thay, however, indicate pronounced trends in
adult eduention through the community sehool for the improvement of various aspesta of community life.
AND MHAT OF THE FUTURE!
Let the community sahool program continue in its naturel development. The populstion of the rural aresa have begun to speak and act
through this school, the sahool of the people. Like a orystal-elear
objest, the school of the people is free from bias, from speculations
and from any tinge of regimentation. Let no other aystem be imposed
upon its program that may tend to reverse the course that the people
themselves have freely and spontaneously mapped out vith their friends,
the teachers, as their guidance and inspiration. Let our eduestional
loaders give these people's sehools every encouragement by going out into
some of them and see hon they function in their communities. Ne hope
to revise certain old and uninformed views on the leadership of the Publie Schools in regerd to its progrom of improving the standards of living
among the masses. Let our government provide more adequate and liberal support for the adult eduestion program of the Bureau, which not
only brings education elose to the people but, as a sehool of the people, also ean make itself an effective agency for the verious forms of
the social amelioration progrom of the government.


-11-
a
ADULT EDUCATION IN BATAAN
Fron the Report of Mr. Juen C. Laya
lcting Division Superintendent of Schools
It has been noted with grest satisfaction thet the adult edueation
program has been effectively implemented, and in nearly every town the
Time Table, First and Second Stages, have been follomed.
Let us surmarise some of the outstanding achievements so far of
the different distristss
LITERACI
The literacy program has hed a slon start, but it is picking up
speed, now that the people have some leisure time after planting time
and before harvest. Many are non being certified by district supervisors as non literstes.
Ar
TU
YOCATIONAL AUTIVITIES
Attempts to help the people economically through instruction in
embroidery and other handicrafts, demonstration of mango smudging,
development of barrio nurseries, etc. have had a good start. (Noteworthy are achievements in Samal, Balanga, Moron, etc.)
CULTURAL-SOCIAL ACTIVITIES
The interdistrict visitations nere conducted with grest success
on September 23, 1950. Teachers learned much from their visits. The
division superintendent, the assistant division superintendent, and
some supervisors of Pampangs visited our Division on October 26 and were
impressed nith the socomplishmenta of the adult eduestion program in
Orani, Samal, Balanga and Pilar. Other touns will bo visited soon by
the superintendent and supervisora froa Zambales.


12


a
Ang Bataan hes had a sucsessful start; the materials are getting
better, the editors are getting more confident, reporting has become
more competent, and the cirqulation is being guilt up slowly. The
publiestion has motivated the adult eduestion progran considerably.
Some reading eenters have been established and are now begimning
to function. The reading habit is being developed. (Noteworthy are
Dinalurihan, Hermosa, Orani, Samal, Mariveles, Limay, etc.)
RTEC
CITIZENSHIP-CIVIC—AOTAYALAAD
Most puroka have adopted their respeotive constitutions after muah
discussions and hove elected offioers sccording to constitutional processes. Nhere the puroka have been slowly but firmly established through
democratic precesses and officers elected by the sonstituents, the program has sueceeded because of the good community cooperation.
Good public relations have been maintoined. No serious complaint
from the people has arisen as a result of the adult education program.
The democratie practioe of consultation nith the constituenta of the
purok whenever a problem has to be solved has largely been the cause of
suocassful public relations. The people are backing up the eduestional
program more than even before.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Community cleanliness and sanitation has been an outstanding success
in many Duroks. The putting up of the trash boxes in strategio places and
the edueation of the people in their use have been largely responsible for
sush cleanliness. Some community toilets have been built.
Visits in parents' homes have been condueted and every home has been
rated once on Ulat sa Magulang. The response to this rating device has


- 13 -
been favorable, often extremely gratifying.
UNCLASSIFIED ACTIVITIES
School-community albums have been sterted, with varying success.
(Good inexpensive albums have been started in Orahi. Orion has adapted
a poster type which is good for display but not suitable for permanent
preservetion. The Division Office has a good album covering all towns,
but these are limited to places visited by the Division Superintendent
and to schools which have sent copies of pictures to the Division Office.)
Olassroom procedure and techniques are being modified so as to
serve better the adult education program. Teachers have begun to spply
the ideas in Division Memorandum No. 18, s. 1950, entitled "Correlation
of In-school Instruction and Out-of-school Activities.” (Noteworthy are
trial efforts in Piler and Moron, where the centrel schools made use of
their toun fiesta celebrations to enrich classroom teadhing.)
Model homes have been selected. In some places, honever, no tags
or posters have been placed to give eredit and publicity to the model
homes. Publicity is important so as to stimulate other homes to emulate these model homes.
Not all the items in the first and second stages of the time
table have been accomplished with equal success. Some are in an advanced
stage of development, while others ere merely starting.


-IA -
VIPING OUT ILLITERAOY IN ROMBLON
From the Report of Mr. Fructuoso I. Ilar
Division Superintendent of Romblon
It may be noted that the province of Romblon is highly literste.
Out of the total population of 108,817 only 7,939 or 7 of the population were illlteretes at the time the Buresu of Public Schools assumed
responsibility fer adult eduestion. It should, therefore, be possible
by careful planning and systematid effort to vipe out illiteracy entirely in this province vithin the next fen years.
There are several factors that account for this highly desirable
state of affairs, among which are the following:
1. This provinee consista of fragments of small islands
which are mountaincus so that its people are found in communities along the coasto and along the provincial roads
which are also along the cossts. There sre very few communities in the mountainous interiors of the different islands.
2. The majority of the communities have schoola from
time inmemorial so that their inhabitants are recipients of
the benefits of these sehools.
3. Many of the inhabitants are immigrants from Batangas
and Capiz mho are mostly businessmen and, as such, are highly
literate.
A. The people of the province are highly interested to
see to it thet their children get some kind of education.
Out of the original 7.922 illiterate adults, 1.e11 have already been made literste during the last two years. That leaves
6,428 illiterote adults still to be made literste. Of these, 1,412


have been enrolled in the present adult educution classes. District
supervisors and principals are securing the cooperation of PTA's
elpealing to their civic-mindedness and arousing their spirit of rivelry and pride to secure and maintain regular attendance in the adult
eduestion clesses.
A summary of adult education activities in Romblon is tabulated
below. The Table shows the percentage of achievements, and the ranka
of the different municipalities, in the task of eliminating illiteraay
during the last tuo yesrs. It will be noted that the municipalities of
Despujols and Romblon tied for first plaoe; Badajos, third place; and
Jones and Concepcion tied for fourth place. The supervisors, principals,
and teachers of these municipalities have been congratulated for the suecess of their work. The PTA's of these municipalities, without mhose
cooperation in many ways such achievemente could not have been acoomplished, also shere the eredits with the school teschers, principals,
and supervisors.



-
O)
-
to
-
fO


- 15 -


E
po
5


-17


A PROGRAM OF ADULT EDUCATION IN PALAWAN
From the report of Mr. Aifonso Villaflor
Division Superintendent of Schools


It is believed important that for Adult Educstion work to be effective in this division, every administrator or tencher should have a
long range plan based on local conditions and environment. This long
range plan may cover three months, a semester or one school year.
Henceforth, every school should prepare a long range plan on Adult Education, one for esch sres similar to the one on citisenship-civio sres,
which is given belon. Only activities mhich can be practically carried
out should be included in the plan.
Long Range Plan on Adult Oitisenship-oivic Training
(One Year)


A. OBJECTIVES
1. To have the adults understand their citizenship-civio
duties.
2. To ereste in the adults a high degree of citizenahipcivie conscience.
3. To provide the adults satisfying experiences in citisenship-civio activities.
4. To improve the character and personality of the adults.
5. To oampaign agsinat gambling, drunkenness and the use
of dynamite in fishing.
6. To point to the adults the evils of the kaingin system
of forming.
7. To promote industry and honesty.
8. To compsign for payment of taxes.
9. To scqusint the adults nith the important events in history.
Y7
B. MEANSA DEVICESA PROJECTS AND ACTIVITIES TO DE EMPLOYED TO
Mm Ti
ACCOMILISH THE OBJEUTAVES
1. Community assemblies with leotures, discussions and
demonstrutions.
2. Instruction in citizenship-civic responsibilities and
duties in adult olasses.
3. Use of posters, slogens and cartoons portraying good traits
of citisenship.


18


4. Neighborhood contests on home improvement.
5. School and community programs celebrating important eventa
6. Organizations of civic clubs and discussion groups.
7. Orgenization of Reading Circlos of neuspapers and periodicals.
S. Model citizon smards.
9. Organize "Citizership Day."
10. Crestion of a citizenship-civic community committee.
11. Making of a Citizenship Code.
12. Securing the nid of ether government and private agencies.
N
C. PRCDLEMS AND LIFFICUALES TO PE ENCOUNTERED, PROPOSED SOLUTIONS


1. Laok of time of both teachers and adults.
2. Lack of facilities as pamphlets, books,
periodicals and light..
3- Ianorence and illiteracy of many adults.
4. Feople live in seuttered areas ----


- Take advantage of
holidays and community
general affairs as
fiestas. Enlist the
sid of laymen.
Requisition in advancs.
Solicit denations. Get
the help of the PTA.
- Intensify literacy
campaign.
Take odvantage of the
time they aro in the
town or bsrrio


5. Non-active participstion of non-school
officials -------------
- Enlist and interest
them to help.
5. Lack of qualified persona to lead in
citisenship training -------
- Train those who shon
leadership.


This plan is only a sample intended to cover conditions in the whole
division. It may be shortened, modified or changed. The important thing
is te have s plan that is workable in the community for which it is intended. Hith this long range planning put into effest, it is believed
that more and better concrete results mill be realised in this division
in adult Eduestion.


ADULT EDUCATION IN THE CANLUBANG SUGAR ESTATE
Reported by Mr. Emilio Avenido
District Supervisor, Calamba, kaguna
Most notable amone the achievements in the different schools of
this district during the months of September and Oatober nas the intensification of the compaign for the eradication of klliteracy through the
orgonization of more sdult education classes and the keeping of the adulta
interested and eornest in their studies. How to keep the adults in regular attendance and hon to keep them really interested in their nork have
been and are still the most sericus problems confronting this mission of
adult education teachers. It can be stated, however, that these problems
have been altogether solved in Canlubang, particularly, where everyone
concerned, the adult education teachers, the learners, the PTA and the
Administrators of the CSE heve truly buckled domn to real earnest desire
to reduce illiteracy. There are at present four classes in operation,
two of the primary level and tuo of the intermediate level, with s total
enrolment of 9l. The clesses meet everyday from 5130 to 7100 p.m. as
majority of the students are laborers in the Canlubang Sugar Estate.
The adult edueation teachers are paid hy the Canlubung PTA and by Mr. O.
G. Milne, Manager of the Estate at the rate of P2.00 an hour. Because
more adults are still seeking enrolment, it was learned lately that Mr.
Yulo, the owner of the Estate, has appropriated Po00.00 for the compensation of additionel adult education teachers.
One important factor that attracts the illiterate employees of the
Estate te attend this class is their desire to attain a better grade of
employment in the company and so that they would not have to be affixing


- 20 -
their thumb marks on the payroll on pay days. According to the paymester of the compuny, the majority of those employees who used to
nffix their thumb marks on the payroll can sign non, a tangible result
of thoir attendanoe in the adult aduestion elasses. Another festuro
that makes the udult aducstion classos sttractive now is the neekly convosstion uberein literary end musical mumbers ere contributed by the
claases. 4 guest speaber is engaged to speak in this convocation. The
vriter ves at one time a guest spoaker in a Friday avening convosation
as thoy ordinarily schadule the convocations on Friday ovenings before
the regular elasses start. Tha adult education materials issued by the
Cantral Office and those that have been secured direatly from the Adult
Edusstion Division are being used as teaching meterials in these classes
in addition to other suitable reading matter obtsinad locally. Practically the same grade prograns sa those used by the elementary elasses are
being used. Gordening. Industrial Arta, and Home Esonomica are omitted
as the students are alrcady engaged in some gsinful oocupstions.


as opportunities for self-expression in your work or family lessen, reslise that human imaginstion does not
grow old, and find crestive outlets in
hobbies, the arts and conmunity activities.


- George Lawton


- 21 -


FACTORS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE SUCCESS OF ADULT-EDUCATION
PROGRAM IN OAGAYAN
(Report on Visit to Oagayan, January 31 - February 3, 1951)
artemio C. Viscende
N
Much that could make Adult Eduestion news headlines can be found
in the secret of the suecess of the pregran of homa and comaunity improvement in Cagayan. Before bringing out the underlying factors responsible for this success, I shall first present a brief recapitulation of the achievements I have observod in this province.
COMMUNITY AOHIEVEMENIS
In Gagayan, no one could miss to notice the deep concern of the
people for the improvement of home life, the goal which the schools
are atriving vith earnest determinetion to attain during this eritical
tima. They are especially after the economic and health improvement of
their communities without losing interest in the other conditions of
life nhich present themselves in esch community. Prominent among the
activities and achievements I have observed in Cagayan, are the follouing:
1. Promotion of Economie Security - - Nowhere have I seen food
production been carried out se successfully in every home as in
Cagayan. Vegetable gardening is abundant in every sehool ground
and home yard. In communities where home space does not permit
backyard gardening, communal gardens con be seen on publis grounds
and borrowed sites. Hence, there has been an abundant and continuous supply of vegetables almost everywhere. And, as a matter of


- 22 -
fect vegetables can be had almost for nothing and they are rarely
found for sale in the merket.
Piggery and poultry are common. The people including the barrio folk are no longer contented of raising only the local breed.
They are non the ones seeking the help of the schools for the improvement of their livestoak. And, to comply with this publio
demand the achools especially Cagayan High Sahool in Tuguegarso
and Bukig Barrio Sehool in Aporri have launched projects purposely
for demonstration and souroe of improved breeds of pags end chiokens asido fron the conmunity extension service they render to help
prevent and cheok the spread of pig end chicken discases. One
thing more conmendable in this connection is the rise of locel
formers' alub and other orgenizations nhose members work cooperntively to bolster their oun projeota.
Interest has also been shown in reviving and teaching local
home erafts sueh as, eloth veaving and pottery. In localities
nhere these industries are found, the sohools help the people improve the designing of the fabricated articles. Other occupational
aetivities suah as, lime making, amoking fish and making articles
out of shells are also introdueed to sugment family income.
2. Home Improvement and Besutification - - Aside from Enrile and
Barrio Balsain in Tuguegarao where the inhabitants have gone far
ahead in improving and beautifying their homes, there are several
other sommunities where the movement can be easily seen as it
spreads from the sahool to the community. Yo any casual visitor in
any community in Cagayan especially in Panablanca, Iguig, Solana and


Gamalaniugan, the art of landscape gardening and fencing of
home yards is an attraction. The layout of patha and lawns and
the planting of ornamental plants which make majority of the
homes attractive have been patterned from that of the school in
the conmunity.
Remodeling of old houses and building of new ones shor connection vith the improvement plan the provincial trade school is
trying to effect in house construction. The improvement can be
noticed as one travels the full length of the province. There may
be few yet, however, of the houses which have shown material transformation; but, at least there are beginnings that manifest rational thoughts over the idea of correct partitioning of houses and
proper decoration of homes.
3. Promotion of Health and Sanitation - - The cleaning not only of
the homes and immediate surroundings but also of the streets and
publie plaoes has become generally one of the primary concerns of the
people. This practice which was started by the schools in the form
of community service through the children and students has passed
its "campaignestage" and is non an acquired training on the part
of the adult inhabitants. Other health prectioes such as, the
construetion of blind ditches to do anay with stegnant water under
the kitohen and environ of the homea and the digging of garbage
pits or use of publie trash sans have been introduced and are
now adopted in oenters of population as vell as in interior communities.


24


4. Other Achiavesnts - - Another conmendable movement which is
of civie importambe is the opening of alleys udthin eronded distriets like thase of Barrio Balasin in Tuguegarao and the construction and imorovement of streets as in Enrule, "parri and Camalaniugan. At the ontsct the movement was sponsored by the
schools and eremnted thronch cormunity serwiua. Loter these projects and other similar ones have become sole undertakings of sone
orgonisntions.
As to the educational benefit derived from the above mentioned sotivities, I sheul! say that mhile the people engage therselves in food
production, besutafying their homes, cleaning their surroundings and
helping in the construetion and iuprovement of alleys and streets they
leurn in one nay or auother something about soil cultivation and con¬
servation, proper use of fertilizers, seed selection, planting of diversified cropa, simple prinsiples of home management, essential rules
on heelon and saritation, dutles of eftizenship, eto. Thus, through
these projects eash of the corrunlties in Cagayan has become the
"school of living."
HON THE SATISFYING RESULTS HAVE BEEN ACHIEVED
There may be nothing exactly nen and astounding about the phases
and sotivities of the odult-education movement in the Province of Osgayan. But, certainly, there is something worth knowing, - how the
satisfying resu..ts huve been asaieved.
Foremost of all the factors that bring the desired results is the
interest of the people in the vorious project activities which speaks


25 -


well of the holding poner of the adult-education program in the provinec.
Of course, the successful development of interest in the program dependa
much upon the uss of proper approach to the movement. In Cagayan tho
economic approach to adult eduestion is the one found most effective
besause of the felt-neod of the people, fertility of the soil, presence
of enough land space in every conmunity and inelinstion of the people by
nature to farm industries. The schools in the persons of the pupils,
students, teachers and school officials including the Division Superintendent creste and offer to the adult citizens of the commmnity opportunities for produotive enterprise. Fer inatance, to help interest the
people in and propagate at least self-sufficiency in home life the Division Superintendent of Schools personally bought white leghorn eggs,
had them hatched and distributed the chicks to the people in the community. He himself cultivated his oun home yard and planted fruit trees
and vegetables purposely to influence his neighbors and other people.
In like manner, classroom teachers and other school officials throughout
the province turned their own respective homes models in the community,
helped distribute seeds and seedlings and seoure for the people the services of technical men to further improve their home industries. This
spproach may not work effectively in other places, but it can be seen
that the adult-education movement in order to interest the people in
its program should take the actual conditions obtaining in the community as the starting point, ond the school must have to lead.
Another fector to which the successful results of cormunity improvement campaign in Cagayan may be attributed is the favorable publie relation of local achool officiala and teschers with the communi

ty leaders and government officials especially nith those of the
Buresuof Plant Industry, Animal Husbandry, Health and Publio Norka.
This relationshir has made possible for the school the proper dovetailing of the activities of the different goverrment and non-government
agencies for the improvement of home and community life. It has made
possible the translation of scientifio and technical infermation from
the different agencies personal and direct to the people nithout mueh
delay. Thus, it brought about not only achievementa but also satisfaction to the people in the different places in the provinde. Furthermore, had it not been for this favorable publie relation ereatod
and maintained by the school officiala and teschers, perliapa difficulty
and more problema, if not total failure, might have been enoountered nhile
propegating adult-eduestion movement in the province. But, as it is,
there has been rise of leadera from the groups of laymen who have produeed much nore of useful sexvice than they have themselves absorbed.
They have become the organizers and leaders of adult-education movement
and officials of sone organisations. They have not only voluntarily
set the examplos of the new emphases on home and community life but
also have impreased upon the people in their respeotive communities the
specifio kinda of education that vill enable each individual "to livo
as full and rich a life es possible."


- 21-
METHODS AND TECHNIQUES IN ADULT EDUCATION
(Adaptations from the Surmary Report of the I, ternational
Conference on Adult Education in
Elsinore, Denmark)
What are the methods and techniques most generally used in
adult education?
Fundamentally, all people are interested first in themselves;
methods are based on this principle and adult eduestion must recognize
it. It mas agreed that the adult edueator could always make contact
by appealing to the interest of people in themselves.
There is a need for the educational worker to have received a
sound treining in sociology and to hove the understanding of the environment in which he works, so that he will be able to develop a prograrme suitable to each group, appealing to every level of interest,
from the physical and manipulative to the intellectual and artistic.
The eduestor must have at his disposal all the facilities that adult
education ean provide and it is his responsibility to use those available from all organizations and from community resources. Others felt
that the vital issue was to co-ordinate the diverse technical practices, for example to link the library with the cinema, sport with
radio, nhile using in their proper place and with due regard to
their limitations all the recognized particular techniques.
The following methods and techniques in adult educstion ere
helpful in the sense that they are means to an end and not ends
in themselves.


Laotures. — The lecture has its established place, but it is
essential te use every means of giving it vitality (questionnaires,
synopses, dincuesions, subdivision of the group, etc.) and to use
it as one method within a whole range of activities. The lecture
may also be a link between the content of a museum or other exhibition and the visitor.
Courses and Classes. - - The organization of courses and classes
differed in mony places. In Belgium special schools have been established for adults. Some handle social questions, others family problems and rural problems. As many as 10,000 vomen had attended some
of the courses given. Traveling teachers in Siom, Egypt and Turkey
are used to contact the seattered communities; they are specially
trained for the work. Civic and vocational training is stressed in
the courses.
Certoin countries (Denmark, France, Ireland) organize week-end
courses and seminors of three to fifteen days to supplement the veekly
evening classes.
Studv. Cirgla. — An established method in educotion is the study
circle, an orgenized form of self education for small groups of people
pursuing theoretical and practical studies in common on a given subject
and in accordance with a definite plan. The group hos a leader who
need not be a professional teacher.
Discussion groups are of basic importence for adult education.
This and the previous technique are best used in conjunction with the
film, lecture, planned reading, etc.


29


Audio Msual aids. — Audio-visual aids (films, slides, television, posters, charts, graphs, exhibits, episcope, etc.) are important
in adult education. It is noted that the film particularly can be
used in many different ways - - to illustrate a lecture or as s
theme for discussion. The basic problem is to obtain films that meet
the real need of schools, associations, and other groups; but only
good quality film should be used. The film can be profitably linked
with manual activities.

Dramatic estaxaties. — Drama appeals directly to emotion and imagination, and should play an important part. In many countries lectures
and discussions are supplemented vith dramatic performances. In Ireland,
where rural education is well developed, amateur dramatics are widely
used, and help to sttract adults to evening courses. Dramatic activities develop the confidence necessary to participation in discussion.

Circulating Llbraxiss. — The special uses of circulating libreries
should not be overlooked in adult education. They should be considered
in terms of the need to make library services available to all, especially those in isolated localities.
Museums. — Modern methods of presentation require that people be
brought into contact with the object rather than that they be confronted
with it. Nuseums provide information in the most concrete form possible
and cover all aspects of human activity. Circulating exhibits presenting a definite theme make, the museums still more effective.
Radio. — Radio can be an important instrument, especially where
it is used by listening groups or radio clubs. In some countries


.
-30-

(Ganada, Scandinavia) pregrammes are planned by the broadeast
ing ststion in coflaborstion rith adult education bodies and group
representatives. It is desirable that this organised publie ba
more and more alosely associated vith the planning of radio, cinema
and dremotie productions. Pepple controlling press, films, and
radio must be helped to realize their responsibilities to the community.


Civic education programs for both adolescents and adults must be purposive and progressive, realistic and scientific, direct and dynamic, if they are to meet the requirements of our
complex metropolitan communities today. The Civic educator and leader must understand the art
of civic leadership, the science of community aotion, the methods of civic organization, the processes of government, the elements of social and
economic life, and hon these factors are related,
before he can train voters or civic leaders in an
effedtive manner.


- Russell H. Ening


- 31-
TEACHING AN ILLITERATE HON TO READ AND PRITE IN ENGLISH
a
The global or sentenoe method is recommended. The following steps
of teaching reading and vriting are suggested:

R
1. Help thaalsarner build English speaking vocabulary through
simple sentences by using the vernacular of the learner as
suxiliary medium to get meaning. Nords and vord-groups thus
used elearly and correctly pronounced.
2. With enough speaking vocabulary soquired, conduct simple
conversation. Essy, short sentences should be used first.
3. Help the learner read nhole sentence on the blackboard or chart. Be sure he knows the meaning. (Sentence
recognition).
4. Break the sentence into thought units or phrases. Help.
the learner recognise and read the word-groups or phrases.
(Phrase recognition.)
5. Break the phrases into words. Help the learner recognize
and read each word. (Hord recognition).
-
6. Give plenty of similar drills on sentence, phrase and word
recognition and reading. Use word cards, vord-group cards and
pocket charts for exercises in recognition.
7. Give follow-up reading exercises, using the vocabulary
in new and original situations. Help the learner scquire
correct emphasis and inflection in reading.
8. English Primers and First-Grode Books may be used for other
exercises.
Vriting should be introduced as soon as the laarner begins to
recognize simple sentences by copying worda, sord-groups or phrases
and sentences. Lessons on dictation end writing original sentences
may follon.


- 32 -
TRENDS AND PRACTIUES IN ADULT EDUCATION
ABROAD
¿cult Edugation In India
The Netional Seminar on the Organisation and Techniques for the
liquidetion of illiterecy was hald in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh State,
from Dec. 15 to Dec. 26, 1950. This Seminar was the first national
undertaking in the country and was organized in secordance with tha
recommendation of the UllESCO Seminor hald in Mysoro in 1949.
Another important event which occurred in India nas the Seventh
all Indin Adult Education Conferenoe which was held in Hyderabad on
Dec. 30-31, 1950. The Conferenoe vas successfully conduoted under
the suspices of the Indian Adult Education Association. The topios
discussed were: Thee Role of Voluntary Agencies in idult Education,
Plarning in Adult Eduestion Nork, The National Seminar, and Grants to
the Aasociation. (Social Eduestion News Bullatin, January, 1951).

Somn
Financing MtEMM—NRA
Three importont peints sere reconmended by the 1949 Inter-Americon Seminar on Illicersay and Adult Educstion regarding the problem
of financing literacy campaigns.
1. The financing of literaay campaigns must be subject to the
same standards of good organization as in well organized eduestional
services; that is, it must be sufficient to cover the programme lsid
down; it must be stable, in order to ensure continuity. And it must
be possible gradually to inarease the aveilable funds in order to be
able to expand the servioes.
2. In accordance with these standards, each country should make
appropatetions every yeur by lan, or even better, should establish
an enr-mazked fund.


33


3. It is to be hoped that privete initiative vill give financial
help in the form of donations, bequests, etc. Private cooperstion
must bo stimulated to that end, but by no means can it be considered
as the basis for planning national literacy campaigna. (Unesoo
Surmary Report: Inter-american Seminar On Illiteracy and adult
Educstion, May 15, 1950)
Fundamental Education Centers
The Unesco's Executive Doard has arproved a 320,000,000 plan, to
be carried over a period of 12 yeers, for the crention of n sorld
network of Fundamental Education Centers. The plan is a pert of a
worldvide compaign against illiteracy and lon living standerds. The
centers would be established in Equatorial africa, Latin America, the
Fer East, India and the Middle Esst.
Each Center will accomplish the following:
1. Research to determine the real needs of the ares and experimentation into new methods und media of fundamental education suited
to those needs.
2. Training in esch Center of 100 specialists, teachers and field
workers for a year, or a total of 5,400 specialists in the six centers
by the end of 12 years.
3. Production of locally adapted tesching matarials, including
literacy texts, reading matter, guides to teachers and field workers,
filmstrips and films, and redio recordings.
4. Mobile missions of experts to go into the field to help local
goyernments to spply the techniques involved, and the materials produced, to their literaoy campaigns. (Unesco Courier, December, 1950)


 34 -
Nomen'a Pragtical Egucation In Togoland
Neakly courses in child nelfare and nutrition had been given to
the village vomen in Togoland, Africa. About 94 vomen leaders, mostly
farmers and tradera, attended the courses. A competent nurse had been
assigned to give lagtures ond demonstrations on the preparation of
suitable food for the child. Severul village midnives sho sttended
the class assertad that they would discord some of their primitive
methods after they had nitnessed the new and modern ways of delivery,
handling the baby and treating its cord. Some women were so interested
that they made s special request to be taught hon to knit their oun garments. They bring their onn wools and needles for the training. (Mass
Educetion Bulletin, Dec. 1950).
Charagteriatica of An adequate Adult Education Program
Robert C. Deming, Supervisor of Adult Education in Connecticut
enumerated the characteristics of an adequate adult education progrem
as follows:
1. It grows out of the demands, interests and needs of all adults
of all ages and socio-economic lovels.
2. It is flexible and maximally sccessible to the population with
reference to geographical location, time, psychological setting, and cost.
3. It utilizes all aveiloble desiroble leadership both professional
end lay, including all orgamizations ond agencies having educstional
purposes.
A. It helps adults to become better adjusted within themselves,
and to become aware of their broader obligstions and relationahips to
the larger world.


S5. It assiste individuals and groups in (a) adapting to changing
world, and (b) gaining greater control over cultural and social forees.
o. It is cooperatively plomed and coordinated by a group involving community-vide perticipstion.
7. It utilises adequate methods, approsches, techniques, and
facilities.
8. It has s congenial stnosphere in which each person feels
velcome and at eese. (adult Education, Octobar, 1950)


The need for a vell-informed and
intelligent population is more evident
in the world today than ever before.
That widespread effective adult education is gine qua non if we are to avoid
future wars is reiterated almost daily
in the press and by our national leoders.


Morse A. Carturight


36


ADULT EDUBATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROMBNCES
Several reporta have been received from schood superintendents,
principals and supermsors describing the various phases of adult
eduention activities conducted in the provinces.
ZANBOANGA
Under the leadorahip of the Division Superiatendent, the campaign
PA

for adult education has been intensified. The city is divided into
sones and ench sone is assigned to o school under the principal or
head teacher who in turn sub-divides the zone into many blocks as there
ere teachers. Euca teacher is responsible for the education of adults
in her block. She takes charge of the litersoy instruction, the food
production projects in the homes, demonstrations for the promotion and
encouragement of nen homecrafts and industries and improvement of other
phases in the life of the adults. One year is given her vithin which to
produce results, from her bloak.
BULACAN
Superintendent Bernardino has reported on the different phases
4.
of adult education work in Bulacan witnessed by a team of visiting
superintendents. The most important of which are the following:
1. Reading oenters in Polo, Obando, Santa Maria, Guiguinto,
Baliuag, San Rafael, Son Ildefonso and Calumpit.
2. Poultry projects in Polo, Santa Maria, Meycawayan and San
Miguel and other new home projects.
3. Adult classes in llteracy, socio-cultural, vocational and
citizenship aspects in Malolos, Santa Maris and Guiguinto.


37


4. Demonstrutions on spraying mangoos to control pests.
5. Health focilities (trosh cana) for publie use in Polo and Obando.
MISAMIS OCCIDENTAL
Siperintendont Sermiento has informed us of the orgenisation of several litoracy elasses in many perta of the province. Their campaign has
made an initial suecesa; 147 adults have been grantod recently certificotes of proficieney by the Burenu.
"In order to help the people improve their agricultural methods,"
vrote Superintendent Sermiento, "and also to give them general information about their government and the present losal conditions, lectures
and community assemblies wero conducted in the oommunities. The sttendance was particularly large in the conmunity assemblies in esamis City,
Oroquiete and Jimenes. The USIS Mobile Unit exhibited filma and film
atrips on health and industries."
NEGROS OCCIDENTAL
Under the leadership of Principal Gorral, the Manapla Provincial
High School has joined the literacy cumpaign in their cormunity. Fourteen
adults were suecessfully taught by high schocl students who served as
their tutors. The Home Economics teschers are conducting lectures on
home beautification and backyard gurdening and poultry. The high schoal
students in their adult eduestion campaign have demonstrated a fine spirit of community cooperation by helping the poor residents fix their
homes and clean their yards.
DAVAO
The Baganda Junior High School, aocording to Principal Bugayong, has


contributed its initial share to the adult education campsign in Daveo.
Seventeen adults havo heen succesafully tsught by atudent volunteers.
A new method of attrasting adults to their class sas devised by the Principal. He substituted folk dancing to tubo drinkin as a means of getting
them to school.


MASBATE
The conference of Mesbate mayors has endorsed the plan to launch an
intensified adult education campaign in the province socording to adult
Educstion Supervisor Naves. The mayors have approved the resolution requesting every muricipal council to oppropriste at least P300 for the
promotion of adult eduestion in ench municipality in Masbate. The Provincial Board has blased the trail by approving the inclusion of Po00
in its budget for moderate allowances of teachers of adults nho may be
designated to any plaoe in the province.
ILOCOS MLTE
Superintendent Dimeano reported that in 49 adult classes there were
778 adults enroled for literaey instruction. Aside from the regular
adult elasses, teachers and students of the different elementary sahools
were able to register 1032 adults under the "each-one-teach-one" plan.
The following schoola nere suecessful in their adult instruction projects: Badoe Elementary School, Dingras Elementary School, Banna Elementary School, Bangui Elementery School, Currimao Elementary School, Paosy Elementary School, Ilocos Norte High School, Laosg S-E District, Pasuquin Elementery School, Piddig Elementary School, Pinili Elementary
School, San Nicolas Elementery Schoel, Sarrat Elementery School, Santa


Meris Elementery School, and Vintar Elementary School.
In order to reinforce the instruction in the adult classes, community assemblies nere conducted in different barrios and centers of population. They were able to hold during the months of November and December 21 adult education assemblies nith an attendance of approximately
4165 adult citizens.


The Bongabong Provincial High Schoel is doing its part in the promotion of adult education activities in Nueva Ecija. Principal Angulo reporteda "During the last week of December those illiterstes who were
taught by the "each-one-teach-one" method were invited to join the music
festivel of the school. Some were included in the literary program to
the delight of the teachers and the students mho had taught them to read
end write. Ve hope to have them all again with us before the end of the
school year to see how far they villincrease their ability to read and
write."
SORSOGON
Superintendent Castro has reported on the adult education activity of
the Gubat High School, nhich has an adult class for literagy sonducted in
the temple building of the labor union and another sdult elass in dressmaking. On account of the large number of advlta takng dressmaking they
are divided into two sections. The first sacilon attends elass from
Monday to Nednesday and the other from Thursday to Friday.
LA UNION
An impertunt phase emphasised in the adult education campaign in
La Union, sccording to Superintendent Arguelles are the community as

semblies. Gommuntty assemblies are utilized to intensify the campaign
for liternoy, peade and order, food-production and taxollection.


GEBU
Part of the adult edueation program of the Daanban ayan Provincial
High Sehool is the literecy campaign. Principal Bacol, leading the movement, has organised five adult education agencies to un lertake volunteer
work in literacy instruction of adults. Thoy are the Iy Soout Troop with
27 memhers, Girl Seout Troop, 16 membera, Senior Class, 54 members, Junior
olass 1, 23 members and Junior Class 2, 12 members. Tha tutorial syatem
of "each-one-tesch-one" is employed.
MABLAD DUE
Superintendent alarcon has reported the opening of a library for
adults in Buenavista, Marinduque. Givic-spirited citisena heve doneted
books, periodicals and magasines anda large number of adulta are sattracted
ito spend their evenings in the librarv.
COTA ATO
An encouraging report has been received from Mr. Manib Manampan,
District Supervisor in Porang, Cotel ato, desoribing the effect of adult

eduestion in his distrist. He said "There has been much noticeable improvement in econonic conditions sicoe the advent of Adult Education this
year. Farmers have enlarged their elearings of staple erops. Vegetablo
gardening and fruit groving have be an stepped up too. New poultry and
swine projects have been carried on by members of the P.T.A., teachers,
pupils and furmers. Model project: have been visitad by members of different sones. Almost every home has some kind of useful projeots. Fectories in salt making, sugar making, pot making and gold smithing have


-Albeen visited by members of zones to improve their own industries.
MANILA
The Rodriguez Vocational High Schoal conducts three adult classes
offering practical courses in Dressmaking, Cosmetology and Radio Mechanios. There are 47 adults enroled in the dressmoking class and they ere
almest through with the required 21 projects to enable them to sen their
own dresses or open their shops. The edult class in Cosmctology has an
enrolment of 65 adults whose ages range from 14 to 42. The adult students in the Practical Radio Mechanics -lass are very much interested in
their course that after tuo veeks’ stays three adult students have been
able to construct and operate their oun standard S-tube Ac-De superhet
radio sets.


Education for family living is that
branch of adult education whidh deals
specifically vith the values, principles, end practices of family life. It
has for ita general objective the enrichment of family experience through
the more skillful participation of all
family members in the life of the femily group.


- MURIEL N. BROTN


Pe


ELAMLLANMRADU(O
aN 9799
S PUEL.
AN
52

Ayi
E
BE2
N

D


"OJCANNDK
PIA
EA
UE
Kmnla
N
EA
TUREIUI
5
y
—

t.
ME

S


N
IAA

PE

E
Kan
UOJO UZA
AOSA
LOO D


4


4


VOL. I7o. 5 MA 4954


GOLIENIS
Paga
EDITORIAL. 1
ADULT EDUCATION IN A DEMOCRACY .... 3
By Dr. Cecilio Putong
Undersecretory of Educstion
SOME NEN PHASES OF THE COMMUNITY SCHOOL THAT HAVE
NY
DEVELOPED RECENTLI IN PANGASINAN, LAGUNA AND BATAAN ... 8
SCIENTIFIC TRAINING OF UNLICENSED MIDNIVES - A PROJECT
UNDERTAKEN BY COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT LSSOCILTION OF
SOLANE. CAGLYAN P. 12
VOCATIONAL COURSES FOR ADULTS IN THE RODRIGUEZ
VOCATIONLL HIGH SCHOOL, MANILA ........................ 17
By Amedo L. Agorrilla
QDULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN KORONADAL................ 21
By Mertin Dideles
BULA, L SECOND RSTA. BARBARA"... 24
By Agustin R. Ferreris
ADULT EDUCATION RORK IN DINGLE ........ 27
By Magdelena Sumagaysay & Agustin G. Dideles
TRENDS AND PRACTICES IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD .......... 30
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES ............. 34
SUMMARY OF ¿CCOMPLISHMENTS 41


EDITORIAL


THE A2ND ANNUAL OONVENTION OF DIVISION SUPERINTENDENTS
Our Gonstitution is immortalized as a great document embodying
vise and for-sighted doctrines on the education of our people. A
singular and typical fenture of the Constitution is the provision
which makes it an obligation of the state to provide education
not only for the youths but also for adult citizens as vell. This
constitutional mandote has definitely been in the mind of the
Directorate and the Division Superintendents of Sohools in muking
Adult Education the theme of the A2nd Armual Convention of Superintendents held in Baguio this year.
The Division Superintendents of Schools, fully determined to
help the administration in maging a total mor for the eradication
of illiterooy, ignorance, poverty and diseases in the country, could
have chosen no better theme, for educstion in this country should
play a more militant role in the promotion ond improvement of social,
civie and economic lfe of the masses, the citizens living in rural
aroas and countrysides. Thus, adult education as a port of the
program of the Bureau of Publie Schools, with the Division Superintendents on the frontlines and the Community School as the agenoy
of the progrom, is a distinot forward sten from troditional education which concerns itself exclusively in classroom instruction.
It insures the flow of the wholesome school influence and its
impact upon the lives of the masses; it facilitates the assimilation


 2 -


from community life of the best in our culture into the educational
syatem.
The Director of Public Sahools in his message at the opening
of the Convention has sounded the core of the program in so many
words: "More and more the public schools are becoming truly the
schools of the peonle and o vital instrument in promoting social action and improving the life of the masses."
No gigantic und miroculous effect may result immedistely from
this Gonvention, but the reforms in the fundamental outlook and
policy of the present educational system evolved in the field
during the last three years and erystalized by the vision and
foresight that have emerged out of the deliberations of the
lest Convention of Superintendents, have brought to light in no uncertain terms the faot that the education of the messes, the unlettered and underdevelpped citizenry must be considered seriouely in all our educational planning, finencial and othervise, if the
people of this country shall enjoy fully the blessings of hauiness, prosperity, and the democratie way of life gueranteed in


the Constitution.



ALP DASOLEN IN A DEMOCRACYO
Dy Cecilio Putong
Undersecretary of Educstion
The deliberations during the week which is about to close have
throw into bold relief the problems of adult eduention in this country. It is to the credit of the Planning Gommittee of the Convention
that it has selected this aspect of eduention as the theme of this
year's meeting ond I congratulete the members of the Convention for
the seriousness and the thoroughness with which they have attacked
the various problems bearing on this theme. The different area reports show careful thinking and the consolidated report which was
prepared by the Coordinating Committee and approved by the Convention
with modifications is an excellent piece of work which merits careful
reading by every Filipino eduentor. In fact, it would not be an
exaggeration to say that the discussions which mere provoked both in
the workshons and in the plenary sessions, os mell as the vigorous
thinking they stimulated, are an augury of better things to come.
As a result of this collective action, we have every reason to expect
e more effeotive, more functional, and more vital school system, one
which is ever responsive to the demends of a dynamic and constantly
chenging society. I also congratuante the Director and his staff for
the inspiration, guidance, and leadership they hove furnished which
made possible the outstanding work of the public schools during the
year, porticularly in regard to community improvement.
No one vill question the importance of adult education, especially in a country lfke ouns which, as may be seen from a reading


Yndarese delivered ot the 4and anmuel Convention of Division Superintendents, Baguio


4


of our Constitrtion, has definitely cormitted itself to a democratic
form of government. If the permanence and stability of a democraay
rests upon the existence of a prosperous, enlightened, ond upright
citisanry, then education must direct its energies to the development
of this tyre of eitisens. In order to do this, we must provide a
minimun level of education for every man, woman, and child in the
country, beoring in mind the disintegrating effeots of ignorance upon
society and therefore the necessity of fighting that ignorance with
all the force and the determinetion we can muster.
Our government has been doing its best, within the limits of its
resourees, to place every child of school age in school. As a matter
of faot, during the nast yeor our elementary schools have heen able to
secommodate every child that sought admission except those in the
sparsely ropulated arens where it is difficult to establish schools.
The big increase in school enrolment from 2,000,000 prior to the war
to 4,000,000 last year is an eloquent testimonial to the sincerity
of our government in its desire to extend the benefits of education
to all the children in this country. But we have to admit that in the
educntion of the adults we have not done so well. According to the
latest availeble statistios, we have the staggering total of 4,500,000
adults who are still illiterate. We cannot ignore these adults because they are the ones who form the bulk of our population and who
make the nation what it is. The frumers of our Gonstitution must
have realized this fact when it cherged the government with the duty
of educating the adult population. The importence of adult education
has been broucht out clearly by the United Nations Educational,
Scientifio, and Cultural Organization in its publicotion entitled
fundamental Eduention:


-SMoney spent on sehools is largely masted unless the
skills, knowledge, and ideals soquired by the children are
understood and arpreciated by the older generation. If not,
serious frustrations and conflicts arise and the younger
generation either come to desrise, or even to abandon, their
oan people or revert to the general level of illiteracy,
quiekly losing the benefits,of their sehooling; hence the
imortance of encouraging active participation by parenta
in the work of the schools, of keeping in touch nith the
boys and girls after they leave school, and of linking the
schools with adult education movements.
The percentage of illiternoy in this country as revealed by the
Census of 1939 should be a cause for concern on the port of every thinking Filipino who has the best interests of his country at heart.
If democracy is predicated on the rrinciple that "sovereignty resides
in the neople and all government authority emanates from them," then
it follows logically that the masses of our neople must be educated
to a point where they will be able to exercise that sovereignty
wisely and for the benefit and welfare of all. This means that we
should not be satisfied vith a situation where about one-half of
our people live continually in a state of intellectual blackout
because they cannot derive meaning from the printed page. Here is
the justifiention for the emphasis which the eradication of illiteracy deserves in our program of adult education in this country.
I hasten to add that the literacy campaign is only one aspect,
albeit important, of adult education. Commonwealth Act No. 80
orending the Office of adult Education, whiah is now a part of the
Buresu of Publie Schools, included in its statement of objectives
liternoy, vocational eduention, and sitizenshir training. The
United Nations Muestional, Scientific, and Cultural Organization
would inelude health treining, oecupstional eduestion, reerentional
eduention, eivil and political education, and peneral eduestion.


6


This is not the ossasion for me to discuss at length each one
of the rhases of adult eduention just enumerated. I shall merely
limit my remarks to one aspeet — oscunational eduestion. This is
an important aspeot of adult edueation because the most inmediste
problem of the average adult is hon to feed, clothe, and provide
suitoble shelter for his family and hor to edueste his children.
In order to be able to do these, he must engage in an ocoupatfon or
in verious occupations from whicb he cah derive an income adequato
for his needs. There are many indicstions pointing to the inadequnoy
of the income of the average Filipino family. Therefore, we must
help our, people to find ways and means of surplementing this income.
One way of doing this is to foster and promote household industries.
It is a source of gratification for me to note that the report of
the Coordinating Committee includes a portion on Home drafts and
Housshold Industries. This portion is an excellent discussion of
mhat should be done to stimulnte our home industries and gives a
statepent of what has been accomplished in this regard in the different rrovinces through the efforts and the leadership of the
schools.
I only wish to add that, together with the determined effort
to foster household industries, there is a need for an effective
organization for the orderly marketing of the commodities that are
fabricated in the homes. It is obvious that if everyone were to
look after the marketing of his own products, mueh time and effort
would be lost and discouragement would result. Organisation is
essentisl. Here we can profit from the experience of Sweden. In
that country there are associations nhich take charge of the market

ing of fabricated articles. Any member may take his articles to a
collecting center or sales agency of the association, which buys
them provided they meet the required standards. It also sends out
instruetors who hold institutes in order to help the workers in
imoroving the quelity of their produets through better workmanship
or through the use of new designs. Non, there seems to be no reason
why similor associations cannot be organized in this country in
order to encourage our neople to engage in home industries. It
stands to renson that if a man can find e ready market for his
produets ipatend of having ta peddle them from house to house, he
would he encouraged to exert more effort in produsing them. I
recommend that the possibilities of orgoniring associations for
marketing the produets of home industries be explored.
Finally, I wish to extend to each and everyone of you my best
wishes for another pleasant and fruitful year. As you proceed to
your respective divisions to resume your mork, I know that you are
ready to socent every ohallence that comes with renened faith in
the sacredness of our mission and that you mill redouble your
efforts toword its fulfillment.


Thank you

-8-
SOME "ILN THASES OF THE OOAMUNTTY SGROOL THAT
HAY ONVTELOPED RECENTLY IN PAMDASINAN,
LAGUNA AND BATAAN
PANGASINAN
The Cabbage Projeet of Bectad
A worthuhile community school project has developed in the
barrio of Roctad, Urdoneto where a rice farmer has grom cabbage
as a follow-erop. This he did with the encouragement and undor
the susrices of the community school council. Lbout a lectare of
rice land was plonted to cabbage just after the rice horvest. It
is reported that the omer would harvest no less than 5,000 heads
of oabhaga from this parcel of land, which he wos selling from
tuenty to thirty centavos a head. He expects to net about P1,000
as an additional income this year.
Ordinarily rice land in the Central Luzon provinces remoins
idle after the rice harvest in Deoember and brings nothing to
the farmers for five or six months. The extra money that this
smell farmer in Bactad will make this yeur will be a great blessing to his fomily. For the first time his small rice farm was
put to this additional production.
The principel, the teachers and the community council in
the borrio feel hepry sbout this newly developed source of income.
With other small farmers they are non plannine to expand this cabbage project after the next rioe season. The lone project has
become an eye opener to the neighborhood of small rice farmers in
Bactad, and it is hoped it will stimulate other form distriots.


9


Mr. Piedad, the Division Superintendent for Pongasinan,
thinks thot the project of "second crop", "follon-crop" or
"supplementory crop", if proctisod by and lorge, vill revolutionise economie life in the rurol areas of his province end, for
that motter, any other regions of the country.
LAGUNA
1. The Revien Olessos for the Tenchers
An unusuolly loudoble plon for the benofit of tomporory tenchers in Laguno who nill take the next Civil Servico examinotions
hes been morkod out this yeor by the Division Superintendent of
Schools. Review classos vill be orgenised and conducted in Santa
Cruz in the different subjects. The elasses will be taught by
the Division Superintendent of Schools, the Division Supervisors
end sone supervising principuls vithout chorging the teachers any
fee whotever. Suporintendent loronso stated thot these review
elasses had been conducted by him in previous years, found helpful and vell appreciated by the teochers. He considers it a
conmunity school project this time to help temporary teschers.
The steff of the revien elasses ere enthusiostio about this
project and seriouely prepering the materials to be covered. It
is believod thet these rovien elasses vill give better results than
sono other nays would. Cortainly, if this plan could be adopted
in other provinces it would be a real blessing for many temporary
teschers.


- 10 -


2. Development of Household Industries
There is in this division a good beginning for the improvement
and expansion ef household industries. There are exthibits of useful and well-made artioles in the sehools and in the division office.
There ere implements, tools and kitehen utensila of different kinds
and utility made of coconut shells, palm leaves, vines and other
materials groving abundantly in the localities. Among the articles that vould attraot anyone's attention in the shops of the, schools
are the lamp shades, picture fremes, eloth baakets, ash trays and
gther, objects vith artistie designs and neat finishing. The Superintendent is drawing a plan for the extension of the making of
these articles in the homes and for providing market for their sale.
If these household industries can be videly developed and expanded,
families vill save money by providing themselves-with-the-home-made.
ertioles and tools, ond even export them to Manilo and other provinoes. They-would bertsinly incresse family incomo.
3. Youths' and adults' Gradustion
A unique ond interesting graduetion progrom was held in Santa
Crus on April 19 in which the high sohool gradustes and the odults
who had completed their literaoy course in the different towns and
berrios of the province were gathered to receive their certificstes
of gradustion. A big erond of tonnspeople and officials from various perts of the province was in sttendance. Many of the members
of the adult graduating elass were housemsids, old men and women,
from 40 to 60 years old. The valedictorian was an old school jenitor
around 60. The work in literacy was bolstered by this combined gre

- 11-


dustion. Teachers and community leaders ere planning to extend
the literacy teaching in their towns. They have keenly realized ,
the need for enlightenment among adults.
BATAAN
Junior "Purok" Organization
A new and interesting irovation of the community school was
found in Bataan. The Junior "Purok" organizations are composed of
school children. The "Purok" orgenizations of adults and parents
have proven their, effectiveness in the community improvement program.
Now their program is supported and supplemented by the Junier "purokh
associations. The latter are oriented on the program and objectives
of activities of the community school. The junior organizstions
ore doing community work in cooperation with their seniors and in
a way suitable to the ages and physique of the members. Initistive,
independence, seriousness of purpose and thoroughness in doing assigned jobs are displeyed by the young officials and members of the
Junior "Puroks". They make their oun regulatiens, hold conferences
and group-meetings and carry out their plans in complete harmony
with those of the senior 'purok" organizations. The Junior "Purok"
of Batean is bringing to light a newly discovered element of human
resources, which is working in line with the unique program of the
Community School.
Superintendent Laya forsees a possible breakdown of the Junior
"Puroks" in a situetion where the Senior "Puroks” may shift the
whole burden of the Community School to the shoulders of the Junior
"Purok" orgenizations. He is on guard against such eventuality.


- 12 -


SCIENTIFIC TRAINING OF UNLICENSED MIDWIVES — A
PROJECT UNDERTAKEN BY COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT ASSOCILTION
OF SOLANA, CAGAYAN
Hoy The Prolect Vos Concelved
Dr. Pablo Capati, as Cherity Physician of Solana in 1949 and
1950 noted tvo important facts in connection with hiswork, nemely!
(1) High rete of infant mortality; (2) Generel ignorance of most
mothers along lines of maternal cases.
In 1949 and 1950, total births were 840 and 345, with number
of infant deaths as 474 and 345, and mothers' deaths from delivery
of 2 and 1 respectively. In the physicians observetion, tetanus
and-bronchitis were the two main causes of infent deaths.
The sweeping movement-of community living improvement in Cagoyon which was initisted by our Division Superintendent of Schools,
Mr. Miguel B. Gaffud, was started in September, 1949. Solans was
emong the first municipality to form community sone organizations in
the central and in the berrios. In February, 1950, these zones (34
in all) formed themselves into one bigger unit called the SUzO (Solana United Zones Organization). I wish to, quote here the SUZO preomble, which embodies the organization's objectives, "we, the people
of Solana, imploring the grace of Divine Providence, in order to
form s more perfect and lasting union, to make our country healthy,
hapry, prosperous and besutiful, establish pesoe and tranquility,
promote the public welfore and secure the blessings of improved con
munity living for ourselves and our posterity ....."
Coincidentally, Dr. Pablo Capati was elected the first president of the Solana United Zones Organizstion. Here, was the chanca


- 13 -
to effect a solution for decreasing somehow, the high rate of infant mortality. Dr. Capati's project of educating the unlicensed
midwives on selentific and modern trends of maternity cases was
among the formulated objectives. This was finally effected in January,
1951.
Organization -
In December, 1950, all head teachers and teachers in charge
were requested to submit lists of midwives in their respective localities. Taa elass of midmives was arranged to be orgonized in
Januery, 1951. Tith the permission of the Division Superintendent
of Schools, the school teacher nurse was to be the instructor under
the supervisioa of Dr. Capati, then president of Sanitary Division.
It came cut that getting the midwives to be enrolled was not
es easy as one thought. On Januery 2, 1951, only two midwives appeared due vo adverse personal circumstances. On the next dey
seven more cone. Persussion and encouragement through explanstion
of the Aniages of the knomledge gained from the course red
finally convinced the midwives to enroll in the course. The number then increased to 17:- 1o women and 1 man.
*
The Course - (As outlined by Mrs. Paz V. Caronan, Instructor)
PREGNANCY, LABOR, TUERPUERIUM
a
Approach to uhe Subiect
Lnumeratin ceses previously assisted by the unlicensed midwives. Their experiences in applving their own procedure during andafter labor. Sauested remedies for each difficulty and odds encountered were ought but and discussed freely, Questions brought
out freely were ansuered satisfactorily to erase the doubts on the
part ef the micgaves.


-IA


1. What an Expectant Mother Should Know: -
a. Perental care - (1) Food; (2) Exercise; () Clothing;
(4) Rest: (5) sleep.
b. Visit to a Physician - (1) Pregnant mother to see a physician or a nurse for consultation; (2) Urine
to be examined.
C. No Menipulation During Pregnanoy - Gase of bleeding during
pregnancy should be consulted to a physician or a nurse.
2. Preperstions for Confinement! -
s. (1) Clothing, napkins and binder for mother; (2) Clothing,
binder and blanket for baby; (3) Cord ligator and
dressing that are elready sterile: () Sterilization of the scissors and forceps by boiling; () Hot
water; (6) Soap and water; (7) Iysol solution;
(8) Tincture of iodine.
b. How to prepare the mother - (1) Place several sheets of
newspaper in place of rubber sheets covered vith clean
cloth; (2) Cleanse the mother's part with lysol solution.


3. During labor
s. Stages of labor - (1) Opening of the cervix; (2) Expulsion of the fetus; (3) Expulsion of the placenta.
b. Whet a Midwife Should not Do(1) She should not attempt to insert her hand inta the
mother's eervix nor to examine the mother internally with the bare dirty hands. (2) She should
not do any manipulation to put the fetus in 1is
pormal position; (3) She should not push the fetus in trying to help the mother at labor.
G.Nhat a Midwife should do - (1) She should call for a
doctor or a nurse in case of abnormal bleeding
during labor or after labor; (2) she should call
for a doctor on abnormol position of the baby;
(3) She should wash and disinfect her hands before holding the cord or she should observe the
principles of asepsis in dressing the cord of the
baby.
4. After Delivery: -
s. Mother to be attended - (1) Be sure that the uterus is


- 15 -


hard and firm (2) Napkina-cleen end ironed;—G) Binder
to hold the uterus to avoid hemorrhage.
b. Umbilical Cord - (1) How to clean the babyy (2) How to
disinfect the cord; () How to cut and ligate the cord;
(&y How to dress the cord; (5) How to place the binder
and diaper. (Demonstration given)
C. Whet to do in Case of Hemorrhage pending the arrival of
a doctor or nurse - (1) Elevate the feet of the bed or
place severel pillows under the buttock; (2) Mother
should rest and lle flet. (Demonstration given)
d. What to do in case of asphyxio pending the arrimal of a
doctor or a nurse - (1) Proper position; (2) Maantaining
the body heat; (3) Cleaning the respiratory paasage;
(¿) Supplying sir or oxygen to the luhgs; (5) Putting
the child into a basir of cool and het water alternstely..

e. Care of the Mother After Delivery - (1) Mother should
lie flat in bed for six hours: (2) She should nurse the
baby after six hours to help the uterus contracu; (3)
Mether should be given plenty of liquid food to provide
milk for the first two days after dellvery; (4) She
should be given enema after 24 hours if she does not.
move her bowel; (5) She should be given spongebath-until she is strong enough, to sponge herself.
f. Core of the Baby - (1)Binder should be placed in such
a may that it will not be wet when baby u: nates;
(2) Avoid bothering the cord often; (3) Daily bath
should be given without wetting the cord, (4) Keep
the baby werm.
5 Drill, Informal Test and Demonstretions:
a. Further questions on topics discussed,
p. Demonstrations - (1) Individual or group demonstrations
by midwives.
o. Otherincidental metter pertaining to the course.
REFERENCES!
1. Principle and Practice of Obstetries by Joseph
B. de Lee & J. P. Greenhill
2. Prenatal Care Pamphlets - Bureau of Health
gretifving results. Attitude of Midwives and Community People. It


- 16 -


apbears that vithin the short time after greduation of the midwives
to the present time, promising results are beginning to show up. Of
the total of 63 births assisted by the 17 midwives, 6l are living, with
one still-born; 1 desth of over a month old, and all mothers living.
The full year's result remsins to be seen.
The midwives graduates who were reluetant to take the course st
first soon got into real interest and became much engrossed in their
work afterwards. Instead of the 1 hour work daily for o weeks as
planned, the class worked 3 to 4 hours deily and finished the course
in 15 days. They wsited 1 dey for their closing exercises to coincide
the event with the scheduled visit of the Division Superintendents of
Schools st Solana on Jenuery 17, 1951.
The conmunity people, too got interested in the project. Six
persons who were not midwives applied to join the class but the term
was then about to end. These and perhaps others more may join the
remsining 24 out of 41 reported midwives. They, too are now
enxioualy waiting for their term to enroll. This will be a projeot
of the second president of the Solans United Zone Orgamization, Mr.
Damian Lasam.


-17-


VOCATIONAL COTRSES FOR ADULTS IN THE RORRIGUEZ
.2
VOCATICNE. MPOR SOROOL, MANILA
By Amado L, Agorrilla
Adult Education Division


Adult eduection when sondueted primorily for the immediste economio
improvement of the lifa of adults is bound to succeed. This is elearly
manifested by the interest and enthusiasm of adulta who are attending the
adult classes in the Rodriguez Vocational High School, Manila. Three
adult elasses have been opened offering vocational courses in Dressmaking,
Cosmetology and Prectical Rodio Mechanics.
There ere 47 adults enrolled in the Dressmaking olass, fifteen of whom
are married vomen with families. Their ages ronge from 15 to 51 years.
This vocational course has been started since August 14, 1950 and due to
insistent demand of the adults who desire to finish the twenty-one proJeots in the course, it is continued up to the present. The teacher incharge is a Home Economios Teacher of the school and finds pleasure
working with her adult closs.
The following are the 21 projects undertaken by the adults, the
satisfactory completion of which will enable them to sew their oun
dresses or work in dressmaking shops:
1. Dress with sports collor
2. Dress with low waist
3. Princess cut dress
4. Dress vith high waist
5. Dress vith continuous collar
6. Dress with balloon skirt
7. Perty dress
8. Children's dress
9. Infont's layette
10. Chemise and drawer


- 18 -
11. Dress with 2-piece skirt
12. Traveling dress
13. Dress with Peter Pan coller
14. House cost
13, Msternity dress
16. Sport dress
17. Vomen's pajama
18, Men's pajate
19. Men's shirt
20. Slaoks
21, Gradustion dress
On Feb. 14, 1951 there were fifteen adults who finished their dresamaking course. Five of them already found johs while the rest continue
studving other projeots with the rest of the class. Those who have
finished their projects have been recommended for their "gradustion
sertificates" from the General Office. About thirty of the members of
the present elass will be able to complete their projects by the end of May.
The adult class in Cosmetology is also a suceessful one. Its popularity is shown when 65 adulta have enrolled in that class with ages ranging
from 14 to 42 years. The adult elass uses two sets of apparatus for permanent wave. Patrons who ere brought by the adult students for hairdreasing are charged P2.00, one peso goes to the school for the use of
electricity and medicines and the other peso goes to the adult student.
Several manicure sets and make-up kits are at the disposal of the adults
in the elass. They have also ore steamer for sealp treatment.
The third adult elass in the Rodrigues Vocstional High Sehool is the
Prectical nadio Mechanios. The elass is newly organized and it started
with 12 adult students, shose ages range from 15 to 37 years. The instruetion is conducted in a very praotical monner that according to the
prinoipel, an adult student, Joaquin Barredo after two weeks stay in
the class hes heen able to construet and operate a standard 5-tube
AC-DC superhst radio set.


19 -


In order to give the adults the ninimum essentials on the constructjon, adjustnent, repairs and measurements of radio receivera, tuo courses
of three mtha duration esah are given. The following phases are studied
in esch courser
FIRST GOURSE (Three months)
1. Bird's eye vien of the course
2, Meoning of eleotricity
3. Energy
4. Sound to sound
5. Five-tube Superbet radio set (Pictorial and Schematic)
6. Complete circuits
7. Parts of tuhe socket
8. Parts of a wave
9. Filament circuit (pictorial)
10. Resistor-Function-Color code
11. Volume control terminals
12. Ether waves
13. Ohm's law
14. Antenns coil terminals
15. Oscillator coil terminals
16. Reading of Mica condenser
17. Variable condensera
18. I.F. coils (actual terminala)
19, Generel parts of a radio set
20. Resonance
21. Natural frequenoy
22. Series circuits
23. Parallel circuits
24. antenno coils (home made)
25. Testing vith earphones
26. Voltage drop
27. Dead spot
23. Tuner
29. Reproducer
30. Detector
31. Wave forms
32. Antenna coupler
SECOND GOURSE (Three Montha)
1. Electron flon in the acrial ground system
2. Electron flow in the tuning circuit
3. Eleotron flow in the erystal detector and phones
4. Charging o capacitor
5. Discharging a oapacitor


- 20


6. Oscillatory discharge
7. Self-induction
8. Back eleotromotive force
9. Diode detector
10. Edison effect
11. Flaming valve
12. Triode tube
13. A-battery
14. B-battory
15. O-batvery
16. Regenerative detector
17. Three-cirouit tunor
18. Resistance coupling
19. Tranaformer coupling
20. Impedance coupling
21. Eliminating the A-battery
22. Eliminating the B-battery
23. Eliminating the C-battery
24. Cathode
25. A0-D0 power supply
26. Dynamio speaker
27. Radio frequeney emplification
28. Volume control
29. Tone control
30, Tronsformers


"There is no man nor people in the world so
rich as to have nothing to gain from the help of
others, nor any man or people so poor as to have
nothing to lose in a world-vide conflagration."
- M. Torres Bodet
(Unesoo Courier, February, 1951)


21


ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN KORONADAL
By Mr. Martin Dideles
Distriet Supervisor, Koronadal
Koronadal distriot is within the territory ereated by Act
¿Al which preseribes the boundaries and the extent of powers exercised by the National Land Settlement Administration or NLSA in
the Koronadal and ala Valleys in Cotabato province. Within the
same arsa was born in 1949, the municipality of Koronadal. Since
then, the NLSA and the municipal officials exercise dual control.
The settlemont was founded in 1939. Settlers from Luson and
the Viseyan provinees since then live side by side with their Moslem
and pagan brothers and play their parta in the drama of the everchanging life; more or less influenoed-by multivisioned men brought
by fate and government policies, who try to assume important role
in the valleys.
Adult eduestion progrom in the distriet under the foregoing
conditions is on a veritable testing ground. Shock absorbers must
be provided. It has to be founded on truth, tempered with sincerity
and fortified with manliness and nobility. It is to be handed to
and accepted by a colony of settlera and pioneers who have defied
the alements, the wilderness, the plague, the hunger, the fear and
the uncertainties. The people have come with a new outlook of life
despite their outworn philosophies, hoping that thoy ean see changes
for the better.
The first two years from 1947 were exploratory years. A
blue-print for improvement nus set on the may. It was not till


-22
July, 1949 thet formal adult edusation for the improvement of rural
ereas was adopted in the district. This much time was necessaty for
obvious reasons. The vriter Being nan in the division and unprepared to meet conditions thefi existing, degided;te wait for the
proper time when the movemeft Sould hurdle major impedimenta and
receive encouragement.
Community centers were puit up first in Tampakan, second in
Norala and third in Banga in 1949. In 1950 a center was put up in
Marbel. The establishment of the centera nas conceived ih order
to improve conditions of the communities in the vicinities of the
schools. Ample opportunities were afforded parents to see the
centers and to carry over the improvenents to the homes.
Nherever possible adult education classes are organised in the
distriet. These classes, however, do not function regularly. Only
a few in the district attend elassas consistently because of the
pressure of work in the farm. As it is difficult to teach them in
mass, the "esch-one-teach-one" method is generally employed in the
district. Despite handicaps, mueh effort is exerted to promote
eduestional enlightenment through community assemblies, open forums, work experiences and home visits.
In Maroh, 1950, all district supervisors, secondary principals
and division supervisors of the division of Gotabato convened st
Koronadal and visited the community centers and improvement work in
Tampakan, Marbel Proper and Banga. By this time conditions in these
places have materially improved. Every house visited in Tampakan


has a clean and sanitary toilet. Appropriate pictures are hanged
on the walls, The community bathroom, the cormunity center and the
sehool park, as well as the sehool garden and the horticulturo projects in Banga were highly conmended by the visitors. Marbel, particularly has undorgone, a veriety of community improvement. The
environment has changed s lot. Fences with pergolas, besutiful
lawns, rose gardens, ornemental plants and improved landscape
ubound throughout the district as a result of incessant and stesdy
campaigns, Much effort has been directed toward the promotion of
health and sanitary conditions. Construction of toilet facilities,
filling of lon places, improvement of drainage and the use of
trash cons are among the community projects undertaken.
Adult education for community improvement has permested the
life of this rural folk. There is coordination in all efforta and
sotivities of the various aspests of the program. Achievements
attained may still be crude, but the spirit instilled by the movement is encouraging as manifested by the attitude taken by the
people.


- 24


BULA, A. SECOND "STA. BARBARA"
By AGUSTIN R. FERRARIZ
Pistriet Supervisor, District of Buayan
Gotabato
Bula, a small fishing barrio bordering Serangani Bay, is on the way
to dupliente the. "Sta. Barbora Project". A model borrio in cleanliness and beouty is the drenm and the foremost desire of its people.
However, the two places differ in location and envirorment. While
Sta. Barboro nestles among the verdant polay fields of Iloilo, Bula
nestles elose to Sorangani Buy, the bonah as its future promenading
avenue.
Bula was born out of necesnity. At the outbreak of the Pacific
War, it was a place of desolation. The war and its consequences brought
about an influx of settlers from different sections of Southern Cotabato, many of whom vere sick of malaria. Those who were strong and
vere fishermen by inclination went into fishing; others became fish
vendors and saltmakers. Makeshift houses and tents mushroomed overnight!
the place that was once desolate and unknoan became the fishing ground
of Koronadal Valley. Bulo became the distributor of fish of the valley,
the hub and life of the settlement under the iron grip of a foreign
enemy.
Sometime in September, I944, the American liberation forces subjected Koronadal Valley to intense bombing. Nanton destruction sprend
far and mide, hunger and disease followod in its woke. Bula, then a
thriving fishing barrio, became aguin a ghost berrio - all houses
having been razed to the ground and the people have fled to places


- 25
of safety. To the fishermen, the interesting fighting had heas merely a lull, a broken liak in their struggla for survival. As soon
es the civil government was reestablished in this section of the
province, the people returned and rebuilt Bula. Not long afterwards,
haroncebaronga emerged everyuhere without regard to sanitation and
benutification. Sanitation bedame s serious problem; filth and human
exereta seattered here and there. Toileta were considered as a luxury; to the illiterates, they nere an added burden. Meanwhile, the
populstion grew in number and business thrived by leaps and bounda.
N sooner than peaco and ordor was restored, a one-teseher sehool
was organised in Bula. Mthin a short span of five years, the oneteacher sehool grew into an elementary sehool. The presence of this
school, homever, did not do much to effect a change in community
living because of the narrow eduestional views prevailing. Educational practices were child-centered; the community extension sork
of the school nas merely confined to construetion of school buildings.
But, nith the introduetion of the adult education program through the
Gommunity School, the educotional outlook became broader and more significant. Intensified conmunity extension work wes carried to the homes
by teachers and pupila. Community assemblies and open foruns were held
to awaken the interest of the people in sanitary and beautiful homes.
Committees embracing the five major phases of adult educction were
organized, with membership droun from the outstanding leaders of the
community. The work was at first indeed difficult; the seope and implication of the program were scemingly beyond the comprehension of the


- 26 -
unlettered "tso". To thange the, life of a people whose ways ere
imbedded in indifferenee end ignoranee is a heroulsan taak. Honever, with the elose Sooperstion of the Oommittee on Sanitation and
llome Besutification, the people's active interest was at last aroused.
On August 7, 1930, five years after the establishment of the
first achool, the people of Bula met for the first time to consider
the complete overhauling of the barrio in sccordance with the beautifiestion plan of the Conmunity School. Each resident was given a home
lot within the barrio in conformity with the approved plan. Labor
battalions were orgenised to help tronafor all houses to their designated lots. Houses, hovever, that gould not be moved out by labor battalions nere pulled by tractors lent by the Municipal Mayor of Buayan.
Streets within the barrio were loid-ont. Everybody strove to olean his
surroundings, fence his home lot, and maintain a senitary toilet and
a home garden. The beach that once served as the depository of human
refuse unfolds a panorama, now attractive and useful having become the
pride of Bulo. It is a aymbol of the profound interest of the people in
the project of community and home beautifiostion.
A barrio that was once a conglomeration of makeshift buildings,
now Bule presents a remarkable contrast. But this work of beautifidation is merely the beginning, more plans for improvement are being
projected. It is still premature to forecast the future of Bula. But
if the plan as blue printed vill materialize, Dula vill emerge ss a
model barrio to realize the dream of a people whose chief obsession
has been to improve their welfare and living conditions.


 27 -


ADULT EDUCATION TORK IN DINGLE
By MAGDALENA SUMAGAYSAY
Principal, Dingle High School, Iloilo
and
ABUSTIN Q. DIDELES
Supervising Principal, Dingle Elementary School, Iloilo
Our problem on adult education in Dingle is approached in two ways -
the direct and indirect. The first, by sctual training given in literocy
with the use of the "esch-one-teach-one" method and the other, by organizing
classes for illiterate adults for their vocational or avocational proficiency.
Last year's survey revealed that about 1,330 adults in the teacher's
zones in the community were illiterates. This constituted about 74 of
the total population of the municipality. Of these, 282 were receiving
literaoy instruction under the "each-one-teach-one" method by then. This year,
233 illiterates were under similar truining, 205 of nhom were recommended
for promotion. Summing up the tyo promotions made, there remains approximately 843 illiterates who heve to be won into enlightenment. This
has to be said because to cenvince an illiterote adult to undergo literacy instruction is tact-texing here, and the most that could be done
was the use of the "each-one-teach-one" method although classroom instruction is mueh preferred.
However, the deficiencies of the "each-one-teach-one" method were
more or less controlled by once in a while calling the adult pupils to
report to school centers for check-up by teacher-sponsors. Here, the
edult pupils were usually given oral and written tests in reading and
vriting, telling time, reading cilendars, knowledge of town officials,
and duties of good citizenship.


28 --


This year, we were sucoesaful in organizing elnsses for adults
designed to improve their vocational and avocational efficiency. For
men, we had the prastical farming olass under an agricultural supervisor
for two months, and the other was an cight neekly lessons on horticulture and poultry und suine under a vocational teacher of the Dingle
High School. The clams for women was on sight leasons in maternal
and infant care, home and family relations, interior decoration, food
and nutrition, and clothing and handioraft. This alass was under the
charge of five competent home economios tenchers of both the Dingle
High Sehool and the Dingle Elementary School.
The classes for men are reaping good results in the community.
The use of fertilizers, both local and commercial, for rice and fruit
trees is becoming universal. In fact, the school children find it
hard non to get manure from private manure dumps for storage in schools
this summer. Everyone seems to find a need for it. Then, the fruit
orchard is grexing wider and better in every home where it was once
started and left to chance; some have started this projeot. Poultyy
and Wmine are in the increase. The Dolando poultry in the poblacion
may inspire others in a few montha, perhaps, to put up a similar
project. Here, the white leghorn stock is increasing. The dread for
avian pesta has vanished because of the availability of the necessary
serums to use and the knonledge sequired on their administration.
The vocational tenchens through frequent visits to these projecta
see to ito that these budding sources of income in the community will
prosper unhampered.


- 29 -
The women felks could not be left behind. Their popular courses
were maternal and infant care, home and family relations, and foods
and nutrition. It was noted that many mothers are now visiting the
tonn's puericulture center and aveil themselves of the help given to
them there. Good neighborliness is evident everywhere in the poblacion
and almost all homes hove vegetable and flower gardens. The home surroundings are almost clean, so are the homes which appeor, besides,
fairly furnished and nell-kept. The latest survey shows that only
7 of the 177 homes have no toilets, although for the same period last
year, 53 homes had none of this in the poblacion. Family felations
have improved. For months now, we have not heard of a seandalous
family squabble or tiff. Family attochments have strengthened. Spending
sprees are unheard of. The control of stray pigs may be a problem yet,
but the ease now is not as serious as last year when 64X of those who
had this domesticated animal alloved them to roam freely in the poblacion.
Those mho had the avidity to gamble preferred to attend the adult elasses
on Sundays and some of them have entirely avoided playing from then on
and ahifted to "Hiligaynon" or "Iuhum" reading. These vernacular magazines
have briaked sales since then.


30 -


TRENES ANO PRACTICES IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD
a
The Figherfolk o.M-MOng.
Life in a Chinese fishing village had been changed after the
wor. The factor responsible was the District Syndicate which had
been established in each of the main fishing villages. The Gyndicate
looked after the well-being of the fisherfolk and helped them in
many ways. It established, for exomple, a transport and marketing
system for the community. In 1946 the Syndicate opened a school
attended by 1,100 childran, /aily. The illiterate fisherfolk who
came in by sea on the fish transport vessels were taught Chinese
idiograms. In the return journey they were given lessons in accounts. The women, learning thet their husbanda were getting this
education, besought the leaders of the organization to do something
for them, and evening olasses were started in different villages.
(Moss Education Bulletin, March, 1951)
Adult Eduetion Aatinitiea Ln India
The Bombay City Social Educction Committee had lsunched its
Ten Year Plan for the liquidation of adult illiteracy in the City
of Bombay. In order to intensify the movement, literacy classes
had been opened in the mills. Such adult education classes were
run on voluntary basis and finonced by the mill ownera. The mills
ond factories were required to put up 300 adult education classes
vithin three years.
The University of Utkal has adopted a plan to compel its students to render three montha service to the country during vacation
by engaging in adult education work. They have to teach the unedu

31 -


eated masses. The University officials vill see to it that before
s student is admitted to a degree he should show that he has rendered
such service to the country.
a research and training center in adult education was opened
in Trevancore-Cochin in order to give instruction on social educatien to fifty pubil-teachers, men and women, for a period of six
months. The subjects included adult psychology and post literacy
rork, agriculture and animal husbandry, food production, health and
senitation, and economics. (Social Education News Bulletin, March
2. 1951)
The Haiti Pilot Proisat
The people of Haiti is undertaking a pilot project of fundamental
education in thein country. The site chosen for this project is the
rural Marbial Valley with an estimated populationtof about 20, COO.
The Marbial Valley ar a community beset with the grave economid and
social problems, such as over-population, land hunger, deforestation
and soil erosion, poverty and intermittent famine, videspread, illire
seracy and a declining agriculture - problems which are found in

many under-developed areas.
The sim therefore of the Haiti Pilot Project is to use fundamental education as a means of improving existing methods of cultivation and soil conservation, of promoting the development of small
industries and of improving health conditions. The project will
demonstrate how fundamental education can help raise the standard
of living in an isolated rural area where condition is depressed

socially and economically.


- 32.
The problem of financing the Haiti Pilot Project is important.
The expenditure for the first year (1948) of its operation amounted to
$43,500. The Unesco contributed $13,500 while the government of Haiti
contributed an equal amount. Other contributions were voluntarily givenby the Viking Fund, of Nen York and the Rockefeller Foundstion. The following year the Unesco again contributed $13,500 to the, operstional
cost of the projeot and 317,400 for the preparstion and testing of the
simple materials for use in literacy teaching. The WHO and the Roakefeller Foundation also contributed in 1949.
(Unesco: The Heiti Pilot Projeot, Phese One, 1947-1949)
Filma in Fundamental Education
Considerable interest has been shown by the people of Gold Cosst
when the first film is exhibited to them. The title of the film
is Amenuls Child, a simple story of village life in Gold Cosst,
showing the deplorable condition of children who ere suffering from
malnutrition and not given proper medical care due to the ignorance
on the part of their perents. After the shoping of the film, group
discussion followed. The village leaders were so interested that a
training course was immediately opened.. A number of traditional
midwives and parents attended the course.
(Fundamental Education Querterly Bulletin, Jan. 1951)
Art-Edugation Project in China
The Unesco has completed its experiment in fundamental education in Pehpei, China for the production of sudio-visual material
adepted to the local needs of the people in the area with special


- 33


emphanis on hygiena and secial walfare teaching. Chinese artists
are trained to produce statie and mobile posters, wall sheets, pioture books and film stripa, all teaching a simple but vivid lesson
in hyglene and the prevention of disease.
(Unesco Press Relesse, Dec. 4, 1950)

Mexigofe "Sonools Mithout Malls:
"7
Mexigo 1n 1223 pioneered a program which sorked on the fundamental principla of adult education thet the people should be helped
to help therseloes to solve their problems. At presont that movement
for community improvement.is being brought about through the work
feof As tural missions whioh the Government of Mexico has sent out
ma
to lio remote zapes givipg spproximately. $40,000 pecple a chance
a to be slowly but surely helped tomard the achievement of better
lapersonal and cemmunal standards of llving and working.
The cultural missions undertook the Improvement of economy and
health, improvemont of the home and domestic life, developmert of
44
sound recregtional and gultural ectivavies, and material improvement
of kural communihies.
Their progrem stressed agriculiural improvement, such as the Introduction of rew orops and new methods of farming. Classes in child care, nutrition, cocking and sewing were
organized for young women and mothers. The cultural missions cooperated nith the devernmentis literacy sampaiga and meintained 125
E

schools for adult beginners.
(Unesco Coprier, Feb. 1951)
1.


34 -


ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES
Reports compiled from the field show the varied activities on
adult eduestion undertaken in the provinces by superintendents, supervisors, principals and elassroom teachers. The aim of the Buresu of Public Schools to intensify its campaign for the promotion
of fundemental and adult educstion in our country is reaping good
results.


LAGUNA
A resourceful teacher of adults, Mrs. Cresenciana A. San Mateo,
brougnt about 300 members of the Canlubang Adult School to Manila on
an excursion a ound the city visiting places of historical and cultural interest for the benefit of the adults. The adult excursionists
were very mueh impressed by uhat they saw and observed in their educational tour. They paid a visit at the Adult Education Division in
the General Office. In an impromptu talk from the Adult Education
Chief, the adult students were encouraged to make themselves leaders
in community improvement.
There are at present four adult elasses in the Canlubang Sugar
Estate compound and majority of the illiterates are laborers of the
C.S.E. The adult education teachers are paid by the PTA and the manager of the Estate. Because of the need for more classes, the owner
of the Estate has recently appropriated Po00 for compensation of additional adult education teachers. (Read, Adult Educstion in the
Canlubang Sugar Estate, Adult Educstion in Action, March, 1951)


PANGASINAN


The movement for model barrio communities is now gaining momentum in Pangasinan. According to Superintendent Federico Piedad the
following are set as the goals for model barrio communities:
1. To make the barrio 1002 literate.
2. To have every citizen in the barrio engage in some
productive activities.
3. To have every home undertake, varied food production
projects.
4. To make every home in the barrio clean, provided with
water facilities, sanitary toilets, and pen and shelter for domestic animals.
5. To make every home well arranged and properly beautified.
6. To make the barrio free from filthy spots, standing water,
and astray animals.
7. To install a barrio clinic with trained first-siders.
8. To have a recreation center in the barrio which should be
sctually used for recreational activities.
9. To establish a demonstration and distribution center for
economic, educational and health improvement.
10. To make the barrio free from crime and misbehavior.
11. To organize a reading circle in each barrio.
12. To encourage prompt payment of taxes.
13. To join civio, religious, educational, cultural, economic
organizations.
14. To have good means of communication and transportation.


ZAMBOANGA
The Junior and Senior Students of the Katipunan High School have
made preliminary reports on the progress of their literacy campaign in
Katipunan. They seida "Our adult pupils can scribble their names and
read slowly short and simple sentences in the dialect. Those who are
studying English can read few pages of the First Grade Book.” The report also observed: "They do not get tired scribbling their nomes on
the ground mith sharpened stick or carving their names and other words
on trunk of trees with their knives. Copying names of persons and
other objects on any available writing materials like leaves or smooth
surface'is their favorite past time."


- 36 -
MARINDUQUE


In a division bulletin, Superintendent arcadio Alarcon issued
to his teachers some pointers on the proper use of the eyes. The
pointers were prepared by Dr. Geminiano de Ocampo. The ten important points bo remember are the following:
1. Hold the reading matter 1, to 16 inches from the eyes.
2. Blink or close both eyes after four or five lines.
3. Look over the edge of the book after each page.
A. Have a good or strong but not too bright light st least.
5. Msintan a comfortable relaxed upright or sitting position when reading.'Avoid reading lying down.
6.. Ayoid s aring whan locking far or near. While seeing a
show blink often ana shirt your gaze quite frequently.
7. After 30 minutes to one hour of reading, typing, etc.,
cover both eyes with the palms of the hands for one half
minute.
8. Use sunglaas or dark fit-overs only when in the bright
outdoora,'not when indoors, or doing close work.
9. Avoid E-ere from vindovs, bright lights or reflections
from reading matters or wells.
10: Avoid reading when tired or sink or in moving vehicles.
A
IlA.93

The Lambunsb High. School in Lambunao, Iloilo is presently undertaking some adult education activities: Reading centers will be
put up in all important, places of the town and the high school students are busy gathering books, periodical, and other reading matters
for adults. The school conducted a survey on the extent of illiteraoy among the parents and other members of the families of students. It was shown that there were 8e illiterstes. The students
concerned were called to a conference and were given instructions on
hon to teach adult beginners. Copies of "ang Balasahon Seng Banwahanon" were distributed to be used for teaching the adults.


- 37-


AGUSAN
The first of a series of community assemblies mas opened on
Februory 24, 1951 in Butuan City under the sponsorship of the Agusan
Agricultural High School. Members of the high school faculty and
community leaders vere assigned to deliver community lectures. The
people gave a hearty response by attending those popular assemblies.
The topios which interested them most were. Rice Culture, Hog and
Poultry Raising, Peace and Ordor, Health and Senitation, The Necessity of Caponizing the Excess Cockerels, and Diversification of Crops.
ABRA
The food production campeign shich had been carried on for
sometime in abra made possible the organization of several economic projecta omong members of the adult schools. Their poultry and
hog raising projects alone undertaken by aprroximately 5,000
edults made an investment of about P70,000. More than 3,000 homes
have been reported with backyard gardens undertaken by members of
the adult education movement.
The Lagangilang National Agricultural High School rendered
adult education service to the community by performing the following!
1. Distribution of seeds and other planting materials to baokyard gardeners.
2. Giving instruction on methods of planting.
3. Helping people on esponising and castration of animals.
A. Selling eggs, chickons and pigs at nominal price to the,
conmunity.


- 38 -
BIKIDNON


s reported by Superintendent Vicente Lumibao, "The people
of Bukidnon believed that abaca only grous in shaded sloping areas
on the hillsides and not en the plains." Adult sduestion movement
vas organized and the cooperation of the Provincial Treasurer was
secured in order to hold demonstrations to belie the populor belief. ufter several demonstrations have been made by the teachers
and agricultural experts, the members of the commurity discorded
the old presumption and began planting abaca on the plains. "as
a result vide aress heretofore remuining idle in this province are
non being planted by the parents to abaca."
LEITE
The liternoy problem of Leyte is briefly described by Superintendent Isobelo Manalo as follons:
"Leyte province has a population of 1,006,891. There are
403,455 illiterates. About 22,385 have been made literate for the
last tvo years. Therefore, there are still 381,060 adults who are
in dire need of literacy instruction". Hence, Superintendent Manalo
expressed the need for a permanent adult education supervisor for
his province to launch a vigorous literacy campaign and to supervise
the various community improvement projecta of the adults consisting
mostly of sctivities in food production.


- 39 -
NUEVA VIZCAXA
literacy classes in three different municipalities have been
organized and financed by their corresponding PTA's. According to
a report of adult Eduostion Supervisor Tranquilino Basat, the PTA's
in aritao, Bayombong and Solano have appropriated ₱75 ench for the
muintenance of their adult education elasses.
Community assemblies have been emphasized in Nueva Viacaya
during the past six montha. They have conducted 58 popular assemblies vith attendance of spproximately 5,321 adults. A municipal
councilor after attending a well-prepared program of a community
assembly remarked: "I already knon hon to read and write but still
I love to attend community assomblias, begause I learn many useful
things, such as, balanced diet, better ways of raising chickens and
pigs, couses of uberculosis, how to increase the yield of my form,
etc."
PANGASINAN
The Pangasinan Trade School is contributing its share in rendering adult education service to the community according to a report of Adult Education Supervisor Valentin Caragan. Vocational courses
in blaoksmithing, goldsmithing and carpentry have been opened to adults.
Twenty adult students have suecessfully finished their course and
some of them have opened their shops while the rest are employed in
blaoksmithing and goldamithing work and house construction.
The Dagupan Oity Memorial College has opened a closs in dressmaking for adults. The suecess of that elass led to the opening of
a class in Tailoring for men.


-LO -
MASRATE
The Provincial Board of Maabate wiil put up again an appropriation similar to that of last year for the operation of adult
edusation alasses in the provinse according to a report of Adult
Edueation Supervisor Ramon Navea. Of the 1,834 illiterate adults
taught, 1,335 vere granted proficiency certificates last school year.
TAHLAG
Publio sehool teachers in Tarlae have been able to open regular elasses for adults with enrolment of 3,126 adult begirmers.
The "each-one-tesoh-one" campaign has also been conducted utilising
pupils and civic-spirited citizens in tutoring adulta in their homes.
Under this esmpaign there are 2,751 adults given literacy instruction.
The adult studenta according to Adult Education Supervisor Bartolome
Evangelista are composed mostly of farmers, laborers, laundrymen,
servants and other dependents. Their ages range from 15 to 80 yeara.


"I feel, however, that it is difficult to
do what can and should be done in the world
while more than half the human beinga whose
deatinies ore at stake - literally and personally at stake - gon nerther read nor vrite."
- John N. Taylor


(Unesco Courier, Feb. 1951)


al


Partial Record of Accomplianment during the School Year 1956-51
A. Promotion of Functional Literany -
Enrolment from July 1 to May, 1951 .................. 163,870
Number promoted ..... 36,775
Number of literacy reading materials including
leaflets published in major vernaculars .......... 343,169
B. Neture of Cormunity Improvement


1. On Health & Home Mig


INe, el Sanelo
1 Engagad ini


INo, al Toraong
rtisipating
IPa


a. Proper Disposal of Gerbage


3,091


182,094


b. Toilet Construction


6,198


266,268


6. House Construction & Remodelling
with Flans



1,858


1,216


d. Home Beautification


793


28,363


e. Other Health & Home Life Aotivitias 


2.088
L


21.006


Total ma


1,332


623,007


Ea On


Cultural Improvement
Orgenising Center libreries
Literary-Musical Programs
Home Decoration
Audio-Visuel Education
(Use of Films)
Othar Agtivitica


S.158
217,920
121,52
SL,LAG
44,l6s


193
2,519
2,159
125
19an


Total


7,551


579,515


A P ANE


—-
S20


SS


b. Piggery Projeots


L,168


!
11,,757


O. Home Orafts


2,212


70,539


d. Tredes


809


 14,142


e. Vegetable Gardening


3,121


1 151,766


f. Other Agtivitias
—
—


1.81o


Tl.622


Total -


11,5M.


707,210


As On the Promotion of Citizenship.


a. Oivie Club Organizstion


Ay


 ESEO


b. Discussion Groups


1,59


1 100,260


6. Cooperatives


569


!
23,759


d. Conmunity assemblies, Opan Fo

rums and Masg Gonferengg







1 1,834.840


Total -


19,509


1 2,051,145


YThe above figures are by no means absolute and categorical due to
some overlapping entries of conmunity activities. They, hovever,
indicate pronounced trends of adult education through the Community School for the improvement of home and community life. 


5-31-51


VOISO DR
NO. A


TO. 4 QUIOSA


VOL. IX -


O
CONTENTS
PAGE
Hdoria! ------------------------------ 
Our Work for the Past Year and in the
Immadiate Future
By Director Benito Pangilinan --- 3
The Community School - Its Techniques
for Fundamental Education ------------- 12
Plan for Two Community School Missions --- 19
Community Colleges
By Dr. Pedro T. Orata ----------- 22
Adult Education Activitiss in Casit-an
By Ricerdo Mac-iling -------- 26
Adult Education Project in Barrio Pampanga
By Natalia Castillo-Villanueva -------- 29
m
Methods in Literacy leaching -------- 33
Approach to Adult Education Work Among
the Natives of Cotabato
By Manib Manampon --------- 35
Trends and Practices in Adult Education
AMONd ------------------------------- 4
Adult Education activities in the
PROVIhoEs------------- 
The Community school and Its Data of
AOhlgvemenug ---------------------- 48


THE COMMUNITY SCHOOL MISSIONS AND PROFESSOR MEDELLIN


For the purpose of promoting home and conmunity life, tuo
Community Sel ool missions were recently organized, one in the
barrio of Punta in the suburhs of Manila and the other in a small
toun of Limban, province of Lagur. This is a part of the Community School, a movement ghich for the last three years hes been
developed in the Philirpines in comection vith comgunity improvement program of adult educatien. A group of eight special
workers, one for literacy, one for farm and animal husbandry, one
for shop and houschold industries, one for physical education and
recrention, ene for health, one for heme economica, one for social and musical progran, and one chief of mission are assigned
in cach community to trke charge of leadership in their reapective
fields ef activities. Increased coordination of activities is expected frem this arrangement. The functions of the special workers
ore not, honever, altegether new, as the technical sasistance they
are to render in the tyo communities are being carried out in one form
or another in other provinces. Tenchers and adult-education werkers
of the Community Sehoel sre performing these services in barrios and
toons nnder the suspices af compunity councils,
"purok" organizations
and parent-teacher associations.
Profesoor Luis Hedellin of Mexico who was sent to the Philippines by the Unesco as adviser on fundemental and sdult education
has worked hard for the formation of the tuo Community Schoel mis

2


sions in Punta and Lumban. In collaboroting with us to lay out the
program of the missions, Professor Medellin is brosd-minded enough
to realise that any step or irnovotion made in furtherance of adult
eduention movement in the Philippines should take into consideration the development of the Community School, nhich hos been working all along for community improvement in line nith the Unesco program. This he did vell enough, and the mission iden was weloomed.
Professor Medellin came to the Philippines with rich and varied
experiences from the Hexican cultural missions. Our adult education,
wvith its well-defined program, has gained from his brief stay with
us. And the tno Gommunity School missions which he helped to form
upon a plan adjusted to meet Philippine conditions and setting, are
possibly his important contribution to adult eduention and to the
existing means and agencies of the Community School of the Philippines.
We are oppreciative of the interest token by the Unesco in
the progrom of fundamental and adult education in the Philippines,
and we are equally grateful of the services rendered by Professor
Medellin toward the enrichment of this program.


-3


OUR MORK FOR THE PAST YEAR AND IN THE
IMMEDLATE FUTUREl
By
BENITO PANGILINAN
Director of Publie Schools
About a year ago today, on this same platform, and during a
similar occasion, I opened the Superintendents' convention, ushering in the second year of what many believed was a new era in public
education in the Philippines. It was my signal opportunity to announce
then the Bureau's policy of gearing our total educstional efforts toward the improvement of living in rural areas. By that sot we gave
the program an official sanction, thereby putting it on a national
level. Previous to this, the program had been rether local, somewhat
short-ranged, and in many ways sporadic. But by the summer of 1950,
the program had assumed the form of s movement which made it imperative
for us to coordinate our total efforts and resources in order to achieve
a common and on a truly national scale.
Supplementing this official statement, we released to the field
soon after the opening of schools the objectives for the school year
1950-1951, embracing(lledministration and supervision, (2) fundamental
and adult education, G) curriculum enrichment and development, and
(4) teacher education, — all of which are calculated to implement our
general program of education for the improvement of living in rural
areas. Our instrument to achieve this end is the community school which
emerged three years ago under pressure of local needs and problems.
Today, at this convention, we can say that we have passed another
milestone in our ever-progressing, ever-videning program of education.
Address at the Opening Session of the Annual Convention of Division
Superintendents of Schools, Baguio, May 7 to 12, 1951.


- AThe cumulative results so far attained have brought to the fore significant signposts which I feel proud to report as among our achievements
for the school year that has just closed. Later, in this paper, I
shall attempt to indicate in broad outlines our next line of action for
the ersuing year.
MNAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED
Ne in the General Office are happy to note from considerable
evidence, reported to us and verified by the Directorate and members
of the General Office staff through actual observation, that the community school idea has gained general acceptance and that the people
have felt with gladness its beneficial impact upon their lives. Thanks
to your vision and untiring leadership, and to the faith of the people
in your sincere concern over their well-being, we have accumulated by
now a record of educational achievement so vital to the lives of the
Filipino people thet I believe it to be unparalleled in the history of
Philippine education. Our education has become such a public concern
that I cannot but point with justifiable pride to the rise of a new
vigorous and intelligent civie spirit among our people, as expressed
through the service clubs and other lay groups, which only proves that
we can solve many a local problem, however seeminglrdifficult it may be,
by husbanding our total resources together.
Ne have noticed ample evidence that we are undertaking our community school program by using the notive approach. This is to say
thet not only do we study the needs and problems of our people, but also
learn their ways of thinking, their methods of doing, their hopes and
fears, their customs and mores, and even their idiosyneracies. Knowing


- 5-


these, we identify our schools with the people, an act which I consider
a basic policy in any educational reform such as that we are undertaking.
The "Samahang pampurok" or "little democracies", of the Division of
Batsan are an example. They are built upon the age-long spirit of
neighborly cooperstion which is far from dead as some people believe.
These "Samahang Pampurok", orgenized and managed by the people themselves
at graasroot level through school leadership, have brought the rural
folks face to face with their own problems and needs. They launch their
own project activities and strive to realize them with the resourcefulness and enthusiasm characteristic of their lives in the good old days.
Among the activities and achievements of the community-centered
schools under the "purok" organization are: (1) Improvement of health
and sanitary conditions in many towns of the province; (2) Establishment of reading centers; (3) Revival of home industries, such as embroidery, weaving and dressmaking, gardening and poultry and piggery;
and (4) the establishment of community playgrounds.
The organizatian on the provincial or zone level such as exists
in many school divisions has raised the percentage of literacy and hes
improved family income through the revitalization of home industries
end intelligent thrift.
In Pamplona district, Cagayan, there has been the beginning of
the revival of the silkworm culture. The 444 cocoons distributed to
37 families have now multiplied to 111,000 cocoons. Other families
nengaged in silkworm culture have swelled this number, and as more silk
is produced, the industry may again become an established one in Gagayan
where it once flourished.


- 6-
Through the parent-teacher associations, conferences with townspeople, teachers' home visits, and school-community assemblies, the
school has succeeded in arousing community consciousness to an appreciably high level. The people are now obsessed with the desire to improve their living conditions. Evidences of this resurgent spirit,
are the improved home conditions, the nest and clean surroundings,
well-kept orchards, backyard, poultry and swine projects, and recreation and reading centers in many provinces.
In Bulacan the people themselves are gradually taking the initiative to bring to the attention of the school urgent community problems, and upon consultation with school officials and the teachers,
to enrich programs of instruction. Toward this end there have been
started workshops in curriculum development which have produced resource units and booklets about farm life and activities, safety,
health, care of animals, and the like. It need not be said that these
supplementary materials enrich and vitalize the studies of children
and actually bring instruction to the home.
In meny divisions, adult education has passed the literacy level
and is now on the vocational plane. Courses in dressmaking and tailoring, poultry and swine, and soy bean growing are being attended by eager
and interested adults, meny of whom are housewives.
The Urdaneta High School in Pangasinan has earned the fine reputation of being the pilot high school in the province. The Baotad
Elementery School has the same position on the elementary level. In
Bactad the drive for better community living is pursued intensively
through the combined efforts of the Gommunity School Counail, the


-7-
Parent-Teacher association, and other civic organizstions. Through
this pilot school the propagation of bermuda onions and the planting of
short-time orops have helped in a large measure to bring about the muchdesired practice of orop diversification.
The community-centered schools find grest success in adult education work. For instance, in Bohol, at the end of the first semester
last school year, there were enrolled 5,144 adults in literacy projacts;
26,839 were engaged in poultry raising; 14,096 in pig reising; 11,485
in homecrafts; 6,613 in truck gardening; and 573 in trades.
Community-school projects are as extensive in the Visayas and
Mindanao as they are in Luzon. The areas of work are as varied as the
community problems and the interest and capacity of the people. Hence,
while the movement is nation-wide, there is a variety of projects and
diversity of procedure which reflect the fine adaptability of leadership to local conditions. Common to ell such projects is the philosophy
that school leadership must make a dent or difference for the better in
the life of the people. In the matter of organizstion, be it through
the Community School Council, the Parent-Teacher associstion, or as in
some divisions, thru the expediency of division directives, the general
plan is to get the people to participate in the planning of schoolcormunity programs on grassroot levels, and gradually transfer school
leadership to the people themselves in all civio matters which direotly
affeot the general melfare of the community. It is obvious that training in lay leadership is part and parcel of the program and this cannot
nbe left to chance. Iloilo, which has pioneered on the approach to the
community-school idea and has contributed immensely to our knowledge of
the problems, has discovered the efficacy of what is called the native


-8-


apdxpach, that is, the approach from the point of view of the people of
the locallty with full consideretion of their conditions and practices.
This viewpoint is echoed in the recommendation of the Bell Mission and
is repeated pointedly by a committee of the Economic Cooperation Administratien vith reference to agriculture, which, in our program, comes
under the area of food production or raising the family income. The
Econonic copana lon Administration committee says: "We encourage a
system of intensive agriculture built upon the traditional small unit
which in lime ueuld multiply the real income of the farmer to several
times his presert income. The small farmer should progress from the
subsistence level to the efficiency level and thence to the comfort
level."
In our work, a similar native approach is applicable to the rest
of the areas for the improvement of living. It is quite spparent by
noy that our program of educstion is a true product of the native soil.
ri has arison from local thinking en pressing local problems, and is
confirmed by fereign experta and by our observation of how local problems
In Lurope, America and Asia are being solved in consideration of their
natave setbings. In our country, therefore, we are building a program
of educabion which we mey call indigenous. It is to our credit as a
people that we do so. What we have done so for manifests our educational maturity:
Now bhat we have become quite familiar with the objectives, the
organization and approach of the community school, we expect to proceed
An high gear with greater confidence and clesrer vision of the future,
We have erysballized so far some basic principles: namely, (L) the community-school program needs to have an effective organization in order


9-


to guerantee permanence and continuity; (2) it must start from and bedirected to the urgent needs of the people, and gradually encompass all
aresa of living; () it must make a difference for the better in the life
of the pecole, othermise the people would not have anything to do with
it; and (4) the cormunity-school must employ democratic processes.
The achievements of some divisions uhich I have cited make only
a portion of the over-all achievements in all other divisions. This
is a tribute to the educationel leadership and statesmanship of our
field personnel. I congratulate yon all for the work so splendidly done
for the improvement of living in rural areas through the agency of the
schools.
EE FACE THE FUTURE
From thia point in the development of the community-school service
progrom, let us briefly survey some advance pests which our present status
indicates as necessitating study and experimentation for the ensuing year.
In the field of instructional materials we might explore the possibilities of developing resource units and supplementary teaching materials
that vill bring the realities of social living to the attention and concern of children. In the light of the needs of our people, such materials
vill helr creatly in improving sanitation, heelth, nutrition, secial life,
and recreation. Some beginninga along this line have been reported from
Bulacan, Iloilo, Bataan, end Cagayon. This ster obviously brings the
problems of social living closest to the level of children and within
the immediate interest of adults. In order ta complete the identification
of achool inetruction with life, it ia necessary that school children also
observe the process of social living and perticipate in it.


-19-


Our concern over the implementation of our work in the field has
sccentuated the need for group action. Our joint labors have placed the
public schools on the forefront of national endeavore. The support and
cooperntion of other Iny groups, including non-schoel services of the
government, have been most encouraging. More and more the publio schools
are becoming truly the schools of the people and a vital inatrument in
promoting secial action and improving the lifo of the maases. Deserving
of particular mention in this connection is the Philippine Publie School
Teachers Association. It has helped immensely in huabanding the resources
of teachers in the interest of public education. Its legislative service
has been aggressively beneficial; and its melfare program has helped msintain the morale of teachers on a high level.
I must not forget also the Fhilirtine Association of Sohool
Superintendents which, by publishing its 1950 Yearbook, has made avoilable literature en the covmunity school which is serving as a source
book for all.
The pride of the teachers and superintendents in their associations is most deserving; and the commendation of the Buresu of Public
Schools of their services is a tacit expression of ita feith in their
educational leadership.
I am hapry that the Flanning Committee hes seleoted as the theme
for the next year's convention to motivate our entire year's achool work,
"Developing the Curriculun for the Cormunity School". We have stressed
on meny occasions the importance of tying up the curriculum of cur
schools vith community life. Many superintendenta and foreign observers of our
work believe with the Directorate that this step in cur expanding program
is toward the right direction.


II -


I om in favor of making the schools conduct projects for the improvement of the community by going direotly to the community itself.
But I sincerely believe that if we tie up the curricular offerings in
our schools with the activities in the community, the results of our
school work would be more lasting. I consider the curriculum arproach
as basio and essential. It begins with the mind, attitudes, and character of the individuel. It is based on the assumption that any improvement in life must begin with the knowledge of the needs and pyoblems of life. Experiencing or going through a living curriculum,
supplementing direct community living, deepen or broaden its effects, and
make more far-reaching its influences upon the people. With the selection of this theme for next school year, ne maintain the continuity of
our ever-expanding program for the improvement of community living in
rural areas through the schools. This is a joint enterprise in which
we can not and must not fail. Thank you.
---O---
Adult Educstion that is strictly on its own
can also lay emphasis on discovering what adults
want to learn and how they want to learn it.


- Dorothy Kewitt


12


THE COMMUNITY SCHOOL - ITS TECHNIQUES FOR FUNDAMENTAL
EDUCATION
Adult education in the Philippines is a pregram of redirection of
human resources for the uplift of our oommon man, 50% of shom are illiterate and about 80% are underprivileged living with lon standords of
life. The progedures and methoda of meeting this situation and solving
this country's problem ia a matter of concern for educators as vell as
for all civic-minded citizens. The principal acency of Adult Education,
the Community School is concerned primarily with the improvement of community living in all its aspecta, in other words, the atvainment of the
good life of the masses. It evolves and adopts techniques basically different from the traditional way of placing premium on the material means
rather than on the innate human resources, attitudes and reactions which
really should matter in a program of this kind. while many are prone to
think that the social amellieration of the people can be handed out on
a silver platter, the Community School to achieve ita purpose places
faith in and relies upon the possibilitdes of self-improvemant, selfhelp, self-organization, active participation and the good sense of the
people. It initiates improvements and reforms out of crude and modest
beginnings of the good life that the people possess, the things they are
familiar with and capable to understand and promote, with the guiding
hands of their friend, the school tencher.
Take the instance of the health program in one of the barrios of
a provincial tosn. The Community School starts with a compaign of
dreining and drying the damp and insanitary place beneath the kitchen,
the obnoxious "pusali" among the Tagalogs. It all begon with the


home of a humble peasant who religiously saw to it everyday that the
"pusali" and all the environs were dry and olean. He has succeeded
to free his home from fly infestation and his yard from mosquito-breeding places. Upon the initistive of the local council of the Community
School, with the teacher on the background, the entire neighborhood
followed suit. Blind drainages, dumping pits, and fumigation devices
were provided, a drive which resulted in the general cleanliness of the
homes and surroundings. No inspecterial check-up by a sonitary officer
or a municipal ordinance could have done more effectively and more auspiciously such a piece of community health activity, which has prepared
the way for a more thorcugh health program in this small community.
This stepping up of the bright and fine little festures of individual
and community life of the common men has paved the way of the Community School in expanding its activities along the lines of cultural,
economic and civic improvement.
Folloving the same method of basic approsch, the Community School
is taking stook and is availing itself of local leadership founded
upon personal pride, personal dignity and initiative of the men on
the frontlines. When a man finds that his neighbors and friends recognize in him special quelities that embody their aspirations, and
look upon him for leadership, he naturally feels honored, gains selfconfidence and exerts his best efforts to come up to their expectations.
mi
this is especially true in our barrio communatles vhere the people
are intimutely related to one another and where they usually have
to depend upon their onn resources to take oore of their community
interest and welfore.


The Community School has developed and buile up many such local
leaders in the barrios and rural sreas. They are either elected "viva
voce" in small informal assemblies or just rise to the occasion of
the urge of the cofmunity movement. They work with zeal ahd unselfish interest borne out of a sense of responsibility and instinctive desire to help their neighbors and fellowmen. By their moral influence, they stimulate everyone in their communitids to perform some
assigned task of civic improvement. They do not think and act in the
way of the officials who are olothed with government suthority, but
they muster follomers and supparters by sheer force of personal and
constructive leadership.
In a typical rural area of the Conmunity Sehool, one such leader
may be working to improve the economic life of his community. He
takes a census of the number of families in his neighborhood and encourages cach to cultivate a vegetable garden, breed some pigs, raise
poultry or engage in some household industry. In one instance, a
community leader campaigned for pig raising convincing esch family to
own ons or tuo pigs. With this scoomplished, he next worked hard that
the families have either duck or mushroom roising added to the pig
project.
Other local leaders are promoting in a similar vay other project ectivities, such as establishing a reading center, a health clinic or a recreation club, repairing barrio treils, or conducting a farming class for
tenants. They receive active and enthusipstic response and cooperation
with the people of their communities because their leadership, besides
belng inspiring and practical, is of the people's onn creation.


- 15 -


In the same spirit that local leadership is developed, the Comunity
School is revitalizing the enlightenment of the mesaes on the demecratic way
of life as a means of carrying out community improvement. Like other assets
which are derived from the consent and goodvill of the peorle, this way
of life must stert from the bottom. Sa far democrac in this country has
lost much of its effect by the exposition, discussion and praises given to
it in a form far above the level of comprehension of the men in the farms,
in the barrios and countryaides. And as an ideology, the demecratic way of
life with us has suffered from the mistaken notion that things benoficial
for the masses con be dished out as something reedy--made for consumption, without regard for thefact that imless the people are well informed and capable
of reacting wisely and actively to the new situntion, any system of life or
program of mass improvement will remain academic, with little or no permanent value. Democracy has failed so for to motivate and stimulate thoughts
and action that spring from a clear understanding of its clementorg principles.
The Community School realizes these pitfalls and believes thet it takes
time, patience and effort to make the masses understand and live in the true
sense of the democratic system. A program of orientation is necessary, starting with the simple ideas and simple practices thet will unfold gradually
the virtues of this ideology, and keeping its pece with the rste of progresa of the educational enlightenment of the masaes.
The Community School is proceeding with its work on this principle. This steady and gredual development of simple democratic processtes of living is taking place in barrios and rural communities, where such
organizationa es the "puroks", "zones", "little democracies", "commu

nity councils" and other small civic groups are established by the
Community School, and where the common men and woman assert their individuel capacities, take sctive role and voluntarily participate
in the constructive and improvement program of their communities.
The "purok" plaa, in perticuler, has mueh to offer in developing the possibilities of the democratio way of life. Each "purok"
selects, through the popular will of its members, the leaders who
will, among them, head the program of improvement. In their meetings
which are held from time to time, as they find need to discuss local
affairs, the members of the "purok" come together with a common purpose and deliberste in the style of the old "barrio meeting" and in
the spirit of the "old barangay". They hold their small "plenary
sessions" anywhere but quite often in the "purok" social centers,
which they have established for conducting community and civic assemblies. They talk in the vernacular, in which they feel at home
and free to discuss even the serious and intimate problems of their
community. The "purok" procedures, with their simplicity and local
touch, appeal to the common people and have proved themselves to
possess dynamic and compelling effect upon the improvement program
of the Community School.
A laudable phase of the "purok" scheme is worth mentioning for
its efficaoy in solving local questions in a fashion true to Filipino
psychology. It is the revival of a civio attitude which disposes of
personal differences and ordinery litigations common in a neighborhood
community. The "purok" officiala, especially the president, backed
by the good sense of the members, serve sa consultants and arbiters


17


in settling petty local problems vithout the necessity of resorting
to police and court interventions. This is highly compatible with
the demecratic concept thet individual or group life should be capable of managing its onn affairs so that unnecessary outside interference
shall not impair the dignity and prestige of its free and independent
existence.
Thus, the Community School is making itself the schoel of the
people, the citizenship-troining institution of the masses. Its program depends a great deel upon the capacities, poners, aspirations and
civio pride of the people as the vital factors for community improvement
ond amelioration. It is paramount thet the principles and techniques
of utilizing the beginrings of the best in our culture, the grest possibilities of local leadership, the dynamics of the simole democratic
practices, and other similar methods and procedures should be explored
in every community so that the latent human resources of the poople, including those of the lover strata, may be mobilized for the pragressive
redirection by the Cormunity School toward further improvement of our
individual ond community life.
What has been accomplished by the Burcau of Public Schools through the
Community School, established in practically all provinces by the adult
education progrem vith the techniques and mathods described in the foregoing pages? From 1948 to 1950, 52,*53 adulta have been taught to read
and write. During the rust school year, 19*0-1951, there vere 193,
993 adults enrolled in adult educstion classes, 40,862 of vhich graduated
and received literacy certificotes. 990,613 persons have participated
in the economic projects of the Community School, 2,059,155 in civic and


18 -


citizenship training including attendance at commmity assemblies, 727,
361 in recrestional and social program, and 919,408 in health, home and
community sanitation.
For the promotion of these various adult eduostion activities, the
sunport and cooperation of civic ond government organizations have been
enlisted. The perent--teacher sasociationa have been most aotive. Nomen's
cluba, puericulture centers, the lions, the Rotary, provincial and municipal governments, and different burenus, are taking a hand in this program
in one way or another.
---Oo--


An old proverb has it: "He that
rides behind another must not think
to guide". Adult edvcstion today must
not ride behind. It must be in the
forefront of intelligent thinking. To
this end it must be manned and stuffed
sith leader minds. Ne think these minds
not only exist but are encouragingly
in the making.


Harry A. Overstreet
Bonero N. Overstreet


PLAN FOR TNO COMMUNITY SCHOOL MISSIONS


In connection with the assignment of Professor Luis Medellin
Nino of the Unesco as Technical Adviser on Fundamental and Adult Education, the following plan for the establishment of Community School
Missions as agreed upon with Prof. Medellin, has been prepared as
follows!
ORGANIZATION
Each mission shall be composed of eight members as follows:
1 Chief
1 for Literacy
1 for Farm and Animel Busbandry
1 for Shop and Household Industries, including
Plastic Arts and Small-Scale Fishing
1 Physical and Recreation Director
1 Health Worker
1 Home Economics Worker
1 Social and Music Leader
Each mission shall be under the supervision and control of the
Division Superintendent, with Prof. Medellin as Adviser. The Supervising Principal or Supervisor of the toun where the mission is established shall be the Chief of the Mission. Competent public school
teachers and provincial representatives or employees of other government bureaus, may be members of the Community School Mission.


20.-


Expenses incurred in connection with the ssaigrment of teachers
and employees to the Communivy Sehcel Miscion shall be defrayed in
the usual menner in connection with the performanee of their regular
official duties. Minor expenses for popers, supplies, etc., incidental to the work of the mission shall be provided by the Division Office,
if possible, by the community where the mission is established.
Ench mission shall be in operntion for a period of obout three
months or longer.

ESTABLISHMENT OF TEO COMMUNITY SCHOOL
COT
MISSIONS
Two Community School Missions shall be established: one in
Lagune and one in the City of Manila. The Superintendents shall
select the place where the mission shall be locoted. It is preferable to establish the mission in a community which is easily
acecssible and rhere the mission can work out its program as indicated in the second paragraph of page 19.
¿ The Superintendent of City Schools subsequently designated
Barrio Punta in Sta. Ana as the center of the Manila Oonmunity
School Mission and the Superintendent of Laguna designeted the
town of Lumban as the center in Laguna.
PARTICIPATION OF OTHER GUVERIMENT BUREAUS AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENT
The Superintendent may select employees or representatives of
local governments or of other buresus assigned in his division to act
es members of the mission or to cooperate in every way possible to


-21


carry out its activities. If necessary, request for suthority to
utilize such services of other employees and representatives of the
folloving buresus, may be sent to corresponding Deportments through
this Office:
5. Burenu of Public Libraries
1. Bureau of Plant Industry
6. Bureau of Commerce
2. Bureau of Animal Industry
7. Philippine Netional Red Cross
3. Buresu of Health
8. Other government entities
A. Buresu of Fisheries


mg
STARTING THE RORK OF IHE MISSIONS
The Superintendents concerned shall take immediate steps to
organize the Community School Missions. They should determine the
location of the mission and assign the cight members of each mission
from qualified teachers in the division permanently, or temporarily
until arrongement con be mede to have the services of other government, employees.
INAUGURATION OF THE COMMUNITY SCHOOL HISSIONS
The Community School Mission of Punta shall be inaugurated on
July 22, 1951 at 4:00 P.M. in Punta and that of Lumban on sugust 6,
1951 at10:00 A.K. in Lumban.


22 -


COMMUNITY COLLEGES
By
Dr. Pedro T. Orata
(From Educational Trends Abroad, Manila Daily Bulletin, July 2, 1951)
Twice before in this column I have described so-called "comunity
colleges" in different parts of Europe - first, in Scandinavian countries
in shat are called "folk high schools," and second, the county colleges
in the United Kindom. The Community college movement is vell under way
in the United States, too. Someone has made the estimate that there
ere 250 community colleges in America, although no one can know the exact
number until the term "bommunity colleges" is defined. At present the
name is-applied to anything under the sun, such as area vocational schools,
four-year colleges, lower divisions of universities, extension courses
of state universities, junior colleges, denominational colleges, proprietary schoola, YMCA and YNCA schools, and general adult-educstion programs.
Recently there have been attempts to define the term community college more precisely. “The community college," says School Life, "is a
composite of all educational opportunities extended by the local publicschool system free to all persons who, having passed the nermal nge for
completing the 12th grade, need or want to continue their education."
Essentially, the following cheracterize the community college, quoting
from a recent article in the September 1950 number of School and College
Management, by Homer Kempfer:
1. It is locally controlled, and a pert of the public school
system.
2. It is tax-supported and essentially free to the participants
in its program.


23-


3. It offers a comprehensive educational program serving the
whole community. It is not merely an institution offering the first two years of college.
Z. The community college program is designed to serve the educational needs of all adults and older youth past the normal high-school age. General education prerequisites do
not exist in the community college except for certain
courses in the curriculum. Illiterates, elementery-school
drop-outs, high-school drop-outs, or college graduates are
as welcome as high-school graduntes. The educationol menu
should be broad enough to appeal to anyone past the highschoal age. The community college would not grant degrees
although it may offer two years of college-credit courses.
Nith the liberalization of educational policy resulting in opening
the school premises and classrooms to adult outside of regular school
hours, and the present emphasis upon community improvement projects as
pert of the school curriculun, the time is ripe for the inauguration of
the community college movement in the Philippines. Toword this end, I
suggest the follovin; funtures for study and experimentation:
1. Sterting in a borrio or poblacion, using the schoel building and
all its facilities, a few useful courses might be started. As
for instance, a bookkeeping and retail merchandising course for
all kinds of store ownera and restauront keepers, the purpose
of which is to give the students the fundomental of business
that will enable them to compete on equal terns with foreign
store keepers in the community. Later, a course for meat cutters
and vegetable sellers might be niven that mill be advantageous
to the students and te the consumers also. Seed selection, irrigation, water and soil conservetion, rat control measures,
how to moke fertilizers, und similar subjeots will come in
during slack season for farmers.
2. For teachers, first look for them in the community before looking for them elsewhere. There ure always, successful practitioners in any taun whe may be villin:, for a few pesos a
week, to conduct the course. Solaries may be appropriated
from existing funds of the municipality not othervise appropriated, or they may be obtained from special collection.
In my home tomn P19,900 were collected in the last town fiesta
in the beauty contest. An enterprising mayor can find a way
to get Fl,000 from such a collection for starting a comrunity
collece.


24 -


3. There should of course be no fees of any kind. The idea
is that the students will have everything to gain and
nothing to lose for attending the classes. The students
sheuld be allowed to enrell and to continue for as long
as they believe it profitable and worthwhile to do so.
The course should be regarded as a public service which
vill produce dividends in the increased eorning capacity
of the students. From time to time, it mould be desirdble to appraise such courses in terms of inoreased earnings by the students and to make the facts widely known.
A. Music, art, play and recrention, to mention enly a few
of whet may be called cultural courses, should be given
alone with occupational courses. Life is dull and cften
meanim less in barrios or touns for lack of activities
of this kind. People resert to the cinema or gambling
or they just walk and loaf around the stores or barber
shopa. Instead of playing panguingui, nomen should study
fruit and vegetable canning in school or learn to cook
new recipes.
5. An effort should be exerted to integrate the courses for
the cormunity college with the regular elementary ond
high-school coursos. School children cha wish to enroll
in the cormunity college should be allowed to do so, indeed they should be encoureged for the good that they can
get eut of their attendance.
6. Reoding matter that will appeal to the students' curiosity
and interest should be provided and included in the library
collection. Illiterate edults should be taught to rend if
they desire such instruction. Once they learn to read they
should be provided with appropriate reading matter in order
that they may keer on improving in their reading competence.
Needless to say, there are alrendy ventures of the kind I have in
mind even though they are not called community colleges. For instance,
we quote the follovin: from adult Education in action, a Burenu of Public
Schools monthly publication ( November 1950, p. 37).
MBATRAN. There pere 20 adult classes organized in the different berrios of Bataan sith on enrolment of 741 adults. The
adult students were found to be interested in practical arts,
such as, basket snd net neaving, cooking, cuttina and sewing
shirta and pants, and food preservetion. In order to attroct
the adults, claases were oponed for such occupational pursuits,
and latar instruction in literacy and citizenship educatioa was
given.


-.25 -
"In Abucay, the supervising principal conducts the adult education class. The adults are taught the elements of tailoring,
sewing dresses, salting fish, and preparing sauce or patis and
bagoon'. After the vocationol instruction, reading, writing
and practical arithmetic are taught to those who need them."
Mhut is perhaps needed now is to make such attempts more systematic
and general throughout the country. It is well to follow the practice
of the National Eluention association of the United States which, from
time to time, makes a book out of a collection of desirable educational
practices in different parts of the United Stutes for teachers to read
end emulate. I have in mind a volume entitled, Learning the Mays of
Democrocy, published a fen yeors ago, which contains descriptions of
conerete practices of schools and teachers to promote the sims of democratic education. I understand that the book has been very popular.
Similar venture could be very useful in the Philip-ines. Why not a book
entitled, Community College Berinning in the Philippines? Supervisors
of adult education aad others interested can make this a cooperative
venture as a promotional enterprise, say, for the next school year!
---oUo---


It is the sim of all who are
deeply concerned with adult educstion today to make its programs
more meaningtul and effective by
closely interrelating study and
action on community needs.


- Eleenor G. Coit


26 -
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN CASIT-AN
By Ricerdo Macailing
Caslt-en Elementery School, Laug-an, Antique
Every one complained of pigs roaming the streeta yet everyone let
their animals loose. That was in Casit-an, a barrio of Laua-an, Antique. It wes a community problem which could be solved through cooperative efforts.
One dey, last dugust, the teachers and civic-spirited perents of
the barrio thonght of solving thot common problem. They met and agreed to construct block fences. They put their plan into action and
in three veeks all the blocks were fenced. No more pigs roomed the
streets. No longer vere the streets littered vith pig wastes. A
great change was indeed felt by the people and an early rising farmer was moved to remork - "Now I con go to my farm early in the morning without fear of stepping on the rolling pigs."
Taking advantage of the newly awakened spirit of the community,
the teachers and parents agreed to adopt a second project for the
month of September, which was for the cleanliness of the yords ond
the improvement of the barrio roads.
The result of the second project was astonishing. Everyone was
busy. The project that failed many times in the past became successful at last. The barrio folk became more ambitious in improving their
community along other lines.
One Monday afternoon in October, when the school bell rang,
the berrio folk slomly came to the school. One of the teachers went
to the front and related news about the wer in Korea. He made sketches on the blackboard as he traced the progress of the war. How


-27 -
eagerly the narents listened! After neurly half an hour of this, the
teacher noted that parents would like some more. But the room, by
this time mas already full so he said, "well, if you want it, we can
write in the dislect the daily bulletins about the Korean war and post
it in our center. Me will also hang big maps of Korea and the neighboring countries near it." The parents welcomed the idea very gladly, and beginning that dey nens about Korean war and other items of common interest had been posted in the reading center.
For their next project they planned an educstional, cultural, and
recrestional advancement of the people in the barrios. They established
a reading center which has been considered as one of the best supplied reading centers for miles around - with its supply of weekly Hiligaynon, Yuhum, National Geographio Magazines, Manila Daily Bulletin,
comics magazines of different kinds, religious books and magazines
on science and inventions.
The barrio reading center has a long table for those who do not
know how to read. These people became so interested ploying checker
and ninapong thot they have forgotten gambling such as "patirik" which
is common in the barrio. More interesting than all these is the realization of the educational and recreational values of radio listening
made possible through the use of the radio donated by one of the teachers to the conter. The peonle enjoy listening to news brondcasts and
populer radio programs featurina fugo and Togo and other Filipino
comedions.
The barrio folk usadto come to our school playgrounds to play. During good menther the men play volleybell with the teachers and pupils


while the women folk enjoy using the playground apparatus. This led later
to a more and betterorganized activities. Athletic meet between sections
or "zones" into which the barrio nas divided has been arranged by the
rural folk themselves. Not only the fathers but also the mothers in
the community enjoy playing ball games which has been regularly scheduled.
Indeed, a new spirit has permested the people of Gasit-an. Significant changes in the life of the barrio people have been effected
through adult education.


---OOO---


Family-life education includes
the older programs of parent education. It also includes homemaking educetion, that branch of
home economics which "is centered
on home activities and relationships and enables the individual
to assume the responsibilities of
homemaking.


- Muriel W. Brown


29


¿DULT EDUCATION FROJECT IN BARRIO FAMPANGA
By Natalia Castillo-Villanueva
Supervisor of National Language in Secondery
Schools, City Schools, Manila
The Conmunity
Barrio lampange is a community of approximately two thousand five
hundred-sixty inhabitants. It is situsted on a site owned by Mrs.
Ramono Fabie in Santa Ana district. The people are renting the lots
on which their houses stand. This community does not enjoy the privileges enjoyed by others. It has no public parks, rublic playgrounds,
or public midden sheds. There are no street sueepera nor garbage collectors.
The schoolhouse in this locality is a two-room building built
by the local P.T.h. It hos an enrolment of tuo hundred.
The froject
To redirect the psople's efforts tovard goals that are healthful and socially sound, to mean them from the influence of leisure
time activities of questionable social value, and to enable each
individual to live as full and rich a life as possible, the Division
of City Schools launched an adult education project in the district
of Santa dna, Manila. a very diplometic method of approach is used
in, connection with this project.
On September 19, 1950, s Flonning and Coordinating Committee to
work for the social and cultural selfare of the Barrio Iampanga nas
organized. The Committee plamed to accomplish the following:


-30


(1) To promote cooperation among school officiala, organizations and citizens interested in making Barrio Pampunga
a more wholesome place in which to live, by increasing
recreation and groun facilities.
(2) To foster the coordination of efforts of the foregoing
organizutions and individuals in order to meet the needs
of Barrio Tampanga, giving special attention to people
who ore out of school and out of work.
(3) To sponsor the study of Barrio Pampange resources,
conditions, and needs.
(4) To advance the education of the general public
regarding the conditions to be improved.
(5) To secure democratic action in meeting the local
needs through existing agencies, organizutions,
and institutions.
Survey of the Barrio Pamanga
One of the first undertakings of the Comittee wus a community
survey of Barrio Pompanga to enoble it to plot its points of attack.
The phases of community life surveyed covered the following points:
(1) Home conditions
food problems
housing problems
clothing oroblems
(2) Health condition
family and community
(3) Occupationel life
types of occupation
earnings
stability of vork
vork opportunities
work conditions
(4) Social and Recreational life
Types of recreational facilities avsilable
in the community as playgrounds, porks,
show houses, libraries
Possession of radio, phonographs, and musical instruments
Clubs ast hobby clubs and other types ef clubs


- 31-


(5) Religious activities
Churches found in the community
Chapela found in the community
(6) Government and other community activities
Provisions for peace and order and for
police protection
frovision for fire protection
frovision for trensportation facilities
Communication
Lighting fecilities
Recreational facilities
Initial Activities
A community reading center sas recently inaugurated in Barrio
Pampanga. The school sterted the project by donating local magazines.
Some civic-minded residents took up the idea not only by donating their
own papers but elso by soliciting contributions from others. From the
USIS reading matter both in English and in Tagalog hes been obtained free
for the Center.
The Center has become not only the rending center but also the
meeting place of ndults in the afternoons where all imaginable topics
are discussed. The children, too, have their comics to read.
During eveninas educational films borrowed from the USIS were
shown in the open sir from six to elght-thirty. The mhole community
turned out to see and enjoy the following pictures:
On henlth and sanitation
(1) Tuberculosis (Tagalog)


Defense against Invasion (Englishl
(4) Cleanliness Brings Heolth (Tagalog)


-22 -


Cultural
(1) Music in Americo
(2) Ta the Shores of Iwo Jima (English)
(3) Wings over Porto Rico and Caribbea (English)
"Bingo" playing among women and children has been eradicated.
This has been brought about by (1) the teachers’ lessons against
gambling, and (2) hy the campaign of the community leaders themselves.
Women and childron playing cards in stores and on tables set on the
road just in front of the schoolhouse were usuul sights morning, noon
and afternoon. But they have disappeared and the gambling paraphernalia are no longer seen.


--OOo--


We need to organize the world
for peace and collaboration, if
we ere to have any world at all.
But it must be a good world for
the sake of goodness.


- Lyman Bryson


- 33 -
METHODS IN LITERICY TEACHING
(Adoptations from the Surmary Report, Inter-American Seminor on
Illiteracy and Adult Education)
Analysis of different methods chich hsve proved useful in literacy tenching in rural, urban and sporsely populated areas:
1. The central purpose of literacy teaching is the comprehension of the uritten or printed page as one of the most efficient means
to secure experience, knowledge, skills and desiruble and useful
habits.
2. Loboratory psychology has demonstrated clearly that the
child learns through the syncretic, global process before understanding the parts of which the vhole is composed. The child sees and
grasps first the mhole, and analyses afterwards. The adult seems to
leorn in the same way, exoent that his vider experience enables him
to analyse more raridly anl more unconscionsly.
3. The sentence is the rerresentation of a thought or an idea.
The global, or sentence and story method is proferable for the adult
leerner also, since it is more interesting for him and accords vith
accertod princirles of learnins.
A. The sentence method has another advantage. It is applicable
to groun ns well as to individval teaching, and is therefore economical
and efficient in adult literocy closses.
5. In liternay classes for eccmatienul arours the sentence
method can be nsed, as has beon successfully demonstrated in the
literacy classes of the Inited Statos and Britisb armies. The adaptation of the method and of the basto materiala must satisfy the
spegtal needs, interest an intellectul capacities of the perticular


grouns


-3-


6. A very important consideration is the fact that the method
used imitielly vill have a permanent effect on the rapidity of progress and on final results. The approach to reading should, therefore,
be made through n method which vill,
- follos the scientifically proved principles governing the
tenchine of rending
- give irmedicte maning te the work
- lead to rarid comprehension
— arouse and retain interest
- be suitable fer use as an individu-l method
- give the puril a sense of real achievement.
Any method not fulfilling these canditions should be suspect. Once
a sound and scientific appronch has been made the tencher can - according to circumstances - expand his method br the judicious use of more
E
thon one methed.
7. Concerning the problem of method, the Seminar wishes to go on
record that it secents the scientific evidence in favour of the centonce ar global method fer teaching children to read. On the basis
of objective data and corroborntive evi-lence of the psycholegy of
adulta, of their interesta and ways of learning, the Seminor recommenda the same rethod for the teaching of adult illiterates until
such time as the results of reseorch an' controlled experiments prove
the contrary. This ereference doca not in any way imply the inadvisability of ertensive exneriments to strongthen, modify, or change the
methodological position expresded by the Seminar,


- 35 -
APPROACH TO ADULT EDUCATION WORK AMONG
THE NATIVES OF COTABATO
By
Manib Manampon
Distriot Supervisor
Parang District, Cotabato
EARLY ADULT EDUCATION MOVEMENT! -
Adult Education among the natives of Cotabato dated far back
in the latter pert of the fourteenth century when the great Juhur
Missionary, Shariff Kabungsuwan porked on the propagation of Mohammedanism in Eaguindonso. Prior to this missionary work the natives were
found with a nevertheless culture of their own. Just what kind of
edult education sas started, must hove been mostly Arabic in nature
as recorded by the sacred book, the Ta'sila, a historical record of
the genealogies of the rulos of Mindanso and Sulu.
There had been concrete objectives that must heve guided Shariff
Kabungsuman when he weilded both love and force to sway these natives to
the fold of Islamism. The Tursila is clear on this point. The ultimate
general objective was the propagation of Islam. aside from this, the
following nere taught in sermons or tutorship:
1. Reading und vriting Arabic nototions
2. Leurning in theory and practice the laws of the Islum
3. Reading and interpretation of the Koran (Forkan)
4. Learning ethics and religion
5. Learning magical tricks and incantations
6. Learning the Code (Luoran)
7. Training leaders in religious propagations
8. Treining in affaira of local government


9. Preachina on coopcration and the 24 commandments
10, lrinciples of life hereofter, heaven and all.
These must have guided the Juhur Missionary and his co-workers.
for in no time the faith of Islamism spread like vildfire from Maguindanco (Cotabato) to Bunyan, and part of Lanao province. Religious teachers sprang up. Landitas, Moro priests mere in abundance. Leaders,
datus and sultans come to rule their elans as was never experienced
prior to the landing of Shariff Kabungsuwan in Mindonao. Such was the
result of the carly adult education movement.
Later in history the natives foucht back the Spanish forces
with the jealous nim to preserve their culture and religions. History
did not fuil to record that the Spaniards never subjugated the natives
of Gotabato. This can be attested to by so many Spanish bastions constructed by the Spaniards in their attempt to dominate the natives.
These forgotten relics of colonization are morks which vrote the resistance of the natives. When the americans come the natives resisted
vith tho same motive they did against the Spaniarda.
After twe yeurs of fighting, the natives gave ur to the Americans vhen they found out that they come not to exploit but to teach them
in the science and art of government. Since then the natives spoke well
of the Lmericans und their ways of dealing vith a subject people. For
at no other time did they learn and receive more education and responsibilities than the half century of american democratic occupation.
PRESENT ADULT EDUCATION MOVEMENT: —
The present movement on adult education is a fer ery from chat
the nativea had built in almost five centuries of existence. But the sp

37-


prosch to the present movement of adult educstion would be in keeping
the ways of life of this region if the principle of apperception would
operste. Thet mould be from the known as basis to the unknown.
Although adult education work among the natives require
more patience, tact and resourcefulness in comperison with the
vork among our Christlan brothers in the same province, more particularly in the rural areas and the hinterlands, Vet there are
lots of curiosities and interesting experiences among the Moros
that could be of use for a better approach to the movement. The
foregoing suggestions are not intended to cure all the ills and
blocks encountered in the local adult education work. They are
suggestions that have neen tried in Parang Maricipality and which
are producing satisfecoory results. Cur basis of approach in this
respect which we would like to pass on do the adult education workers
among the Moros are!
1. Attracting the natives to group enterprises or projeots
2. Narrowing the imaginary gaps between the Christians and the
natives in beliefs, mationalism, superstitions, customs
and traditions.
3. Using the Arable cheracters to motivate literacy work
4. Holding community assemblies where native leaders are
motivated to spenk to their people
5. Holding barrio athletio oompetitions
6. Forming schools and barrio adult education councils composed of native professional and lay leaders
7. Organizing native P.T.A.'s guided by the teachers


38 -
8. Making survey visits by zones making the datus as leaders
9. Follow up and check up work by pupils and berrio leaders.
The above suggestions were issued to teachers to guide them in their
periodio check up of improvements.
Once a month a meeting of all teachers is called to discuss the progress and problems of each zone. With the help of local
adult educstion councils, improvements of the campaign are offered.
This practice has made the zone visits effeotive and interesting.
The participation of the people through the barrio council has worked
out inspiring influence among the natives to raise their standard of
living.
In literacy classes, the help of a Pandita is sought to begin teaching hos to read and write with the Arabic notation written
side by side with the English words and phrases. As s consequence,
the enrolment increased as the natives find direot interpretation
of the lessons in their own way of writing and reading.
Community Reading Centers do not only contain English and
vernacular litereture but also Mohammedan pamphlets, notices and
announcements. These have helped to interest the natives to these
centers.
During Community and School Day in esch zones local and home
made articles are exhibited by the natives. Community and school
programs and games enlivened the affair where the kids and their
parents take part and vie for prizes.
In economic productivity much progress are noted in various food
production and other farm projects. Cooperatave stores of the natives
are seen along the highnays especially at Simay, Parang, Cotabato.


- 39 -
CONCLUSIONS! -
As the natives of Cotabato differ by grouns from one another in
their nays of life and the dialects they speak, the teachers and other
dult education workers in these places should be familiar with their
idiosyneracies. Their religions, beliefs, traditions, customs and
proctices should be respected if ne mish to solicit for their cooperation in carrying out adult education compaign. Adult Education workers
among the natives should be cautious, patient end understanding
with a lot of sacrifices to renlize their objeotives.
Other factors of approach which may be useful are:
1, A knowledge of the dialects of the place
2. Femiliarity with the leaders, Pandites, datus and their
temperaments
3. Fomiliarity vith and attendance to local fiestos, celobrations,
etc.
A. Familicrity with the natives in the different strata of
their society
5. Extension of services and favors to the natives, such as reading their licenses, letters, answering communications, eto.
6. Invitina the leaders and Consehals to school.
7. A visit to their mosque on Fridays vith the children
2. Giving responsibilities te the leaders in school and Community Councils.


40 -


TRENDS AND IRACTICES IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD
lublic Iibrary filot Preiect in Delhi
The rurpose of the preject is to demonstrote how public library
services can form an essential pert of literacy campaigns and adult
education rregrammes. Special attention vill be given to the needs
of the nesly liternte adults.
The plan for the first year is to aasemble a collection of 10,000
books, periodicala, pamphlets, mana and pointers for adulta and children.
The books will he loaned free for home use. Appropriate courses for
rending vill be furnished the adults hy a group of library service
advisers. Film shovings, discussion, publication of reading-lists,
gramorhone-record concerts, oxhibitions and story-hours for children
vill be undertaken to stimulate reading intereats. (Fundamental Education Quarterly Tulletin, Junuary, 1951)


Uneago Seminar
Umesco vill hold from November 15 to December 5, 1951 a meeting of
experts to discuss "the use of vernacular languages as vehicles of instruction, both in school and out of achool and the reloted problems of
tenching in langunges other than the vernacular.” Director Bodet believes
that the mecting of experts vill produce better results if the investigations should be enlarged s as to cover the use of vornacular languages
out of school, that is, in fundamental and adult education, as vell as
in school. In view of this the Bureau of Public Schools was requested
to submit te Unesco materiols and information on the use of vernacu

-Allar langueges as medis of instruction in school and out of school in
the Philippines. (Unesco letter, May 15, 1951)
O D E Program in Greege
C DE means “Community Development Employment for the Utilization
of Idle Man Power.” It is a Greek plan to make people in a given area
use their ideas and their idle manpower for community development.
Under this plan about 1,500 villages have been awakened to realize
that they have in their own hands and tools and in their own ideas,
the means of reising their standard of living.
After 18 months of work employing 150,000 morkers, results accomplished were almost miraculous. More than 5,272 kilometers of
roads were constructed or improved, 50,000 acres of land were made
productive, over s hundred water supply systems had been installed
and 24 sewer systems completed.
As Glen Leet, Director of the Welfare Division of the United
Notions Relief and Rehabilitation Administration to Greece said, "O D E
is an expression of fimdamental faith in the intelligence and capacity of the common people to solve their own problems in an environment
where each person gets an opportunity to work for the: thing which
for him has meaning and significance.” (United Nations Bulletin,
Merch, 1951)
Adult Education Campaign by 'Schemes"
An adult education campaign is conducted in Northern Mgeria under
the organizstion known as "schemes". Each scheme operates about 30
centers at a time and esch center with two or three olasses. The scheme


- L2 -
is under the direction of a local orgenizer assisted by s local committee. Courses of four months duration esch are held for adults between
15 and 35 who have "missed the chance of going to school". An examination is held at the end of each session and successful candidates are
given literncy certificates. (Fundamental Education Querterly Bulletin,
Januery, 1951)
Recommendationa on Fundementel education
The Regional Conference of Unesco Nationel Commissiomsheld recently in Havana gave special attention to the subject of fundamental education. Considering that the training of teachers and the production
of tesching materials are of the greatest importance in fundemental
eduestion the following recommendations were submitted concerning the
better and more effective cooperation of the National Commissions and
concerning the Regional Center to be established at Patzouero under the
suspices of the Unesco
(s) The greatest possible number of fellowships should be
attained for each country.
(b) The number of fellowships should be established in
sccordance with the cultural needs and the geographical situstion of each country.
Patzouaro will be the sest of the first of the five-regions
of Unesco's 320,000,000 plan for fundamental eduestion trsining and production center.
(Unesco Courier, February, 1951)


—43-


ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES


Encouraging reports have been received from the field on the extent of the promotion of fundemental and adult education activities in
the provinces. From the facts gathered in the reports, it con be well
said thet the efforts exerted by the superintendents, surervisors, princinals and teachers have not been in vain. The legion of adult education workers, who out of mere patriotism, used time, money and efforts
to serve the melfare of their communities, need laudable commendation
and praise for their exemplary loyalty and devotion to their country's
cause.


Surmer class for school janitors was opened by the Division of
City Schools of Manila at the Eulogio Rodriguez Vocational High School.
It was an adult education preject vhich aimed to develop among school
jenitors of the city the ability to perform certain basic operations
in plumbing, machine repoirine, practicol electricity and bookbinding.
There were 44 jenitors mho nttended the summer class representing the
different elementary and high schoola of the City. Each joniter was
suralied with P4O cash by his principal who obtained the amount from the
local school fund. The money was spent in purchasing materials used
in the different courses taught to the janitors. 4ll projects finished
by the junitors were submitted to their principals as school property.
MORINDUDUE
Adult education activities are rearing good results in Santa Cruz,
Merinduque. Surerintendent Alarcon has reported thet 282 adults engaged


in baokyard roultry, 214 in piggery und 49 in different home crafta.
The women have recently orgunized a "Home Lrts Club" under the enthusiastic leadershin of Mrs. Soledad P. Palomares, Home Economics
Tencher. The club members are very eager to exhibit their finished
homeoraft articles. The most sctive member, Hrs. Dorotea Pereyra,
has finished irmedintely tuo awenters, two table clothes, three bedspreads and several center rieces.

MISAMIS CRIENTAL
Notable improvement in the economic conditions, healtl and sanitation of many communities in Misomis Oriental, on account of adult education assemblies, is reported by Superintendent Faguio. "The responses
of our adult ponulation", Mr. Pagujo said, 'to the community assemblies
have been very encouraging, resulting in increased food production in
the homes, benutification of home surroundings, increased enrolment in
literacy classes and active cocmeration in the estahlishment of reading -
centers.” Resding conters cre nut ur in many rural districts, such
as Villanueva, Tagaloan; Mollogan, El Salvador; Looo, Ampiuican, Binaungan;
and Initoo.
ABRA
Practical courses for adults are orened in some berrios in Abra
according to a communication from Sunerintendent De Leon. A class in
carpentry fer adults is conducted in barrio Casili mder the berrio
scheol, shop teacher. Tuenty adults have enrolled in that class and
they are nor making chairs and tablos for home use. In barrio Mudiit
another adult class is orened under the local plant inspecter. Tventyfive adults are eagerly receiving instruction in plent pest and discase


- 15 -
control. They learn how to apaly chemicals to their fields and use
fertilizers.
COTABATO
Adult education campaign in Cotabato has brought about the much
needed community imorovement and "the masses have realized the benefit
of having sanitary homes with backyard vegetables and flover gardens."
There are 91 adult education classes functioning in the province according to a report of Adult Education Supervisor Vargas. He noted
that the Mohammedan adult students preferred to be taught in English
while the Christianized folks choose the National Language. Most of
the successful adult classes are conducted in Cotabato Central, Tamontaka, Tapudi, Tran and Manday which are all Moro communities.
LEITE
The "each-one-teach-one" campaign is reaping tremendcus results
in Leyte according to Adult Education Supervisor ferez. Through the
cooperation of students and tenchers about 9, 520 adult illiterates
have been enrolled during the first semester of 1951.
The fermers in Colubian were greatly benefited by a series of
community assemblies conducted by the Calubian High School. The topics
which delighted the formers most were: Care of Hogs, Increasing Corn
Yields, Balanced Diet, Flower Gardens and Interior Decoration.
TARLAC
Reported by Adult Education Surervisor Evangelista. "Every school
in Tarlac has its library opened to the public. Oftentimes we sec
neople going to the school library to read newspapers, magazines, etc.
PtA's ere urged to buy or subscribe to periodicals, magazines, etc.


- Lo -


in the vernacular to drar more peonle to the school and be enlightened,
besides."
ILOILO
The most important contribution of adult education to berrio Magamay, nccording to a report of Mr. Simeon Jabosa, Head Teacher of
Magamay Primary School in Nueva Valencia, Iloilo, is the eradication
of the old belief of the people in herbolarios, anting-anting, babaylan, hizit and other superstitions. If there are people in the barrio who still versist in the primitive ways of healing the sick, their
number is insignificant. The main reason why some rural folk still
follon the eld ways is their inability to buy medicine due to
poverty.
IANGASLNAN
Tongasinan has a new method in adult education. The Adult Education Supervisor Coragan has boptized it as "Illiteracy Doctoring
System". He describes the method as follows; "The illiteracy doctoring system is an adult education project for community imrrovement in
Pangasinan. It is based on the principle of the interview. In every
barrio school, a teacher is designated as community interviewer. He
listens to complaints and problems of ony adult who, comes to school
for advice. Usually the place of the interview is the principal's
office or the roam of the hend-teacher or the reading center. Many
parents desire te find out the status of their children in school.
Others like to know the cause of the suspension of their pensions. Some
parents have land troubles mhile others inquire about remedies for
their children's wounds. Some adult studenta consult their tutors on


27-


lessons assigned in their primers."
Mr. Caragan stated that "one interesting example of the doctoring system was that of a farmer who had spplied fertilizers to his
rice planta and later discovered that his plants had vigorous growth.
Fearing thet the plants might not bear grain, he consulted the school
“doctor" at Telospotang, Malasiqui about his trouble. The teacher advised the farmer to trim the leaves of his rice plants and the fermer's
problem was solved.
LAGUNA
Adult education in Laguna is mainly concentrated on food production. Poultry and piggery projects as well as backyard gardening are
in full swing in Los Banos, Calamba, San Pablo City and other towns
bordering Laguna lake. "From an honest observation of its economio
conditions," writes Superintendent Lorenzo, "the province of Laguna
may be considered among those which are free from want.”
The campaign for the reduction of illiteracy is presently receiving the whole-hearted support of officials and townspeople. In
many schools Sunday classes for adults are held. In places where regular adult classes cannot be organized the "esch-one-teach-one" method
is being used to advantage.
ROMBLON
The Odiongan High School has launched an adult-education campaign
in this town. High school students, under class advisers are tusoring
adult begimners. There ere 167 adults enrolled in the literacy project and
mheny more are expeoted to join due to intensive campaigns made by the


students. The text book used is the pamphlet in Hiligaynon issued by
the Division Office of Romblon. There is no fixed hour of instruction
because the adults are given every opportunity to earn their living.
Most of their meetings are on Saturdays and Sundays.
ZAMBOANGA
The Katipunan High School is conducting a literacy campaign among
the Subuanos. Principal Adan of the Katipunan High School has organized
his Third and Fourth Year students into a group of literacy orusaders
to teach these people some phases of fundamental education. Those who
are rendering domestic services are taught at home after their work in
the evening.
NEGROS ORIENTAL
The campsign for populerization of reading centers has been started
in Negros Oriental. According to a report of Academic Supervisor Pinero,
one of the best reading centers in the province is located in Barrio
Camayac, Dumaguete City. At the corner of the school site there is a
mango treeunder which newspapers and magazines are placed on bamboo
tables and sests for those who would like to come and read. The
reading center is ideally located st the junction of several barrio
roads. It is also the bus terminal of the city so that many people
enjoy reading in the center while waiting for their bus.


THE COMMUNITY SCHOOL AND ITS DATA
OF AGHIEVEMENTS


1. LITERACY
s. Census Record, Enrolment and Promotion


INO.OF IDULRIETROL.T


NULGIR OF IULNS—T


TORAL T


TERCE TNOS OP


IILLITERATES! MENT





PROMOTED


IPROMO. I


PE MOTION


DIVISION


119 & ABOVE


11948


A


m
AIONI


BE. 29 ON


NGTMN
((ESIIAAIED


to 11948-4911949-5011950-511


1939 IENROLMENT


11929 CENSUSI 1931


11948-511CENSUSIIOA8-51


I. INa


94
12,126


8,6191


39


D2


T


Ltel.1


1,2691


3.9.1. 14.7


2. Agusan


31,341


 TOAl


--


-*


- -


- -
 -


3. Albay


136,395


1 8,8621


58


333


1.


5381


A 6.1


A. Antique


7,M43


8821


--


- -


- -


 -



5. Bataan


2,51k


1 6,362)


19


478


725 1


1,2221


M.5 1 19.2


6. Batenes


2,662


1 1,0941


33


153


320 1


5061 19.
46.3


7. Batangas


1 159,502


17,8781


- -


246


AO1


286


.21 3.6


8. Bohol


182,300


135,6411


528


I


3,103


2,439 1


6,3701


3.* 1 18.


9. Bukidnon


21,366


7,4651


16


50 !


631


.9
.3


10, Bulacan


7A,178


1 7,0131


21


347


1


AA !


7821


1.11 11.1


11. Cagayan


 100,519


116,7861


-


1


1,3471


1,712 1


3,0591


2.6 1 18.2


12. Camarines N.


1 18,360


1 1,1251


--


1


- -I


--


---


13. Camerines S.


121,210


1 6,5781


36


--


1


2,187



2,423)


1.8 1 33.8


1A. Capiz


162,103


1 9,2701


98


569


!


1,942 1


2,631


1.5 1 28.1


15. Catanduanes


----


6,6171


- -


I


352


P


37 I


3891


1 5.9


16. Cavite


61,785


5231


1


115


1


196 1


3111


,51 59.5.


17. Cebu


MO, 690


111,8881


95


!


735


1


1,070 1


1,9001


16


18. Cotabato


1A6, N75


1 3,2071


- -


1


1,083


1,847


2,9301


2. 1 91.4


19. Daveo


117,279


1,0501


- -


lo


88 1


981


.1.1 9.3


20. Ilocos Norte


85,522


1 9,4801


43


362


LA


5491


5! 5.8


21. Ilogos Sur


96,7lo


1 3,9331


- -


198


- -


1981


5
2 1


22. Iloilo


231,250


110,1221


295


I


1,350


3,2254


1,8701


2.1
48.


23. Iloilo City


3521


--


--


152 1


152.


-- 13.2


24. Isabela


7O8


11,145!


26


429


84


5391


" Ma


25. Laguna


79


1 5,9511


60


191 1


2s1:


. A.2


26. Lanso


57


11,0921


- -


1


90


30 1


l2ci


- 1,7


27. La Union


14


110,3361


15


753


517 


1,2851


1,91 12.4


28. Leyte


128


117,52011,055


9,721


9,530


20,336)


5.5 1 17,3


29, Manila


6-


 A9A!


—


296 1


2961


1
60.
23


30. Merinduque


678


1 5,3851


41


96


I


205 1


3421


1.6 1 6.A


31, Masbate


2,612


1 8,3871


20


1


106 I


1,545 1


1,Tal


2.8.' 21.1


32. Mindoro


12,961


1 3,9401


--


136


!


1,720 1


1,8561


L.31 Ma


33. Misemis Occ.


"3,5L4


1 7,9561


--


151 1


1,5211


1,8721


2.34 21.


34. Misamis Or.


6L, 159


! 4,231!


- -


48


1


2,5701


2,6181


A.1 61.9


35. Mountain


1140,602


113,854!


--


8,619


102 1


8,7211


,21 62.9


36. Negros Occ.


293,936


1 9,6321


--


1,420


I


3,586 1


5,00%1


1.7 1 52.


. 50 -


IILLITERATES
119 & ABOVE 1 1948 1
¡(ESTIMATED
to 11948-4911949-5011950-5111948-511


DIVISION


TO. U9 IDUIRIETRGLI WIBE GN IDUINS T TORAl IPERCENCAGS O5
MENT !—— PRUMOTED


—I PROMO-I PROMOTION
TION ! RASED ON


E VONOg V.


119
EI


1 19211.
113,8271


E


LE1 T


LEE


T933 1


2.2


D
!


2A8
18.3


8. Nueve Ecijo


1
114,941


1 7,3501


25


1


152 1


-


1e1 1


2


1


2.5.


39. Nueve Vigcaya


2,086


1 1,7431


50


31 1


847


I


1,288 1


L.


1


22


O. Palawan


36,532


1 6,8601


127


378


567





1,072 1


2.9


1


15.6


1. Pampanga


1 100,605


1 9,6021


35


298


401


E3


e5


!


4-9


2. Pangasinan


1 232,598


119,8831


56


1,587 1


3,631 1


5,251


2.2


10.2


3. Quezon


9,251


1 3,1761


75


llo


42


227


.3


e1


Quezon City


--


-


1


--


- -


1


- -


Rizal


98,364


1 2,2991


142


356 1


517


11,015 1


1


1


M.l


Romblon


531


1 8,2311


20


1


1,M42


915


1


2,97 1


6.5


28.5


Semar


6,358


148,5871


267


6,2171


1


6,184.


3


:


13.3


. Sorsogon


,902


110,3131


26


267


159


1


152


.6


1


4z4


. Sulu


,941


1 4,1781


53 1


93


¡CA!


1,3


D. Surigao


80,353


120,3031


239


1 2,404


291


1


2,934 1


3.7


!


1.5


1. Tarlac


75,353


118,6691


383


1,030


!


1,413 1


1.9


1


7.5


72. Zambales


21,680


1 2,4501


206


45


351 1


1.3


114-3


3. Zamboanga


1 246,105


111,5991


- -


783


803


11,586 1


1


19.7


A, Zamboange City!


1





I








- -



-


- 



otal 1948-51


IS,S1n


15836351


3,513


u, 30 115,602


1102,8351


15


T


18.0


38-48
otal 19


—dO


SDA


--


L


-


--


592


—g


I


942.


RANO TORAL 1939-1 3,356,1a1


1913,9281


395


1 2anil
MS, lo 1As,602 H92.1201


2.9


1


14.0


1939 IENROIMENE


b. Enrolment and Promotion
School Yeer 1950-1951


D


IVISION


IFENGENTACEINANIO G
INO. OF PUBLICI OF PROMO-! ADULTS
TENROLMENTI NIMBER ISCHCOL TCNES. ITION BASEDIPROMOTI
IPROMCTED!
ITO EAC
IN THE
ay
ma
E
DIVISION JENROLMENT IEAUHI
E


1


ANo


5330


P


DUel


528


32.2 1


2,0t


2.


Agusan


794


—


745


- S





3.


Albay


191


1A7 !


1,496


77


.09


&.


Antique


882


1,087


1


S -


 


5.


Bataan


2,630


725


391


21.6 AA


1.5


6.


Batanes


527


!


320 1


90


60.’


3.55


7.


Batangas


40


40 1


2,805


100


.01


8.


Bohol


I


6,283


1


2,439


2,308


38.8 1


1.06


9.


Bukidnon


1,280


I


50 !


325


3.9


15


10, Bulacan


1,593


!


A !


1,812


26


.23


n.


Cagayan


8,915


1


1,712 1


1,816


19.1


1.16


12, Cemerines N.


674


1


1


- -


13. Cemarines S.


2,991


I


2,187 1


2,118


73.1 1


1.03


L.


Capiz


3,670


1


1,943 1


1,979


!


53


.98


15.


Catanduanes


1


2,314


!


629


1.6


.06


16.


Cavite


195


196 1


1,209


100


15


31


TFERCENTAGSRAO OE
INO. OF PUBLICI OF PROMO-! ADULTS"


DIVISION


IENROLMENTI NUMBERISCHOCL TCHRS
IPROMOTED! IN THE
! DIVISION


ITION BASEDIPROMOTED
ON
ITO EACH
MCT ITEACHER
JENROLIMEN.


IV. Coba


Gmen


!


106


1


L,203


174


25


T
18. Cotabato


3,291


1,847


1


1,321





.51.7


*
!
1.4


19. Daveo


1,050


88 1


1,810


844


 ,48


20. Ilogos Norte


329


1


M4


!


1,483


43.8


.09


21. Ilocos Sur


N


-


1,385


- -


-
I


22. Iloilo


L,622


3,215


I


3,659


692.6


.9


23, Iloilo City


352


152


1


625


19.2


 :2


24. Isabela


84


34


1,411





100


.C5


25. Laguna


3,861


191


1,541


1.9


!
12


26. Lanso


238


30


1


973


P


12.


1.03


27. Le Union


2,991


517


1,241


17.3


OA


28. Leyte


34,131


9,530


1


M.531


2.9


1 2.1


29. Manila


194


296


!


3,99


60


.07


30. Merinduque


7-
82
2,


205


457


7.4


 .45


31. Mesbate


3,216


1


1,543


1


1,128


Aa

1.37


32. Mindoro


2,813


1,720


1


945


el.1


11.8


33. Misemis Occ.


A
9,329


1,521


1


1,006


15.7


11.5


3A. Misemis Or.


3,685


2,510


1



1,321


69.7


11.9


35. Mountain


,170


102


1


1.376


8.7


.07


36. Negros Occ.


,016


3,586


1


3,488


39.6


11.03


37 Negros Or.


,46l


1,262


1,610


28.3


.8


38. Nuevo Ecije


2,.00


—


39. Nueva Vizcaya 1


45


847


!


429


68


1 1.9


40. Palawan


3


567


!


439


30.9


1 1.3


Al. Pampanga


40


!


2,20n


.92


.02


42. Pangasinan


59


3,631


L,253


9.2


.85


43. Quezon


327


42


2,050


2,3


.02


AA. Quezon City


514


 -


--


A5. Rizel


76


517


!


2,13


89.8


 .2


46. Romblon


.,988


915


550


)


40.6


1 1.7


A7. Samer


,210


3,156


--


--


48. Sorsogon


159


159


!


1,408


I.


100


!
.11


19. Sulu


-


873


—


- -


50, Surigao


1,875


291 1


1,215


1


15.5


.24


51. Tarleo


6,304


1,030


!


1,598


I


1o


.65


52. Zambales


s1


45 1


855


55.6


.05


53, Zamboanga
3
mpoanga City
*
'NATIONAL SCHOOLS
1. Cen. Luzon Agri

6,305


803


!


1,AA


!


12,7


P0


437


:


- *


--


School
2. Phil. School of!


.


-


I.


42


I


- -


--


Arts & Trades
3. Cebu School of I


- -


--


49


1


--


--


Arts & Tradez


* -


I


--





zo


1


- -


--


- 52 -


i.
NATIONAL SCHOOLS TENROLMENTI NUMBER 18
IPROMOTED!
L


PERCENTACEIRAIO OF
NO. OF PUBLICI OF PROMO-! ADULTS
SCHOOL TCHRS. ITION BASEDIPROMOTED
ON
IN THE
I TO EACH
DIVISION TENROLMENT
ITEACHER


A. Helle So. or


Arts & Trades


37


1


10 1


L4


1 21


1


.23


5. Baybay Net'1.


Agri. School


- -


1


--


22


- -
1


1


- -


6. Bukidnon Nat'1.!


Agri. School


- -


1


-- I


15


--


!


- -


7. Negros Occ.


Agri. School


- -


1


--


IA


--


1


- -


8. Phil. School of!


Commerce


- -


i


--


17


--


i


- -


9. Phil. Neutical I


School


- -


!


--


---


--





10, Cebu Neutical


School
—


--



1


--!

—


3
-


--





- -


TOTAL 1950-51
1193,993


!


19,862 1


85,998


1 26.0


1


0.6


The folloving comments on the above figures are pertinent!
1. There ere no complete records of enrolment and promotion by
school year, before 1948. There was no work in adult education during
the Japanese occupation.
2. The percentage of promotion in each division from 1948 to 1951
on the basis of Census number of illiterstes is computed on the number of adult illiterates in 1939 Census in the absence of complete and
up-to-dete Census figures.
3. While some divisions have made high percentage of promotion in
1950-1951, the number of edults promoted appears to be insigpificant
compored with the original number of illiterates in those divisions in
1939.


A. The percentage of promotion in 1950-1951indicates a high percentage of feilure. The percentage of promotion is only 262 for all
the divisions.
5. The last column in the 1950-1951 tabulation gives the retio of
adults promoted to each teacher in the division. It appears to be .6
to 1 teachers for all divisions during this school year.


2. NATURE AND SCOPE OF COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT


—
1) On Health & Home Life.


INO, ol SROnRor
ing Schools


INO, ol Rercons
!Participating


s. Proper Disposal of Garbage


L,199


289,160


b. Toilet Construction


9,800


1 315,834


c. House Construction & Remodeling
with Plans


2,913.


1 58,978


d. Environment Besutification


1,204


7,553


2. Other Heslth & Home Life Activities
S


2AKIO.


1124.183.


To tol


20,895


1 919,408


2) On Cultural Improvement


s. Orgenizing Center Librerles


7A


SLDEI


b. Literary-Musical Programs


3,199


389,560


c. Home Decorstion


i
3,661


1 1AL,552


d. Use of Educational Films - Audio
Visual Education


194


1 82,66L


Activitia
2. Othe
I
2s



1.949.
L


I
S6.294.


T ot a 1


10,094.


a5
727,361


3) On Economic Improvement



s. Poultry Projects


7,150


TS00,608


b. Piggery Projects


6,593


1 21L,956


c. Home Crafts


3,842


1 108,997


d. Trades


1,217


28,005


e. Vegetable Gardening


L,761


1 198,679


—f. Other Activitles

—


2AgTI.


1 101.TIA


T ot a 1


ES,G50


1 990,613


Aa On the Promotion of Citizenship


s. Civic Club Organization


53


TOS.SIT


b. Discussion Groups


2,065


1 130,601


c. Coonerstives


660


1 29,973


d. Community Assemblies, Open Forums
and Mass Conferences


1
1 12. 303.


11,192.984.


Totel


20,6Ah


12,059,155


The above figures are by no means absolute and categoricel due to
some overlapping entries of community activities. They, however, indicate pronounced trends of adult educstion through the Community School
for the improvement of home and community life.


SSVObdVU


NOERTO.S SENOOA


C O NT ENTS
Page
VE
TanSEMINAN OH FUNDALELTAL AND ADAAT ADICATION ........... 1

*
mara 

Oitipa
mpn
InD KOLE OF PULDARMHAL AHD AOSLA EDECATION H IA
REALIZATION OF OFA. EDUCATIOHAL ODJECTIVES .......... 2
Dy Assistant Dircctor Venancio Trinidad
-TmP
Ta
TRA LUM. AF COMMLATIA SCHIOOL FISSION ..................10
Dy iloman F. Lorenzo
T
PILOT PAOJECTS FOR HODEL COIMUNTILES IN
HEGROS OMIENTAL...... 15
lly Tomas de Castro
O
T
Ama
IY T.
Am
Pa'7
ADEBORLON ACTIVITIES OF INA PATANGAS
VEST HICH SCOOL .... 20
-
n
ng
ILE CADDACE PAOJECT OF BACIAD......... 24
l Fructuoso Hanantan
AmO
 
ADULT EDJCATIUN VOKK OF PE-L AA NATIOMAL
AGRICULTUtAL SCHOOL... 27
y Doninador D. Clemente
T


TOSSUSROL HAIDRLLES FO. ADULT EDUCATION AMD

7
GOTaw
COMMU. AII—SCIOOL LIPAOVEMET POCAA ............... 31
1

TR
ATA
a
TAAMIIS AND P.ACIlUE E! ADEl SEceMIeI ABMOAD....... 32
Pr
a
N
r
 ma
T
)
ADULT BDSUATION ACTIVITLSSS IL TE PAAVINCES........... 36
mi.¬
ANIOUICEMMT AHIG PAOGRAR OF ME SEMINAR ON

FINDALEZNTAL AND ADULT EDUCATION .................... 45
DIVISION MEMORANDA ALiD CIRCLAAS ON ADULT EDECATION .. 51


- 2


THE ROLE OF FUNDAMENTAL AND ADULT EDUCATION, IN THE REALIZATION
OF OUR EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES'
by
VENANCIO TRINIDAD
Assistant Director
In the manner of the Secretary, I may start my remarks this afternoon by asking: What can I say now that you, as tried educators and
true, do not already know? After the inspiring and illuminating addresses of Secretery Evangelista, Undersecretory Putong, and Director
Pangilinan; after your committee workshops that, I have observed, have
often been conducted with the fire und fury choracteristic of men of
conviction intent to essert the truth as they see it; yes, after your
exhaustive discussions, dissertations, and deliberstions in open convention — after all these, what can I talk about non that may serve
es a glimmer of light, as it were, in our search for adequate solutions
to the problems of community living that press upon us? But I am a
good soldier of the profession, ond must hasten to comply with my
assignment.
Ladies and gentlemen: Our status as an independent state, our
position as a respected member in the family of nations, has opened to
us new horizons that inevitably must nffect, for weal or for ves, the
foundotions of our national life. If this is so, ours now is the task,
I believe, to reexamine our program of citisenship training in school
and see whether the traits we teach, let alone the methods we employ in
teaching them, meet the exigencies of livine in our modern world. Now
citizenship training, in ita basal espects, not to soy its broad connotations, cannot be divorced from the program of fundamental and adult
Address at the Annual Convention of Division Superintendents of
Schoels, Baguio, May 7 - 12, 1951


SELINAR ON FUNDIMENTAL AND ADULT EDUCATION


The celebrstion of the Golden Jubilee of the Philippine Educational
Systen will be held in Manila and in the provincea from December 10 to 16,
1951. One of the importont fentures of the Jubilee is a Seminar on Fundamental and Adult Education te be held in Manila from December 6 to 12 with
delegates and observers coming mostly from the provinces as members. The
Seminar has for its theme, "Enriching Comaunity Life for Freedom."
The plonning committee of the Seminar bos divided the program into six
ereas of community life, nemely, literacy, economic ond vocational activities,
health educstion, cultural and recreational life, cheracter and civic training,
and machinery and organization for fundamental and adult education. The
outcome from the study and deliberation ly the different ares-groups assigned
to mork on the six aspects of community life is expected to give necessary
orientation and practical training to delegates and observers and to enable
them to implement in their activities in the field the concepts of fundamental
and adult education within the framemork of the Unesco rrogrem.
Aside from the educators who are forerunners in the movement of fundamental and adult education in the Philippines and uho vill lead in the study
ond discussions of the areas of the Seminer, there bre other leaders of
thought with special qualifications in seciel, economic, moral, health and
cultural life who will act as resource persons and contribute broad viens
on the objectives of fundamental and adult education in the Philippines. It
is hoped the Seminor will give the participants greater insight into the
fundamental sims of this movement and equip them vith more effective techniques and knonledge of democratic processes of cerrying out fundamental and
adult education for the enrichment of Fhilippine community life.


- 3-


education which is the subject of your convention this year. To divorce
it from such a program, to deny the identity between the two, is tantamount to courting its failure. Citizenship training, indeed, must
start from mhat the Director has called "grassroot levels"; from such
levels it must gather the sturdy 'threads to weave into its pattern;
from them it must derive its inspirations, its incentives, and its
imperatives.
In this address before, us, the Secretary of Education stressed whast
he believed to be three pressing needs of public education in the Philippines today, namely, the need of further gearing the public schools to
the economic development plans of the government, the need of further
vitalizing the methods of cheracter edueationin the public schools,
and the need of further strengthening the concept of one world among
the Filipino youth. That these are desirable points of emphasis in our
educational efforts, now and in the immediate yeors ahead, everyone in
this convention will readily admit. It is our consensus — nay, our
unanimous belief —- that upon the proper and effective imlementation
of the goals which the Secretory, in his pnimitable elocution, has set
will depend in large measure the speedy recovery of our country from
the difficulties that, through circumstances not of its onn choosing,
have come upon it, and concomitantly the speedy realization of its
ideals as a republicin a world torn opert by conflicting ideologies.
In the light of this convention, the paremount question seems to
be in what way or to what extent we can achieve such goals through our
program of fundamental and adult education. Stated otherwise, the
question seeks to knon hoy this program may serve to advance the
frontiers of life of our common people insofar as the economic, ethical,
or political phases of that life are concerned.


--
On the Vocational Phase


Members of the convention, our Director has spoken in eloquent
terms of the achievements of our conmunity-centered schools particularly
in matters more or less vocstional. To that praise may I have your
indulgence to add mine. It is our hope that the activities vhich these
schools have initiated or otherwise promoted in order to invigorate our
economic life vill centinue in high gear. Such is our hore for it is
only nhen we succeed in strengthening and stabilizing our national
Ri
economy shall ve have succeeded in lifvina the cultural, intellectual,
and spirituel tone of life in our rural areas. But — and here wve may
with reason or discretion panse — how long can we fondle that hope?
I need not, at this moment, dwell on the common impresslon that
our youth as a rule shy away fron occupational or vocational pursuits.
To most of them the desirable goul is the liberal professions — lan,
medicine, or engineering — in mhich, rightly or wrongly, they believe
they vill have greoter chances for success in life, not to mention better
or wider oprortunities for the acquisition of a socially-acceptable
personality. Against such a background, against such an atmosphere
which, unfortunately, is beina abetted ly the parents themselves, ve
may not be able to accomplish, as me mish, our desire to sear further
the “ublic schools to the economic developmant plans of the government.
For obviously it is not enough that ve intro luce the youth in school
into the world of pork, equip them mith a sizable stock of manual or
monipulative skills, and teach them to produce articles of utilitarian
volue. The more fundamental thing, it seens to me, is for the youth
to centinue to pursue, out of school, the vocational interests which
they have developed in school and eventually to enter upon occupetions
that vill contribute to the material development of our ocunery.


- 5
Now this brings us to the question of so changing our concept of
work that our boys and girls will consider the pursuit of a vocational
2

course as much an honor as the pursuit of a liberal or cultural
profession. In this, I believe, the community-centered school can and
should come in handy. Through its activities in fundamental and adult
education we may bring to bear upon our masses the weight of our conviction thet it is about time for them to rid themselves of the belief
acquired as a result of our four or five centuries of subjugation that
labor of the brann is not so sterling es labor of the brain. By persuesion and by precept, ne should make them comprehend that any such
belief is erroneous; that it is born of a wrong or distorted spprecistion of values; and worse, that it is a lingering sign of a
complex of inferiority that for long has hung heavy upon the life of
our people.
On the Cheracter Education Phase
In regard to the need of further vitalizing training in character,
there can be no doubt that our program of fundamental and adult eduestion can be of invaluoble and inestimable service. Character, as the
great Goethe once said, is not formed in isolation -- and, I may add,
does not operate in a vacuum. It takes its shape in the sommunity of
men of all sorts — nay, in the muck and mire of the world. In the
same way, perhaps, that one may possess a formal religion and yet in
prectice have no God, so may one know by heart all the traits that
constitute the sum and substance of desirable conduct, and still not
possess the character that meets the requirements of the society to
which he belongs or in which he moves about. For character is nothing
ifit is not functional; it is nothing but a presumption of goodness
if it does not find any consistent or continual application in the


--


varied sctivities and realities of life. Truly, it will not do to have
s child act courteoualy in school and rudely in the street, or work
industriously in comection with his lessons in class but lazily and
leisurely with regard to his household chores. Not a double, but a
single, stendard of behavior should be our gosl. Thus, in effect,
must the community—centered school serve as the practice ground —
the testing territory, if you wish -- for the virtues that we teach
in school.
At this point the matter of the curriculum obtrudes itself. I
agree to the proposition that while the curriculum should help improve
the community, there should be st the same time the maximum utilization
of the community resources for the enrichment and vitalization of the
curriculum. In other words, there should be an effective interaction
between the school and the community resources to the end that a program
which is mutually beneficial'to the school and the community mey be
evolved.
I wish to touch on one more thought before I leave this topic. If
the community is to refleot the program of character education in the
school, if itis to mirror the virtues that the students have been
taught to acquire, it follows that it should creste a favorable climste,
es it nere, for the exercise of those virtues. And this, presupposes
that the people in the community themselves should realize the transcendent value of character and in every possible way live life as it
should be lived.
On the World Citizenship Phagg
In the matter of effectively grappling with the last pressing
problem touched upon in the address of the Secretary — that of further
strengthening the one-world concept among our youth, I believe again


--
that the community-centered school, through its program of fundamental
and adult education, may well hold the key. Any important undertaking
sterts from a humble beginning, and it should not be surprising to
acknovledge that a great idea like world citizenship can suoceed only
if it gathers nourishment and momentum from such a simple, serene
source as a rurel community. Offhand this meens that to the extent
in which we develop among our youth — nay, emong our acults — such
pride in our rural communities es sill impel ther, sith enerny and
enthusiasm, to improve conditi na in thoan cormunities, enly to that
extent can we develop genuine aporeciction f the ides of universal
collaboration. For certainly, it will be an impingement on our sense
of proportion te ask our people to ponder on the problems of the world
before they have seriously attended to the problems of their respective
places of origin. Like cherity, citizenshi; must begin in one's immediste environment. He cannot be a true and self-respecting internationalist who is not, first and foremost, a wod nationalist.
Nom what do I want te drive home at this juncture? Simply this!
Thet in view of the role vhich me ure expectad to play in the affairs
of the world, there is the more reason, the more urgency noy, to push
through in ever-inoressing vigor the prrogram of fundemental and adult
educstion about which we have been talkina all long at this convention.
It is pleasant to knon, in this connaction, that shereas in 1939 our
percentage of illiteracy, wes 51.2 per cent, in 1948, Lased on reports
from 37 provinces, this percentage came down to 40 or 41. This notable
gain, far much of which the public schools must clain credit, is a
happy indication of progress and should serve as a vital encouragement
to greater efforts on our pert in this ares of our work as educators.


8


And now, as I prepare to close this brief speech, may I bespeak
your decision or determination, spropos of our program of fundamental
and adult education, henceforth to attend, together and in unison, to
all the three points of emphasis which our Secretary has presented
to this convention. Let not one phase be neglected, over-emphasized,
or sacrificed for the other: Remember that our program of education
encompasses more than physical emprovements — that it envisions more
than home beautificstion, toilet construction, or orderly care of the
family projects. That program has for its ultimate sim to shape up
for the better the modes of thinking of the individuel, stir his irer
compulsions, ana lead him to reach for the high, immutable values.
The fear has been expressed in this convention that this program
of education entails so much time, effort, and responsibility, and
for that reason ve are not being fair to the teachers who will of
necessity bear the brunt of the work. To my mind, any kind of nork is
light or heavy depending upon one's emotional attitude tonards it.
If one is interested in the work, if he discovers in it an urge to
display his talenta for doing good, he will find the work light. If,
on the other hand, one sees no meaning for him in the work, he vill
consider it an imposition. To make our program of fundamental and
adult education interesting, stimulating and absorbing to the rank
and file of our teachers so that they will participate in it figuretively with a singing heart — in short, to arouse the proper emotional
sttitude towards it, is the function of the school administrator.
My friends: Every year, since the first convention of division
superintendents of schools was held in 1903, our key school officials


-9-
and teachers in the field have been faced with a challenge. And
always, with courage and visdom and vision, and to the undying gratitude
of our people, they have hurdled the challenge. Will we, in our day,
hurdle ours?
I thank you.


---O UO ---


Democracy is government by talk - tyo
kinds of talk. On the one hand, talk directed to the electorate by the  ublicist
and the rolitical leader, te vhom we look
for informtion and advice. On the other
hand, talk among the voters, as they assimilate and digest the information placed
before them and meke up their minds on
public questions. Both kinds of talk are
necessary to the formation of sound public opinion.


- Milliam E. Utterback


- 19 -


THE LUMBAN COHMUNITY-SOHOOL MISSION
By Roman F. Lorenzo
Division Superintendent of Schools for Laguna
Ipon receipt of the letter of the Acting Director of Publio
Schools, dated July 19, 1951, informing the Division Office of the
selection of Laruna to be ene of the centers of the community school
mission in the Philippines, the Division Superintendent lost no time
in designeting the town of Lumben vhere tlu cultural missim was to
start its work.
A three-day orientation course was conducted in Santa Cruz,
the capital of the province, by Professor Luis G. Medellin Mino of
UNESOO which started on July 16, 1951. This course was attended by
the members of the conmunity school mission who were selected from the
various government agencies like the Bureaus of Flant Industry, Animal
Industry, Health, and Public Schools, and the Red Cress and SWA.
Professor Medellin distributed pamrhlets dealing on the work of the
mission; one, a working plan of the mission applicable in the Philippines and the other was concerned with the organisotion and conduct of
the cultural missions in Mexico. Lurinn the course, there was a lively
discussion on the various aspects of the mission's work. Professor
Medellin made an ocular inspection of Lumban, and right there and then
was convinced of the correct choice as to the place. The following
is the composition of the mission:
Mr. Roman F. Lorenzo ............ Administration and Supervision
Mr. Francisco San andres Assistant
Prof. Luis G. Medellin Nino Adviser
Mr. Diosdado G. Jimenez ......... Chief
Mr. Glicerio Y. Gaza ............ Literacy
Dr. Nerciso Cosio
Mr. Nicomedes Reyes )............ Farm and Animal Industry


-11-


Mr. Froncisco C. Befnerdo .......... Shop and Household Industry
including Plastic Arts and
Small-Scalo Fishing
Mr. Cosme San Pedro
Mr. Procopio Yasona )............. Phy sical and Recreational
Dirgotors
Dr. Viconte Torrechente
Miss Felisa N. Cadayonu ) ........P. Health'Workers
Miss Besilia Malis ................. Home Economics Worker
Mrs, Felicidad Gstus
Rev. Alejandro Lualheti ).......... Social and Music Leaders
At the outset, the mission was faced mith odds. It may not be
amiss to mention here that the organization of the mission at first
wes not looked upon with favor by meny of the inhabitants, of Lumban.
Their reasons were premised on the belief that it would expose the
shortcomings, veaknesses, and other defects of the town. However, the
indifference to the mission was remedie" throuh the explanations made
by the Division Surerintendont of Schools who stressed on the ways
and possibilities of improving the economic, cultural, sanitary and
occupational aspects of community life through the free assistance of
the various technical men of the different agencies of the government.
The explanations were accepted, good naturedly and a change of attitude
for the better mas noticed.
The people of Lumban, in general, are very optimistic in the
suecess of the work.
The folloving are the objectives of the mission with particular
reference to Lumban:
1. To promote the health and sanitary conditions.
2. To promote the occupstional activities.
3. To promote literacy.
4. To inculcate the proper use of leisure time.
5. To help elevete the economic life of the community.
6. To encourage initiative, civic responsibility, and self
and group development.


A survey of the community along oocupational, sanitary, and
economic and cultural lines, was conducted by the teachers on July
13, 14, and 15, 1951. Befpre this was made, the community was divided
into fourteen "puroks" and at least tuo teachers vere assigned to make
the survey of each "purok". The folloving is the summarized statistical dota which will be used as the basis of our activities:


m
GE
SUMMARILED STMAISLICAL DATA OF THE SURVEY
CONDUCTED IN LUMBAN


1. Populstion ....... 6841
2. Number of families ................ 1200
3. Number of houses ..... 1072
A. Number of houses in ounor's lat .... 742
5. Number of houses in rente! lot ..... 330
6. Number of houses and yard properly
fenced ........... 381
7. Number of houses vith toilets....... 402


e Incaielo wetes .... 1


(a) Others. 9
8. Source of nater supaly .............. Faucet
9. Dominant occupation ................. Farming and Fishing


10, Crops raised - Vegetables, koot Crops, Corn, Bananas and
fruits


11. Number of pigs ................. 1499
12. Number of chiokons ............ 3141
13. Number of ducks ... 974.
14. Number of geats ..s. 35
15. Number of beoks and newspoper owned
by the family:
(s) Tagalog .... 602
(b) English ............3141
(c) Others ........... 105


15.. Number, of illiterntes above 8 years old .. 319


The results of the survey were discussed mith the members of the
mission and the community council.


The different "puroks" were given cotchy names as


Takin Silim, Madaling aran, Dapit Hanon and such historical names as
Davao, Lumbang, Maytalang, Pinagbakahan, and Bagong Silang.


- 13.
On July 26, the community school council was formed. In this council, at least a delegate from each "purok" was represented. In the
meeting, members of the mission were introduced to the council members
and an open forum was held. Then there was an election of officers and
the following composed the councili


Dr. Iseac Austria .....


ident
esi
Pre
.


Atty. Tomes Anonuevo ................ Vice Fresident


Mr. Eladio Macalalag .....


Secretery-Treasurer
.


Eng. Conrado del Rosario .....


rublic helations Officer



Mr. Manuel Almario ...


...... Nember


Mr. Glicerio Tabla ...........


...... Member


Mr. Fernondo Villegas .....


Me mber


Mr. Francisco Lagrada ......
Mr. Victor Fovi ....


...... Hember
Member



Mr. Juan Llantos ..


Hember



Mr. Simeon Lagrosa ...


...... Member


Miss Guillerma Bacsafra .......


Member



Mr. Eligio Macalos ...
Mr. Damaso Gaza ..


..... Member
...... Member


Mr. Francisco Ferrer ................ Member


No stone mas left unturned in the preparation of the inauguration
of the community school mission scheduled on August 6, 1951. People
from all walks of life contributed their share to make the affair a
success. Streets and houses mere decorated. The cleaning of the surroundings of houses was done before the inauguration. Arches vere
--
constructed and a temporary stage where the program would be held ves
built. These were undertoken by the teachers, PTA members, members of
the council and others. The whole toun was in festive mood.
The inauguration was witnessed and porticipeted in by the Honoroble,
the Secretary of Education, the Acting Director of fublic Schools, the
superintendents from the neighboring provinces, the provincial officials
headed by the Provincial Governor, the municipal mayors of the province,
PTa officials and the school officials and teachers. The Secretary,


14


with his party, mas met at the foot of Lumban bridge and thence marched
to the town plaza, where the progran was held. Approximately 1,000
people attended the pregram. Most of the numbers were contributed by
the members of the various civio organizations. The highlighta of the
program sere the speech of the Secretary of Education and the installation of the officers of the Community School Council. Arnis exhibition,
"duplo" and folk dences were shown. llalfray during the Secretary's
speech, it ruined hard but this did not dampen the enthusiasm of the
people.
Aside from school officials and teachers, the local civic organizations that are taking active part in the work of the mission are the
FranSeBantsa, Lumban PTA, the El Buncal, the Lumbanion and the TayoTayo Club.
The folloving community leaders also are taking active perticipation in the movement. They are Mr. Procopio Yasona, Rev. Alejondro
Lualhati, Hessrs. Eladio Maoopagal, Juen Llantos, Seturnino Abadier,
Francisco Ferrer and Atty. Tomas Anonucvo to mention a few.


15


PILOT PROJECTS FOR MODEL COMMUMITIES IN
NEGROS ORIENTALI
By Tomas de Castro
Division Superintendent of Schools
The division of Negros Oriental vill undertake to make adult
education as one of the principal points of emphasis in all schools
in the division during the school year 1951-1952. In view of the
faot that an adult education progran has been in operation in the
division during the past three years and that most teachers are already acqhainted with the nature and scope of the work, it is eorpected that a more intensive activity vill be performed tis year.
The progran here broadly outlined should be worked out in greater
detail by supervisors and principals for their respective districts
and schools.
ma
PILOT PROJECI
With the hope of insuring tangible results in the work, it is
suggested that every munfcipality shall put up a pilot project (model
barrio project) with the whole teaching force of the town acting in
one as organizer and enabler. Such project may be a one-whole-barrio
or any definite-territory affair wherein improvement may be effected
in the economic, health and sanitation, citizenship, recreational,
and social-cultural life of the people. The outcome of the project
should make the barrio (or the community, as the case may be) a model
for the other barrios to emulate.


1
From Division Memoranduna No. 18, s. 1951


- 16 -


The following goala are set to be secomplished in every pilot
projeot:
(1) To make every home in the barrio clean, properly beautified,
provided with water facilities, sanitary toilet, and pen
end shelter for domestic animals;
(2) To make the barrio free from unproductive home-yards,
filthy spots, standing water, and astray animals;
() To make every home undertake regularly at least one productive
avocation (leisure-time occupation) as vegetable gardening,
poultry-raising, piggery, or any handicraft such as basket-,
furnicure, bukia-making, mat and hat-weaving, sinamay-,
pina cloth-, and cotton cloth-weaving, etc.
(4) To install in the barrio a social center that includes a
reading center and provisions or outfits for athletic games;
(5) To make the barrio 100% literate;
To make the barrio free from crime and misbehavior;
To encourage prompt payment of taxes;
(8) To encourage the organizstion of associations as civio,
cultural, economic, otc.;
(9) To have good means of travel and conmunicstion; and
(10) To be able to present models of good homes, stores, poultry
projects, piggeries, home gardens, etc.
Specialization of Schoola: So important is community service
and participation in adult eduention that (a) no teacher is to be considered efficient, especially in “Group B” unless she has, done her
part through enthusiastic participation in community betterment and
adult educstion work, and (b) no school child may be allowed to pass
courses in social studies, home economics, vecstional courses, language,
character and health, and other subjects vithout satisfactory evidence
of the application of learning in these subjects to actual community life.
n
Visitation Districta: Every town or borrio should be divided into
as many visitstion districts as there are teachers. One visitation
district shall be assigned to one teacher, or a group of such districts
to a group of mutuelly helpful teachers. A map of the barrio, the
visitation districts, end the names of the teachers in charge shall be


-17


made end posted-on-the bulletineboard orpested-in-an album-thaet may
be labeled "Gommunity—School Album."
Conmunity—School Album: Every school should have an album containing pictures, clippings, schedules and programs of lectures, adult
educstion class records, copies of memorandums, etc., which at a glance
will show the activities and achievements of the school in regard to
the community improvement and adult education work. This album may be
labeled "OOMMUNITY—SCHOOL ALBUM", and should be made readily available
for all visitors, teachers, parents, and others in order to publicize
the movement.


District Council: Every barrio, or better still every visitation
district should endeavor to organize a council which shall be composed
mostly of the most influential parents of the district. The council
shall have a chairman, a vice-chairman, secretary-tressurer, and other
officers. The teacher acts as executive officer of the district. Among
the functions of this council shall be:
a. To help in the dissemination of information and to motivate
group actiong
b. To co-operste in the follow-up of community projects;
c. To co-operate in home visitation;
d. To facilitate teacher-perent-pupil contacts;
e. To plan and organize activities as will be needed for the
promotion of adult educstion and community improvement;
f. To set the standards for ahd designate model homes, stores,
gardens, piggeries, etc., for each month;
g. To co-operate in various ways so that community-school
projecta may be carried out efficiently and with maximum
of educational benefit to perents and other adults.
Enlistment of the Co-operation of Parenta: The initiative of the
schools may serve as a means of sterting and speeding up the development
of activities and gommunity programs, but school leadership should not
be relied upon as a permanent arrangement. All efforts should be exerted


- 18 -.
in order that, parenta mill ba made to-assume-more end more responsibility.
This can be done through the enlistment of the cooperation of active members
of P.T.A.'s,municipal officials, and other civic-spirited citizens who
can help in the program. The ultimate aim is to have the peonle assume
the responsibility for the imrrovement of the community.
Mobilization of all High School Students and elder Elementary
Pupila: Every high school student and every intermediate pupil is expected to undertake community projects. It is not necessar, for all
students and pupils to undertake literacy work. Some of them may be
allowed to undertake other community projects in connection with the
vocational, citizenship-civic, and cultural-social aspects of adult
education. Every school child is supposed to take an active part in
health and sanitation campaigns.
High school students may undertake community projects in connection
with the preparation and distribution of adult education reading materials
and publication. Reporting may also be considered as worthy activity
in lieu of literacy work.
Development of Home Industries: The Industrial Arts and Home
Economics teachers should devise ways and means of propagating to the
perents better practices in farming, fishing, handicrafts, commerce,
weaving and other common industries.
m)
he Co-operative Movement: Cooperative stores may be organized in
towns in order that articles produced by the schools may be given proper
display and sold to the general public. A nominal charge of, say lO5,
may be allowed to maintain the store and improve its facilities and
service. Thus it is possible that some local materials may be used


I -


and the productive talent of some parents may be developed and made
profitable.
Development of Community Libraries: Efforts should be exerted to
make the community-school reading centers into regular libraries. The
following requirements once met, will entitle a cormunity library to sid
from the Bureau of Public Libraries:
(s) A reading room
(b) Reading tables with at least 20 chairs
(o) Bookcases for books and periodicals
(d) A caretaker or librarian
If these requirements are met, a library may be recognized and, upon
approval, will be entitled to receive books and other reading materials
from the Dureau of Publie Libreries.


----O OO ----
Promoters of adult education believe,
of course, that there should be community
centers in which education and recrestion
and reading and music and discussion of
public questions and other activities for
the betterment of ordinary living can be
carried on.


Lyman Bryson


ADULT EDUCATION ACTITITIES OF THE
BATANGAS WEST HIGI SCHOOL
From the Report of Jose R. de Leon, Principal
The adult educstion activities of the Batangas Fest High School
consisted of the following aspects: literacy, sanitation, health,
and home beautification. As early as August, preperatory to implementing the various objectives of the community service program,
teachers were sent out to conduct a preliminary survey to determine
the needs and problems of around 600 homes. Included in the items
for the survey were: the number of rersons in the family; the income
of the earning members of the family; the general home condition
relative to home beautificstion and cleonliness of the surroundings;
and the number of illiterates in esch home,
As soon as the preliminary survey was conducted, a committee of
teachers discussed ways, and means to carry on the work of helping
solve the community's problems and the survey was and still is the
problem. of illiteracy among adults. Forthwith, a elass for terching
the illiterates how to read and writs even their numes only wes organized during the early part of September, 1950. There wele about
30 students who enrolled and were able bo carry on for .boit a nonth
until the fishing sesson came and the anrollees, most'y fishermen
had to stop because of the more urgent call of making a living. The
National Language teachers and the vriter look turns three times a
week-in-theevening in teaching these adults.
In order to break the-monotony of learning hom So write, the
writer, at least once a week, reviemed the-imporiant, events of the


- 21-


veek, local and foreign, and even translated into National Language
reports about scandals, grafts and corruptions in the government as
bared in the feature articles in the issues of the Free Press and the
deilies. In the same manner, the writer read literature, on Communism and Democracy, follomed by open discussion on the merits and
defects of the two ideologies. Much interesting comments and discussion took place during such recitation and it was the writer's
satisfaction at the end of the period of every meeting that the poor
people who attended the class would still rather embrace the democratic way of life in spite of its defects. The writer exercised
sufficient tact in reading materials and drawing conclusions therefrom.
In fact, most of the conclusions were advanced by the students themselves after the writer has merely read interesting and pertinent
paragraphs on the two conflicting ways of life.
Dut it was not in the attempt to teach the adults how to write,
at least their names alone, that the high school undertook to improve
the general conditions of the community. In promoting sanitation
and cleanliness, the teachers and students also took an active part
by checking up of the homes previously visited to find out how much
improvement was due since the previous visit. Some students were
even assigned to inspect homes to see how the interior decorstions,
if there were any st all, mere in keeping with those taught in the
H. E. classes. Sometimes, as later visits revealed, there were
homes which followed the suggestions of the students in matter of
hanging pictures and curtains and arranging furniture. There were
some housewives, however, who would rather have the time-honored


-2


practice of setting household objecti just as they found them as rar
as they could remember. The report of the students on this stubborn
clinging to tradition was often interesting. The students were
warned not to insist on any change should they find the occupants
unwilling to follow suggestions. It is because of this exercise of
tact probably that the work of the high school in helping improve
the community is considered by all as really something different,
sincere, and earnest.
The high school, through the help of the H. E. Department, also
sttempted to help poor families improve their diet by teaching them
how to prepare simple foods. Although success in this phase of the
work stillremains to be seen, the consolation is that poor familles
are fast-realizing that the high school has embarked on all efforts
calculated to improve their general living conditions.
In preparation for the next year's more intensive Adult Educstion
Program, the area under the school's charge was divided into "purok"
or zones, following the example in Cagayan. The whole erea was divided
into 14 zones, with each zone under the direot charge of a leader
and the responsibility of a teacher. All the zones, were, in turn
formed into a United Zone Organizstion, whose officers were elected
by the zone leaders in a formal election held in the Administration
Duilding sometime in the early part of April.
To promote the morthy use of leisure, at least three times during
the year, specialized games, particularly volleyball, were played
either between the faculty and outside teams composed of adults or
between outside teams invited to play on the high school grounds,
with equipment supplied by the-high school.—Such games are much in


- 23 -
need in this area where the fisher folk are prone to while away their
time in gambling nooks while waiting for the fishing months.
Then, in connection with the food production campaign, the
Agricultural Department of the high school gave out seeds of eggplants, tomstoes, and patola to the inmediate neighborhood that tended
backyard gardens. It was only to families living along the shore
that the agricultural extension service did not render any help at
all in viem of the condition of the soil there. Besides giving out
a few seeds, the two teachers also gave pointers on the growing of
the seeds distributed.


---O UO ---


The orucial question facing those
interested in the promotion of community
organization for adult education is always,
in the last analysis, this: How may the
means be provided for the consistent
maintenance of this necessary process
of balancing a given community's adult
education resources against its needs?


- Glen Burch


-24.
THE CADBAGE PROJECT OF BACTAD
Dy Fructuoso Manantan
Head Teacher, Bactad Elementary School
Urdaneta, Pangasinan
A farmer is as patriotie as the soldier who goes to the
battlefield. In Dactad, I have been told of the plan of a certain.
farmer to engage in cabbage just after the rice harfest in November.
After my inquiries, I found out that the cabbage project mentioned
to me was no longer in its blue-print stage but it was made into
a reality. When I reached the home of the farmer, I began to ask
him about his cabbage project. The farmer narrated to me his
experiences in connection with the cabbage project he had in Nueva
Ecija. He said that he used to have frequent visitations in Nueva
Ecija because he had some relatives there. He said he learned the
technique of cabbage culture from the place in addition to the
knowledge he learned from school.
I wanted to know from him the following pointa: (1) How
many hectares were actually planted to his present cabbage plantation?
(2) What mere the different varieties of cabbage? () How many men
vere employed to s hectare of cabbage plantation? () Rhat were
the terms or conditions he gave to his laborers who helped him in
the cabbage plantation? (5) How many hours were spent by the laborers,
if there be any in his cabbage plantation?. (ol From his experience,
which one yields most in income, that of mongo as the second crop
following the rice harvest, or the cabbage?
The Bactad farmer-had planted with cabbages-about six and


-2a.


a half hectares of land during the later pert of November, 1950,
just after the "inepostol" variety harvest. He had no rice land
except his "bancag" in that irrigated area, so he secured the six
and a half hectares by lease method, paying a rental of eighty
pesos per hectare. He told me that from his experience in cabbage
culture learned from school and actual experiences in other places
he visited, the "Early Flat Dutch" can be harvested after three
months and the "Late Flat Duich" after four months. Another good variety is the "Early Jersey Nakefield.” According to him, cobbage
culture is easy to tackle although some people believe it to be
difficult. He said he employed six men, preferably his relatives.
Out of the six men, three men were employed to do the spraying
of D.D.T. insecticide, while the rest do the irrigation and needing and proper cultivation. He said that cabbage culture needs
meticulous care as te (1) irrigation, (2) weeding, (3) spraying
insecticide, (4) guerding against enimals and outside agencies.
Inasmuch as most of his laborers are his relatives, he gave out the
following terms: laborers were alloned to get from 202 to 302 of the
actual value of cabbages harvested; giving them further concessions
as to the number of heads of cabbages consuned in their homes, free
of charge. With this share system he said, the laborers got around
from P300.00 or more per hectare depending unon the success of the
project.
With reference to the planting of mongo as secondary crop,
the farmer told me that from one hectare of land, the average horvest
is from ten to fifteen cavans of mongo. The low yield may be attributed


to the following factors: (1) Crude method employed in the planting
of mongo; no plowing and harrowing. (2) No weeding. (3) Laok of
interest in the mengo project. Comparing it with a cabbage farm,
the average farmer gets five thousand minimum and ten thousand,
maximun, although there are times when more heads of cabbage could
be harvested if not affected ty the presence of worms and frequency
of typheons. Frem this he said that a cabbage farmer gets from six
and a half hectares around ₱1,C00.00.
The experience shown by that farmer had encouragod the other
farmers in Bactad to consider seriously an opportunity for future
investment in cabbage project the coming year. The people discovered
the difference in the amount of harvest between the monga and the
cabbage. The other farmers have also concluded that it is a poor
proposition te lend their lots; but they should cultivate them by
themselves. The cobbage plantation in Bactad, althouch it vas in
its experimental stage, played an important role in providing more
income to the people. Desides the increased production, it also
increased to a grenter extent, the employment of mere laborers. In
short, the living conditions of the people vere elevated on sccount
of this project.


-2 -


ADULT EDUCATION WORK OF THE BAYEAY
NATIONAL AGICULTURAL SCHOOL.
Dy Dominador D. Clemente
Superintendent, Baybay Hational
Agricultural School
This school was in the past always short of palay for the maintenance of the students and teachers, It was noticed though that the
production per hectare was higher than the production of the farmers
in the surrouading localities. The problen of increasing production
in the same area for the purpose of raising enough for the school
population became the biggest problem of the school. If this problem
could be solved, its solution may be the key to the improvement of
rioe production in places having the same soil and climatic conditions
as those of the Baybay liational Agricultural School.
It was decided to introduce two plantings during tho year with
the uso of fertilizers. The first planting harvested in Hovember,
1949 gave 1,740.43 cavans of palay fron 34 heotares without fertilizer
and the second planting harvested in April, 1950 gave 1,830.36 cavans
of palay from 28 hectares or 51.13 cavans and 65.30 cavans per hectare
respectively for the two plantings. The cost of the armoniun sulfate
fertilizers (100 Kg. applied to each hectare) was P28,20 and subtracting this amount from P142.60, the value of tho production increase,
would give a net gain of P1l4.40 per hectare if each cavan of palay is
valued at P10.00. The second planting was so successful that nany
farmers cane to this schbol requesting for information as to what was
dono to the second planting to insure the high yiold.
One farmer whon the school helped during tho second planting
season reported that from a parcel of his rice field which usually


yielded 18 cavans, he realized 38 cavans when he ap-lied fertilizer
and followed the other suggestions given him by the school.
Due to the many requests for help from farmers in the production
of rice, a more extensive extension work in palay culture was undertaken at the beginning of the school year 1950-1951. Farmers mere
permitted to come to the school for conferences. They were permitted
to buy selected seeds and exchange with any palay they had meight for
meight. Up to December, 1950 no less than 150 cuvens of ralay seeds
were sold or exchanged. The Trovincial Aricultural Surervisor cooperated
in the extension work of the school by bringin; 60 cavans of selected
seeds to the farmers in northern Leyte.
In order to improve the agricultural practices of the farmers
in the different barrios within s radius of seven kilometers frem the
Baybay National Agricultural School as center, demonstration lots were
established in eight barrios. The cooperators vere requested to select
the poorest rice land in their care to be the demonstration lots. It
had to be proven to the farmers that even poor lands could be made to
pay with proper care and treotment. One student was assigned to each
farmer to give advice on the preperation of the land, planting the
seedlings, application of fertilizers, and contral of insect pests
and diseases.
Nhen the transplanted seedlings in the demonstration lots were
only a month old, Assistant Director of Public Schools, Mr. Venancio
Trinidad and Superintendenta Agustin Panares and Gaspor Suguitan of
Surigao and Cebu respectively were brought to see the demenstration
lots in January, 1950. It was observed by them that the palay in


-9


the different plots were much better than those in the surrounding
paddies. A month after, Dr. Gilbert S. Perez, Chief of the Vocational
Education Division, Buresu of Public Schools, and Dr. Harold S. Tate,
Fulbright Professor of Vocational Education visited this school. They
were shown the palay demonstration lots of the school in the different
barrios as well as the gourami pond constructed and seeded with the
help of our teachers.
One day in July, 1950, the horticulture teacher of this school
gave the information that he was harvesting for the last time from a
four year old one hectare pineapple plot and thet he did not have any
more place to plant the suckers estimated to he no less than 20,000.
In former years, the plot vould have been ploved and the suckers
thrown to the sea or in pits to rot. After conferring with the teachers
and discussing with them that the present -olicy of the Bureau of
Public Schools is to help the common farmers improve their lot, it
was decided to distribute the suckers free of charge to schools and
farmers.
Since this pineapple is of the queen variety and it is much better
then the native verieties and swceter than the Hawaiian pineapple,
it was presumed that after broedcasting the news to the farmers that
they could get pineapple suckers free of charge, they mould go to the
school and ask for the suckers. For one month, no one came except some
well-to-do farmers. The policy of distribution vas then changed by
bringing the suckers to the farmers in their omn barrios. The barrio
head teachers or principals were requested to help in the distritution.
bhen the farmers leorned of the free distribution they became se enthusiastic abcut planting more pincapples. They demanded more than what


-30-


the school truck could carry. Esch farmer was given not more than 50
suckers except those vho own bigger areas and who consequently were
given more.
Up to Decomber, 1950, no less than 25,000 suckers vere distributed to 12 elementary schools, seven secondary schools, two religious
institutions, tyo constabulary camps, one agrioultural experiment
station, and 135 farmers. It is expected that the schools given
pinespple suckers vill serve as distributing centers in the yeers to
come.
This school hes a coffee plantation of about three hectares.
During the early part of the liberstion of the Fhilippines and up to
1948, the berries were never harvested as it was more asonomical to
buy imported coffee than harvesting the berries. Under the coffee trees
ere no less than one million seedlinas which would only be destroyed
if not to be distributed. The school has now distributed to different
fermers about 3,000 coffee seedlings.
Other phases of adult educstion work of the -aybay National
Agricultural School consisted of the folloning:
1. Encouragement of gourami fish culture.
2. Demonstration in dairy projects.
3. Castration of carabaos and cattle.
4. Extension work in smine breeding.
5. Control of poultry and swine diseases.


31-


RESODRCE MATERIALS FOR ADULT EDUCATION
AND COMMUNITY-SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT FROGRAM
There are four important Philippine resource materials for Adult
Educotion and Community-School improvement program which are considered
valuable not only for the information and enlightenment they give on
the original development and steady gronth of adult educstion in the
Philippines end the nidening secpe of activities of the communityschool program, but also for the rich contents of various techniques
and procedures proven or on trial for implerenting the objectives of
adult education and the conmunity schcol.
The four resource materials as a whole is a trestment of adult
education in a local setting but they contain, by and large, the nenest
trends and principles of technique of fundanental and adult eduestion
within the framework of the Unesco program. Ne are exploring them in
connection with our fundemental and adult education work through the
cormunity school. There are in these materials adaptations from broad
fundemental processes and procedures with which me are trying to solve
our local adult educotion problems or to implement the objectives of
our program of enriching Philiprine community life.
These resource materials which are listed belon hove been norked
out with cooperative efforts in the field by educators vho are actually
engaged in adult education and community imprevement pregrem and whe
sre recognized leaders end suthorities in this movement:
1. Thia Is Qur Community School by Superintendent Jose V. Aguilar, 1950
2. Education in fiural Areas for Better Laving, 1950 Yearbook published
ty ine frillrrine lesociotion of sehool Suseraintendents
3. Little Democracias by Superintendent Juan C. Laya, 1951
X. Imbroving the Cormupity-Schuel Eroeran by Superintendent
VitellonG BersUNCino, 1931.


32 -


I
P
TREHES ENI. FRECTIUSS IN ADULT EDUCATION AEROAD
Adult Literacy Lrive in dimer
The Social Education Doard in the state of Ajmer, India recently
discussed at a meeting of the members the different weys of intensifying
their adult literacy and social education campaigns. There are 50
centers in the rural communities in ajmer conducted hy the teachers of
the village primary schools. More than 1,500 adult men and women are
enrolled in the centers.
In order to promote the cause of social educstion 50 new centers
nill be opened next year and a training camp for primary school teachers
on social education will be conducted. 4 weekly paper vill be published
and will be devoted to post-literacy work of the edults who have beenmade literate.
(Social Education News Dulletin, Vol. II, No. 7, July 1, 1951)
Fensant Farming Prolect in Rhodesig
Northern Rhodesia's problem is that her population exceeds the
carrying capacity of the land under cultivation. It was belleved that
if their traditional methods of cultivation could he improved, the
population land balance could he restored. The ner project is what they
called "peasant farming." This form of simple farming vill pove the
way for the Northern Rhodesions to abandon their indigenous systems of
destructive cultivation, employing the axe and hoe, in favor of a
simple method employing implements, crop rotation, composting and contour
ridging.
The following are the adventages of "peasant farming":


- 33 -


1. A way of earning more money than the average villager.
2. A way of being one’s oun master and working for oneself.
3. A way of gaining increased wealth vithout leaving the tribal
area.
4. a way of acquiring the necessery capital equipment for
farming by receiving repayoble loans for implements and
having land stumped and cleared - also on repayment.
(Community Levelopment Bulletin, Vol. II, No. 3, June, 1951)
Teachers of Teachers
The Mexican Centre plans to train more than 1,0CO fundamental
education specialists in 12 yeors. This number is inadequate if the
70,000,000 illiterates vill be taken into account. The Centre hovever
vill train teachers of tenchers. Gradustes vill go out to staff similar
centres organized lw individual nations, so that teachers will be
formed by a kind of "chain reaction" process.
(Unesco Courier, February, 1951)
Sierra Lgone Community Develorment
There are two phases involved in the community development projeot
in Sierra Leone and they ore:
1. The training of miduives through the local Lunda Secret
Society under the initintive of Dr. Margai.
2. The mass literacy scheme run ty the Methodist Mission at Do.
Their project entrusts the government sith the function of harnessing the energies of the community to accelerote the plan of social
and economio development. This plan operates on the principle of
partnership between the Government and people. For an effective realization of the plan, community development committees are set up in the


34


provinces. Esch committee consists of the best technical experts
available in the conmunity on matters pertaining to agriculture,
health, education and public norks.
(Mass Educotion Bulletin, March, 1951)
Adult Education Mork in India
There are approximately 5,000,0C0 illiterates residing in the
jurisdiction of Delhi Municipal Committee according to their 1951
census. To "liquidate illiteracy" 55 adult literacy centres have been
organized in the different parts of the city.
One scheme of rousina public opinion in favor of social education
in India is through the primary school children. a fine exomple mas
set by school children in Thana District when they raised a collection
of Rs. 7,600 during the Mahatma Gandhi'g Deoth Anniversary in Jenuery
last. The amount was intended for the intensification of the program
of social education.
The U.P. Government in India has launched a drive to educate the
illiterate constobles in the police force. The aim was to improve the
efficiency of the force.
Nith economic democracy as the fundamental idea, a Coorerative
Mass Education Movement was inaugurated in lengal on May 25. The aim
of the project is to improve the economic condition of the people through
the cooperative movement.
(Sociel Educetion News Dulletin: July 1, 1951)
Colombo Excosition
The Tepartment of Education will take chorge of the Philiprine


perticipotion in the Colombo Exposition vhich vill be-held in February,
1952. All the countries of South and Southeast asia are planning to
participate. The Philippine exhibits will present the progress of
our country in the field of culture, including art, music and dancing.


----O Uo----


Exhibition is, of course, the dominant
method of adult education practical in all
tyres of museums. Techniques vary according
to the class of objects shoun. Thus, science
museums stress mechanical exhibits, vhich
the visitor operates an, controls. Netural
history museums emphasize the habitat grour.
Art museums generally hold to the aesthetic
orrangement of objects in chronological
sequence. Exhibitions of these tyres are
not necessarily self-exrlenetory. Of
more importance to the general public
ere the educationol exhibitions, complete
vith labels, diagrams and other aids,
which tell their oan story.


- Theodore L. Low


36
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES
ILOILO
The Guimbal High School in Iloilo provinos had started its adulteducatien work with the organisation of reading centers. Tuo reading
centers uere set up in the town and one in each of the barrios. According to Principal Torreblenca, the topic discussed during the inauguration of the Pescadores heading Center was dynamite fishingi Fes¬-
cadores is a fishing village. In the inland barrios, the topids discussed in their meetings concerned food production, payment of taxes
and loyalty to the government.
Besides the seventy odults who vere tutored Ly the teachers and
students of the Dumanges High School, the other important adult educstion activity of the high sahool was the inguguration of the Dumangas
Reading Center. The reading center wes a rroject of the Girl Scouts
of the high school and was located in one of the vacant rooms in the
municipal building. Because of its nearnesa to the market many people
nere benefited by the orgenization of the Dumongas Reading Center.
QUEZON CITY
Community essemblies with the oid of local perent-teacher associations and other civic organizetions of the locality have been held by
practically all the schools in Quezon City, according to a report of
Superintendent Fablo F. Reyes. He said: "The primary and irmediate, sim
is to bring the government closer to the pecple and thereby help in the
preservation and restoration of peace and security." The guest-speakers
were considered authorities on their subjects. The Deputy Commanding
General of the A.F.P. spoke on peace and order, the City Mayor discussed


-37 -


the closer cooperation between the government and the people, the Judge
of First Instonce on civie duties and rights of citizens, the P.T.A.
President on the relation of home and school and the President of the
Barrio Lieutenants' League spoke on the barangay.
LA UNION
The mass meeting held on September 17 under the sponsership of the
South Provincial High School, Agoo, La Union resulted in the orgenization
of a community council composing of seven community leaders. The
council was to serve as the sponsoring organ for community improvement
in Agoo.
On November 15, a community reading center was set up in one of the
houses most centrally located. The reading materials were composed
of Ilocano pamphlets, such as "Sursurat ti Umill," "Pagbasaan ti Umili,"
"Bannawag" and "Silaw." The magazines vere donated by the teachers and
students. "This reading center," reported Frincipal Anacleto B. Alzate,
"was frequented by the people in the neighborhood. Some fomilies even
borrowed the reading materials in the evening and returned them in
the morning."
CAGAYAN
The Agronomy Class of the Cagayan High School perticipated in a
series of community assemblies held in the berrios of Libag, Patagyaman,
Atulayan and Anafunan. The assemblies were held to intensify diversified ferming. The Cagayan High School, according to Principal Manaligod, secured for their drive the help and cooperstion of the different


zone leaders, the representatives of the Bureau of Plant Industry, and
the Superintendent of Ilogan Experiment Station uho demonatrated on
control of pests and diseases and improved farm practices.
ALDAY
The Albay Normal School has intensified its campaign for adult
education by utilizing the services of the senior students. Principal
Benigno T. Reyes described the system employed by his school: "Each
member of the tuo sections of the senior class taking a course in
fhilippine Educatienal Systen has been required to teach st least one
illiterate adult vith a minimum age of fourteen and a maximum of fifty.
This activity is a part of the training of the seniors in public relations. The individual report of each is subject to the aprroval of tho
Division Supervisor of Adult Education. No student is given complete
grade in the course without fulfilling this requirement.. In case the
report is doubtful the supervisor requires the student-teacher to
arronge a personal interview with the subject to check the suthenticity
of the report. A careful scrutiny of the student's narrative report of
his subject minimizes the tendeney to make the project a mere makebelieve. At the end of the first semester of the present school year,
there nere some ninety-four adults salvaged from illiteracy and ignorance.
The literacy work of the student-teachers does not end with the subject's
ability to read and write. Adult education activities of the students
are further extended to the encouragement of their less informed noighbors to produce more food crops, poultry, and hogs with the view of
improving their economic cendition. They are also given information in


- 39-
improving their community living conditions through convocations with
special leebures end showing health films to give them more concrete ideas
of healthful living. The meakness of this project is the lack of follonup work for more or less permanent results. The vork is also handicapped by the lack of reading materials for practice in reading. Nevertheless, the initial work has awakened the interest of the salvaged
illiterate adults in the improvement of their community living cenditions,"
PANGASIMAN
The adult education campaign for comunity improvement sponsored
by the Agno High School, is obtaining mholesome results in agno, Pangasinan. The lrincipal, Mr. Vitaliano Ulanday, mentioned thot their
Municipel Treasurer renerted "a remurkable increese in the collection
of land and residence taxes as a result of the campaian for payment of
taxes by parents in order te improve and expand government services."
Their adult education compaign also served te arouse the civic spirit
of the people. Led by Dr. Generoso E. Sison, several volumes for homo
reading mere donated to the school. There were cight citizens who contributed P3: esch for the installation of water pipes in the school.
OMT.
ROE LON
This school year, the Oliongen Hich Scha1, Romblon had successfully
taught 164 adult students. Reported by the acting Principal, Juan G.
Marquez: “The adult education classes under the Esch-One-Tesch-One Plan
were conducted by the students fram the first yeur up to the fourth year,
subject to the supervision of their respective class advisers. Each


 40.
student was required to teach an illiterate adult. The basic textbook
used nas the pampllet in the Hiligaynon dialect issued by the Division
Office. There was no fixed hour of instruction but most of the teacherstudents utilized their off-hours in the evening and on Seturdays
ond Sunduys."
AT RG
ZUNMLDNO
The houses in the neighborhood of the Zambales High School in Iba
mere organized inte four "puroks." The purok was used as unit of
community organization and much improvement had been noted especially
on the phase of hygiene and sanitation. According to rrincipel
Agcaoili, every home has backyard poultry and piggery and some have
vegetable gardens. In order to improve house construction, a model
house is selected in each purok every month



LIYTE
Superintendent Manalo made a special mention of the adult education
work of the Calubian High School. He reported: "Besides the 'Ench-OneTeach-One' classes taught by teachers and students, the Calubian High
School has embarled vigorously on instructing the adult furmers and
home makers through community assemblies on (a) the proper care and
feeding of hogs and (b) how to make the home sttractive through flower
gardens and interior decoration. Demonstrations on fruit preservation,
castrating pigs and caponizing chickens ere given in every community
assembly.


-AZAMDOLNGA
Under the supervision of their National Language and English
teachers, more than 50 students of the Kabansalan Junior High School
organized a literacy campaign in Kabansalan. The initial results were
encouraging. Most of the adults were already signing their names.
Another phase of edult education work of the Kabansalan High School
was the conference of farmers in the vicinity of the schoel under the
Agronomy teacher. Topics such as seed selection and propagation, use
of fertilizers, balanced diet, town besutification vere discussed
where the farmers porticipsted vith interest during the conferences.
In one of the adult classes in Dapitan II, the Supervisor, Miss
Faundo was greeted by a o5-year old adult student: "Miss Supervisor,
my hands are hard of farm labor, my eyes are abnormal already due to
age and my tongue is stiff with buyo and cigarettes. But I love knonledge. I nant to spend the rest of my life reading and listening to
the radio broadcest. I willtry my level best to procure my nen
glasses in spite of poverty."

NUEVA VIZUANG
The Nueve Vizcaya High School at Bayombong conducted several
phases of adult education work this year. The school held three community assemblies during the United Nations Day, Human Rights Lay and
Constitution Day. Severol demonstrations were made in the berrios of
La Torre and Donfal on such subjects as native recipe cooking, interior
decoration and food preservation.


- 42


This year the Nueva Viscayo High School, the teachers and students
were able to tutor 81 adults who were anerded certificates of proficiency.
This vas consldered the biggest number of pronotion during the year by
the different schools.
According to Acting Principal Ramon Esperos, the P.T.A. of the
Nueva Vizcaya High School denated the amount of P75 for salary of one
adult education teacher for borrio Kayapa uhich had a high percentage
of illiteracy.
AIEN
MAKIADO-UE
Describing the progress of sdult-educution werk in Marinduque,
Acaderdie Supervisor Julian kogol said: “The adults nhe did not have
any chence to study when they vere young were taught in fermal closses
by teachers how to read and write. The tenchers employed the syllabic
method. The children folloved up the instruction given in school ly
tesching their perents at home. Re actually saw children teaching
their respective mothers hos to read in barrio Dutonsapa in mogpog.
"In Suha, Torrijos another class for adults was organized vhere the
students preferred only instruction in Arithmetic and Reading. Most
of the adults enrolled had one or tuo years of schooling before but
they reverted to illiteracy due to lack of oppertunity to proctice
what they learned in agheol.
LATANES
.. An educationel campaign in the form of cormunity assemblies will
be launched soon by the tenchers and students in batenes. According
to Superintendent Padus the theme of the campaign will be on the
necessity of payment of texes by the peorle.



ARETNT
NECROS OICIPEN AL
Several community assemblies were conducted in Saravis, Negros
Occidental by the Saraviia Junior High School. Principal Ravina reported
that "toen officials, perents, prominent and wealthy people in the community, tenchers and students took part in the assemblies." The topics
popularly discussed concerned the improved methods of agriculture and
local industries, raising the standard of living, nise use of leisure
hours, and what the government, school and church are doing to improve
life of the poor. "In these assemblies," the principal said, "the
problem betmeen the hacenderos and their laborers on one hand and between
the people and the town officials on the other are shared by all with
sympathy end understanding."
CATANDUANES
Every Senior student in the Catonduanes High School has pledged
to make one illiterate perent literate. Principal allarde noted that
the Senior class is enthusiastic and interested in their literacy project.
AR
FALANAN
Several adult education projects vere conducted for the melfare
of the non-Christian inhabitants of Palawan. According to Surerintendent
Villaflor some adult-education teschers are paid by FTA funds in order
to maintain the interest of local workers.
SAMAR
Adult educstion work in verious phases had been canducted by the
different schools in Samar according to a renert of Superintendent
Tayco. The folloving projects were emphasized:


4


1. Popularization of planting fruit trees and 8401 fruit trees
seedilnga vere distributed by the Catarman National Agricultural
High Sehool so parenis and formers.
2. Promoting commvnity spirit which made the Gemay FTA to donate
o l-hectore site for the use of the Gemay High School.
3. Backyard improvement which produced tangible results in the
form of "adequete fencing of backyarda and turning empty lots
into vegetable gardens."
4. Literacy drive which mode 68 adults to be able to read and
nrile by the “each-one-teach-one" procedure.
5. Community assemblies conducted by the Holy Cross Insitute,
Knighta of Columbus, Labor Union, Oras PTA and Oros Elementary
School..


BATANGAS
Datanges is now popularizing the organization of reading centers.
Academic Supervisor Bautista reported that in Dalayan, Nasugbu and
Ibaan, reading centers were put up in the centers of the population in
order to attract people. "These are means by which people could be
encouraged to make vise use of their leisure time,” Mr. Dautista said.
DQHOL
More thon 250 adults attended the adult-education demonstrations
in the barrios of Taloto and Tiptip in Dohol. The demonstrations were
conducted by the teachers of the Dohol Trade School shoming the barrio
folk hon to refinish old dirty chairs, hon to solder wash basins and
the kitchen utensils and how to remodel old dresses. According to
Principal Sarmiento, the demonstrotions sere supplemented by him with
lectures on home vegetable gardens and baclyard poultry raising.


E
EAI
TTUDI
GU MEN J ANE GEASCRATION

111
THE
OF IAE ES.ASJAGEMENT OF
A —
PHILIPPINE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEMI
1901 - 1951
ANNDUNCEMENT AND PRCGRAM
SEMINAR ON FUNDAMENTAL AND ADULT EDUCATION
The Golden Jubilee Celebration of the Philippine Educational
System vill be held from December 10 to December 16, 1951 under the
auspices of public and privete educational institutions, leading
educstors and civic leaders, vith Senator Geronima T. Pecson as
General Chairmen of the celebration.
A Seminor on Fundamental and Adult Education is one of the outstanding features of the celebration. The Seminor has been divided
into six areas. Decause of the scope of work the Seminar will cover,
it will be conducted from December e to 12. 1931. The flest three
days of the Seminar vill be devoted to group discussions, in the form
of work shor, under the leadership of different chairmen and members.
of area-groups. The last three deys will be devoted to the discussions
in plenory sessions of the reports of verious area-groups, nith the
coordinating committee to integrate the contents of the reports.
hom
Tha Le en Snegific Arans
The theme of the Seminer is Enriching Conmunity Life for Freedom,
with six areas designsted as follows:
1. Economic and Vocatienal Aspect.- Mr. Jose C. Aguila, Division
Superiiendent of Schools
for Pampanga, Chuirmen
Dr. Gilbert Perez, Chief,
Vocotional Educotion Division,
Bureau of Fublic Schools,
Chairman, Resource Persons
2

Inclosure to menorandum No. 55, 5. 1951


2. Literacy —-


-La

- Mr. Venancio Nera, Division
Superintendent of Schools for
La Union, Chairman
Mr. Segundo M. Infantado, Vice
Chancellor, National Teochers
College, Chairman, Resource
Persons
3. Health Educstion —— Mrs. Miguela M. Solis,
Superintendent, Normal. Schools
General Office, Chairman
Dr. Marieno Icasiano, City
Heatth Cfficer, Manila, Cheirman,
Resource Persons
4. Cultural and Recreationol Life
Mr. Juen C. Laya, Division
Superintendent of Schools for
Bataan, Chairman
Dr. Concepcion Aguila, Executive
Director, Cenbro Escolar University, co-Chairman
Dr. Pius J. Bazth, Fulbright
Professor, Cheirman, Resource
Persons
5. Character and Civic Training — Mr. Jesus I. Mertines, Dean of
Instruction, Philippine Normal
College, Chairman
Dr. Antonio Isidro, Secretary,
Ccllege of Education, U.P.,
Chairman, Resource Persons
6. Lachitnery and Oreenization for
Funidlementel and .dult Eduention-- Mr. Vitaliano Bernordino,
Division Superintendent of
Schocls for Bulacon, Chairmon
4
Srecial Committces
1. Committee on Preparation of
Monograph on the Seminar ——-- Mr. Isabelo Tupas, Assistant Chief,
Instruction Division, Buresu of
Public Schools, Chsirman
2. Committee on Coordination -—
- Mr. Jose V. Aguilar, Division
Superintendent of Schools for
Iloilo, Chairman


3. Conmittoe on Progrem, Arrangement
and Adult Education Associstion - Miss Helene Benitez, Acting Dean,
College of Education, Philippine
Women's University, Chairman


NATN


Mr. Estanislao R. Lopez,
Assistant Superintendent of City
Schools, Manila, co-Chairman


A. Plenary Sessions — Mr. Jose V. Aguilar, Chairman
Mr. Isabelo Tupas, Secretary
First Doy, December 6, 1951 - Plenery Session
8:30 - 12:00 A.H. - Registration of Delegates and Observers
Opening Program:
Address by the Honorable, the Secretary of Education
Key-note Speech by Mr. Jose V. aguiler, Division
Superintendent of Schools for Iloilo, Chairman,
Plenory Sessions
2:30 - 5:00 P.H. - Presentation of objectives end orientation
problems by eree-group chairmen
Second Day, Decenber 7 - Group Heetings
8:30 - 12:00 A.M. - Deliberction and discussion by the orea-groups
2:30 - 5:00 P.M. - Deliberation and discussion by the erea-groups
Third Day, December 8 - Group Meetings
8:30 - 12:00 A.M. - Deliberction and discussion by the ares-groups
2:30 - 5:C0 P.M. - Deliberation and discussion by the ares-groups
Fourth Day, December 9 - Open
Fifth Day, December 10 - Flenery Session
-A
8:30 - 12:00 A.M. - Report of area-groups by the Committee on Coordination
2:30 —— P.M. - Visit to Cormunity Schoels
Sixth Day, December 11 - Flenery Session
8:30 - 12:00 A.M. - Report of erea-groups by the Committee on Coordination
2:30 - 5:CO P.M. - Report of ares-greups !. the Committee on Coordination
Seventh Day, December 12 -- Plenery Session
8:30 - 12:00 A.M. - Highliglts of Coordinated Report by Chairman, Conmittee
on Coordination


Report of the Chairman, Committee on Organization of
Adult Education Association of the Philippines
Closing Progran:
Address by the Director of Public Schools
Addiress by Hon. Geronima T. Fecson, Senator


- 46 -
Seminar Membershins
The Seminar will admit 200 delegates and a number of observers
from the provinces and cities representing public and privata school
teachers and civic leaders who are interested in fundomental and adult
education through the community school. Delegotes are supposed to attend
the Seminar area-groups to which they are assigned during the entire period from December 6 to 12, 1951 and vote during deliberations. Observers
may attend the group meetings ond plenery sessions ot nill but they will
not vote.
Delegntes
Delegates should be recommended from adult educution workers who
ore actively engaged in community improvement ectivities or who are actually directing fundamental education work.
The Seminor will select and admit 200 delegates from quelified
representatives submitted as follows:
Two representatives from the public schools, preferably
superintendents, supervisors, and prinoipals who are
members of the Philiprine Public School Teachers Association, or from the private schools, in each province
or city.
One member of Parent-Teacher Association from each province
or city.
One member of other civic organization from each province
or city.
Cbservers
A limited number of observers may be admitted to the areo-group
mectings and plenary sessions vith permission of the group-choirmen and
the choirman of plenary sessions. They may toke pert in the discussions,
if they so desire.


EExpenses of Delegates and Observers
The Seminar has no fund for traveling expenses of delegates and
observers. It is expected that sponsoring organizstions as the FPSTA,
the PTA's, Nomen's Clubs, Rotary Clubs, Adult Education Councils, and
other local civic asseciations vill be villing to provide funds for
their representatives to the Seminer in vien of its importance te their
communities. Of course individuals interested in adult education and
willing to defray their cwn expenses may elso apply to attend the Seminar.
Renort of Membershils
The inclosed arplication form for admission as delegates and observers should be submitted by the heads of the local sponsoring organizations or associstions or by interested community leaders early
enough so as to resch the Seminar Office on or before October 15, 1951.
Each delegste and observer should be recommended for membership in three
areas of the Seminar, with the order of preference indicated. This will
enable the conmittee to equalize more er less the number of members for
each area. The delegates and observers will be notified in due time of
the area-groups to which they have been assigned. They will be provided
with proper identificetion.
Attendanco of Delegntes
The success of the Seminar vill de, enl a great deal on the interest
of the delegetes in the vericus reas they esire to exrlore and in
folloving up their fields from the beginning to the end of the Seminar.
It is hoped that the delegates will arrive in Manilu st least one day
before the formal opening of the Seminar and that they will be in
attendance at all their respective grour sessions.


-50 -
The Seminar mill be followed by the Congress of Educators which
begins on December 13, the day folloning the end of the Seminar. It
is hoped that the delegates to the Seminar will find it convenient
to attend the. Congress.


Corregrondence
all gorrespondence on the Seminar including the aprlications for
memberships as delegates and observers should be addressed as follows!
Seminar on Fundamental and adult Education
Adult Education Division
Buresu of Fublic Schools
Manil a
Elaces of Meetings for Aren-Groups and flenary
Sessions


Auditorium, Thilippine Normal College, Corner, Taft Avenue
end Ayala Bouleverd (Registration here)
Fhiliprine Nomen's University, Corner, Taft avenue and Tennessee
Arga-Groun Mgetings -
1. Economic and Vocational Group - Auditorium, Philippine Normal
College
2. Literacy Group ———-—- San Andres Elementery School,
Corner, San Andres and Hright
3. Health Enucation Group ——— San Andres Elementary School
4. Cultural and Recrestional
Life Group —--- Sun andres Elementary School
5. Character and Civic Treining
——— Aroullo High Sehool, Corner,
Group
Taft Avenue and Padre Feura
6. Hachinery and Orcanibtin for
fundamental and adult Education
Groud --
-—— Anaullo High School


51


DIVISION MEMORANDA AND CIRC LANS ON ADULT EDUCATION

ISSUED DY SUPERINTENDENTS OF SCEOOLS
During the school year 1950-1951 several menoranda and circulars
were issued by division superintendents of schools treating different
phases of adult education in the provinces. The interest and enthusiasn of supervisors, principals, teachers and the people of the
communities have been stinulated by these memoranda and circulars.
Copies of the following division memoranda and circulars were
received from various divisions:


Division


Abra


Bataan


1



1
1
!
I
!

!


GIAARCALO
1 Title or Subject-Matter treated
Number,
—-Aud Date
L



Memorandun No, 1,
-5-50


Memorandun No. 15,
8-1-50
Memorandum No.:23,
8-22-50
Hemorandun No. 25,
9-25-50
Memorandun No. 28,
10-24-50
Bulletin No. 10,
9-12-50
Bulletin No. 13,
12-11-50


! Prescribing Quota of Accomplishments of Adult Education Activities for Every Supervisory District and Prompt Submission of
reports
! Objectives and Suggested MHeasures
on Adult Education for 1950-1951
1 Surmary of the 1950-1951 Adult
Education Program of the Division of Abra
! Adult Education and the CormunityCentered School
1 Surmary of Quarterly Reports on
Adult Education
1 Community Survey
1 Survey of Adult Education Activities
as of November 30, 1950



IH. S. Memorandum
1 No. A, 7-26-50
!-Momorandun No. 7,
7-26-50
IMenorandua No. 9,
8-9-50


1 Program of Activity on Adult Education and Cormunity Improvement
1 Adult Education Program for the
Year 1950-1951
 Time Table for Adult Education:
! First Stage


52


Division



Dataan teontty


Memorandum No. 13,!


Tine Rble Tor Aaune Eauection.


9-1-50


Second Stage


1


Memorandum No. LA,!


Conferences and Conventions on


9-7-50


Adult Eduostion


!


Memorandum No. 15,!


Transition from Pupil.to Parent


9-12-50


Teacher Pafticipation in Com

munity Improvement


!


Memorandum No. 18,!


Correlation of In—School Instrue

10-11-50


tion and Out-of-School


Activities


!


Memorandum No. 19,!


Time table for adult Education


11-2-50


frograma Third Stage


!


Bulletin No. 7,


Suimary of Accomplishments in


11-2-50


adult Educstion: First and





I



Sacond Stages


Cieerielcntion,


Title or Subject-Matter Treated


Datangas


Memorandum No. 22,
—-2L-50


Improvement of Community Living


DORel


Letter, March 1,1950
Letter, July 16,1950
Letter, Nov.3, 1950
Memorandum No. 43,
7-19-50
Dulletin No. 1,
7-1-50


Testing Sencaule in kaur Penastios
Submission of Schedules of Monthly
Community Assemblies
Intensifying Literacy Instruction
Nork in Adult Education
Suggestions for Adult Education
Work for 1950-1951
Summary of Adult Education Activities During the School Year
1949-1949


SuINCon


MENTONGan Io. 1
1-2-51
Dulletin No. 8,
10-40-51


Visits of Livision Superintendents
on Adult Education
Orgamization on Adult Education
and Community-Service Programs


DUHLGRON


Memorandum No. 1,'
1-2-51


House Flan for the Average Family


Cagayan


Memorondui No. 23,
8-1-50
Memorandum No. 31,
8-21-50
Nemorandum No. 32,
9-15-50
Memorandum No. 36,
10-13-50
Memorandum No. 435
11-17-50
Memorandum No. 2,
2-15-51
Memorandum No. 5,
2-2-24.


Reports of the Cormittee on Tha
School and the Community (Elementary and Secondary Levels)
Objectives, Activities and Problems
on the Adult Education Program
Report on the Literacy Campaign
The "Zone" Plan, A Nay of Community
Improvement Frogrem
Objectives, Activities, Problems
Suggestions and Recommendations
on Fundamental and Adult Education
Community Improvement in Pomplona
Evaluation of Adult Education
Activitlos.


53 -


ciamaiaicntion,
Number and Date


Division


ManOranGun No. 25,
10-6-50
Memorandum No. 25,
"-15-50
Memorandum No. 265
7-26-30
Memorandum No. 3,
1--51
District Memorandum No. 1.8-18-50


Title or Subject-Matter Treated


Von


Tosting or Maalt Eeuestion roeron
on Schools' Bulletin Boords
Division's Slogan: "No Illiteracy in
the Provinee of Capis during the
Fiscal Year 1950-19510
Prompt Submission of Quarterly
Report in Adult Educstion
Report on Adult Education
Plans and Program of adult Educstion
in the District of Capiz.


Gotabato


DAVOO


Letter, Aug.8,1950
Memorandum No. 10,
—1-25-30


List of Community Assembly Lectures
The Progrom of Adult Education in
Cotabeto


District Memorandum No. 5,
—12-1-50


Suvey of the Nunper of literetes
Among Perent-Teacher Associstion
Membera.


neno


Memorandum No. 39,!
n-21-50
Mrmorandum No. 47,!
9-29-50
Memorandum No. 5,I
2-8-51
krmorandum No. 10,!
3-26-51
Letter, Dec.20,19501
City Memorandum Nod
", 2-28-51
City Letter, March!
7, 1951
City Bulletin No.2!
1-20-51.


Compilation of Local Plans to Promote Better Living Among Fil. Masses
Report on Adult Educstion
Semestral Report on Adult Education
Vacation Beriods from the Standpoint
of the School Conmunity
Report on Eradication of Illiteracy
Report on adult Education
Report on Adult Education Activities
Community School Hlan to Promote
Detter Living.


Isabelo


Circular No. 4,
9-L-50


Making Surveys on Literacy and
Canvassing the Community for
Yolunteer Tenchers


LaNAO


Mulletin IE. 1,
6-12-50
Letter, Aug.22,1950!
Memorandum No. 14,
8-16-51


Adult Education and the Community -
Centered School
Furhishing Copies of "Highlights of
the Rada Reading Center.
Suggestions on How to Carry out
Adult Edugation Program


LagtE


Memorandun No. 16,
7-9-50
Memorandum No. 33,
11-13-50
Bulletin No. 1,
7-19-50


Program for Adult Educstion Activities for the School Year 1950-51
Report on Adult Educstion
Adult Education Materials


SL -


Division


T
1


GMHanan. 
Nomber and Date I


Title or Subject-Matter Treated


Morinduque


T


Memorondum No. 30!


Mperte cn lank: Pavestion


11-2-50


1


Bulletin No. 4,!


Functions of a Life-Centered School


7-19-50


!


Bulletin No. 1, !


Construction of Better Homes


1-22.21


MTRtG


P


Circular No. 2,


Inction or lant Ronention





7-15-50


Mindoro


1


Memorandum No. 6,!


obgcetiwos la Tundanental ang Munt


!


8-15-50


Education for the School Year 1950-


!


1951


!


Memorandum No. 9,!


Adult Education Moterials Available


I


—10-ll-50


for Distribution


Manmle Ceeidenta


1


Memorondum No. 361


Establishment of Community Reading


I.
—12-650


Genters in Misemis Occidental
-


Masenag CPAcmtal


I


Memorandum No. 42!


Adult Education Activities


10-21-30


Icunteln 


T


Memorandum No. 22!


Inprevenent of Comunty lavine


!


11-29-50


Through Food Production


!


Memorandum No. 231


Objective Evalustion of Community


12-18-50


Improvement


!


Bulletin No. 2,!


Adult and the Community-Centered School


$-30-50


Neros Cocidental


h


Circular No. 1,I


Aaciennent or bos bivimon SCrr


8-8-50


Personnel


!


Circular No. 6, I


Prices and Accountability of Adult


11-11-50


Education Materials





Memorandum No. 7,!


Authority to Approve Pay Rolls and





7-15-50


Vouchers for the Salaries of Munici

L



L



pal Adult Edue
tion Tenchera


Negros Oriental


!


Letter, July 7,


Reports on Adult Educstion


!


1950


!


Letter, July 20,


Adult Educotion Reports and Records


!


1950


1.


Letter, Sept. 15,!


Adult Educetion Plans


1950


!


Letter, Nov. 2, I


Reports on Adult Education


1


1950


!


Memorandum No. 8,!


A Surmary of Adult Education Activities


5-3-50


for the School Yeer 1949-1950


!


Memorandum No. 221


Adult Educstion and Community Im

9-1950


provement


!


Memorandum No. 251


Adult Educstion Activities


9-19-50





Memorandum No. 9,!


Six-Point Program for the Total Liqui

3-5-51


dation of Illiteracy in Negros Or.


1


Memorandum No. 18!


Adult Education Program for 1951-52


7-24-51


55


Division


T Glnerislenlion,
1 Number and Date


Title or Subject-Matter Treated


Ngros memtel


! Bulletin No. 2, I


Tumdenental ana Manl: Bamotion


(Con't)


1 3-9-51
I


in the Public Schools (Radio


Intervianl


MV, Visano


 Memorandum No. 1,


Adult Educstion Activities During


7-10-50


the School Year 1950-1951


1 Bulletin No. 4,


Progress in Adult Educstion


7-6-50
1


Literacy Work


!
Letter No. 17,


Conmunity Assembly Lectures


7-10-50


I Bulletin No. 1, 
1-8--

—


Construction of Better Homes


PALENON


! Memorandum No. 24,


Suggestions in the Implementation


 11-2-30
!


of the Pivision General Objectives,


1


1950-1951


!Memorandum No. 26,!


On the Organization of Community


11-9-50


Adult Councils


I Bulletin No. 12,


Adult Education and the Conmunity

8-7-50
!


Centered. School


IBulletin No. 16,


Construction of Better Homes


10-28-50


I Memorandum No. 3,


Survey of Illiteracy in Palawan


1-12-51


Province


IBulletin No. 3,


Adult Education on Economic


! 1-8-51


Improvement


! Bulletin No. 5,


Emphasizing the Teaching of Civic

 1-10-51
!


Citizenship and Health and


!


Sanitotion in Adult Educstion


Bulletin No. 6, 


Economic Activities for Adult


1l--alL


Nomen



Pengasinon


IP.N.S. Bulletin Noj


The Cortilla Method of Teaching


.2, 8-4-50


Literacy


I P.N.S. Memorandum I
1 No. 2, 8-4-50


Literacy Campaign


I P.N.S. Memorandum
1No. 3, 8-18-50


Cormunity Surveys


! Memorandum No. 33,!
9-19-50


General Cbjectives of Adult Education


I Memorundum No. 34,!


Designation of Cne or Two Model


9-19-50


Berrios in Every Municipality


I


Pangasinan


! Memorandum No. 43,


Iloko Trenslation of the Declara

11-23-50


tion of Human Rights


1 Bulletin No. 3,


Adult Education and the Conmunity

1 2-1-30


Centered School


 86 -.


Division


.A
1


Classlfication,
Number and Dote


Title or Subject-Matter Trested


quezon


T


Letter, Lec. 84

1950


Report of Eradication of Illiteracy


1


Memorondum No. 18,!


Program of Adult-Education Activities





8-30-50



for the School Ysar 1950-1
221.


Romblon


!


Memorandum No. 24,I


Elimination of Illiteracy in Romblon


8-21-50


Province


!


Memorandum No. 36,!


Problems of Illiteracy in the Pro

!


10-27-50


vince of Romblon and their Elimina

1


tion


1


Memorandum No. 3, I


The Role of Teachers, Supervisors,


!


1-9-51


and School Administrators Under


1.
---


the Comrunityentered Education

Sorsogon


Bulletin No. 1, !
"¡-2N-50


The Community. Centered School


!
L


Bulletin No. 2, I
7-7-0

-


Adult Education


Sulu


!


Bulleuin No.1, 


Nng Illiterotes Ros to Perr


!


8-22-50


by the Cartilla hethod


!


Circuler No. 6, I


Crediting Teachers and Students for


1


9--50


their Nork in adult Education and


I.
-


Y
OE
Communit
Lcg
—
—PAVI



NOrIa


1


Memorandum No. 31,.


Adult Education Flan for the


O-LL-0


1950-1951 School Yeor


1


Memorandum No. 33,!


Adult Education Supervision and


!


9-21-50


Administration for the School


*


Jear 1950-1921.—



Zamboanga


!


Circulor Letter Nos


Survey Reports


5, 9-l1-0


2


SNOODMUAU
SE PURL,
N

E
4g
S
NA
E
AMENAA
13
EN LD
“PUcario'
M
Can

y

s
A
E

12

n

fPo
MIO
AR
ENP
A


P

Af

4

a
2



HEA

EO
A
NI
II LIE
MRY IEl
UOHSO HE
OioGrosoo
LNOo o
JA



VOL.IX 2 70:6 NEN 4954
CATIO"


gONTENTS


Page


EDITORIALS..... 1
Ta
m
FINDAMENTAL AND ADULTE EDLCATION PROCIAN IRRCUDE
THE COMMUNITY SCECOL IN MEXCAUAYAN, BILACAN... 5
Dy Emilio J. Samaniego
TEC
A
PRELMINARY ACTIVATLES OH FINDAMENTAL AND
ADULT EDUCATION IH MAGSINGAL .......................I1
By Santiago Dizon
T
LUMBAN COMMUNIIY SCHOOL MISSION ...................... 15
By Artemio C. Vizconde
THE ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES OF THE BAMBANG
HIGH SGHOOL 20
By Alberto A. Cenato

rm
TE
THE "LAITLE TEACHEN" METAOD IN LIPERACY WORK .......... 23
By Vitaliano Bernardino
SAYTAN, A LITTLE DEMOCRACY IN ACTION .................. 25
By Amado L. Agorrilla
THE PULO IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS OF THE DUMREGAS
HIGH SCHOOL  28
By Elpidio L. Cabus
TRENDS AND RRACTICES IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD ........ 31
I
mrm
ADUILT EDUCATION AGTIVITIES IN THE PROVIEUE........... 34
ATT
RESOIRCE MATERIALS FOR FUIDANENTAL AND ADUELT
EDDCATION  43
TITI
THAY
LITERACY IN THE PHILIPPINES E HOVIROR.............. 57


a
SUOPN STATEMENT


59


THINKING ON THE FORTHCOMING SEMINAN ON
FUNDAMENTAL AND ADULT EDUCATION
The blueprint of the forthcoming Seminar on Nundamental and Adult
Education vill present facts and problems concerning adult education
through the Cormunity School. Ne desire to invite particular attention
to some elementary basic idoas about this program:
1. Adult Education loaders and literacy teachers should appronch
the program of fundamental education with an open mind that recegnizes
the possibilities and rosources of the psople of the commities as a
great asset of the program. Nhen the citizens of the community find
the program valuable and useful to them and they are given a hand in
running it, they will take abiding interest in the enterprise and will
be willing to share in the responsibility of making it a going concern.
In this way there vill be more assurance of permanence and continuous
growth of the pregram. Witheut giving recognition and making use of
the native and local hunan powers, any well-conceived plan of adult
education is hardly promising.
2. With this major requirement in mind, the adult education werkers
should determine the interests, cenditions and needs of the community
or communities embraced by the development pregram and decide upon the
aspects of community life that must be given first attention. The
Seminar has divided itself into six aspects; namely, Ecenemic and
Vocational Development, Literacy, Health Education, Cultural and Recreational Life, Character and Civic Training, and Machinery and Organization for Fundamental and Adult Education. The fundamentals of
these, different phases will be discussed in the group and plenary
sessiens of the Seminar. Equipped with these fundamentals, community


2


loaders ind edult education werkers vill be in a better pesitien to
proceod with their werk. They vill knaw how to take up lecol problens
individually or simultaneously and to place emphasis on integrating
and unifying various activities fer the promtien of better standards
of living and happiness of the community.
3. The exploration of the local human resources, and native.
authorities as well as the proper utilization of these potentialities
for maximum community improvement, calls for broad understanding,
constructive leadership, and skills in human relations. Those in charge
of fundamental oducation must guard vell against a community-development
program that will he too ambitious or too advanced for the local
population to understand. The capacities, the temperamental attitude,
and even the humor of these people should be reckoned with in building
up a progrem that will make possible gradual, steady, and enduring
improvement.
The foregoing pointers are but a few of the basic concepts which
vill be taken up in the Seminar; other essential features of adult
education through the Community School will be discussed. 'hat contributions shall the delegates and observers in the Seminar make for
further enrichment of the fundamental working basis of this movement?


-3-
READING CENTER, A CORNERSTONE OF COMMINITY IMPROVEHEDT PROGRAM
Mr. Venancio Trinidad, Assistant Director of Public Schools,
after a recent visit to Bulacan stated: "I was very much impressed
by the work of the division in fundamental education, particularly
vith the establishment of community reading centers, of which the
province has now about two hundred. These are located in small
communities, barrios and strategic rural areas, where they are readily accessible to the people. I was pleased to note the people’s
interest in the conmunity reading centers."
The observation of the Assistant Director shows the impertance
of popularizing reading centers as a factor of community improvement. He found that through the cocperative efforts of the people
thoy had ostablished these community reading centers. This is a
cloar manifestation that any given conmunity, if sufficiently motivated, can on its cun resources initiate wholeseme projects for
common welfare as vell as develop active and responsible community leadorship.
A community reading center can serve many purpeses. It
can act as a community classreom whero illiterates can be tutorod
to enable them to discover the secrets of the printed pago. It
can serve as a seurce of infermatien on social, cultural and economic problens where citizons can read a thousand-one ways of
making a happy home and where farmers can inquire on the latest
farm metheds te increase their produce. It can be used as a point


-A

of gathering where the community leaders and the people can
meet and frame their programs fer community assemblies,
civic-educational loctures, group discussions, heme-crafts
conferences, and the like. A reading center is the best antidcte
for many in the countryside in their prepensity to spend their
leisure time in mnprofitable and unwholesome pastimes. A
reading center, if properly directel, can becone a motive
force to make life in rural communities rich and useful, and can,
therefore, become a cornerstone of the conmunity improvement
progran.


The greatest enemy of freedom
is ignerance. The condition of being imcrant is man-made; it can be
eradicabad only by helping man to
help himself.


Yang Hsin-Pao


- 5-
FINDAMENTAL AND ADULT EDUCATION PROCRAM THROUH
THE COMAUNITY SCHOOL IN MEYCAUAYAN
BULACAN
By Emilio. J. Samaniego
District Supervisor
Meycauayan, Bulacan
Community improvement and adult education are so closely
interrelated that any activity intended to promote one of them autoQuite often the latter is utilized
matically promotes the other.
as a means to effect advancement on the former.
Fror available reports of a former district supervisor of
Meycauayan it can be noted that effort was exerted in previous years
in activities connected with community improvement and adult education
program. Similar activities in other districts or municipalities
might have been done with more intensity so that Meycauayan failed
to gain recognition. Existing conditions in Meycauayan appear not
to be less favorable than conditions obtaining elsewhere in the
Division of Bulacan for the prosecution of a fundamental and adult
education program. With this appraisal of local conditions the
entire teaching force in Meycauayan confidently bolieves that what
have been accomplished in other placos can also be done in Meycauayan.
The first week of August, 1951 marked the beginning of intensified
activities in connection with community improvement and adult education program.
Basic Ain and Obioctives. The progran of adult education
as envisaged by the central office is being implemented in Meycauayan.
All its aspects are given due consideration. The ultinate goal is
the improvement of living conditions in the community to enable the
people to live better and richer life.


-OIt is recognized that different communities vary in their needs
and resources. The interests and aptitude of the people as well as
those of the teacher-leaders possibly vary in like manner. Thus it
will be observed that some commmities place more stress in combating
illiteracy; others undertake activities intended to improve conditions
connected with health and sanitation; and still others place more enphasis en improving their economic donditions through food production
projects such as poultry and piggery; and quite a majority of them
have done something along cultural-social aspect.
This should not be interpreted to mean that the communities
enguged in the type of activities of their first choice vill never
undertake other activities. All communities cannot be expected to
undertake all aspects of adult education at once or with equal degree
of attention. Some activities have to be done ahead of the others
depending upon the enigencies of community situntions.
Prelininarr Organization and Orientation. In the second division educational work-conference held at Malolos on March 19 to 21 and
26 to 30, 1951 all the conferees, among whom were the district supervisor, principals, head teachers and selected classroom teachers from
Meycaunyan District, pledged intensification in the implementation of
the cormunity school program in Bulacan. In the said conference the
pook or purok organization patterned after the type found in Bataan
was suggested. This is tried in Meycauayan and it appears to be
effective.
The whole municipality is divided into as many areas as there
are schools and each area under each school in turn is divided


- 7
into zones or pooks, each, under a teacher or group of teachers. In
some pooks one teacher-adviser is found sufficient but in other pooks
a group of teachers (2 to 3) has been found desirable. The teachers
had to nake a housesto-house campaign in their effort to sell the
idea of conmunity service to the people. After one month of meetings
here and there the people were convinced in the importance of the
movement and at once formed naok organizations. The officials of the
ngok or purok organizations are president, vice president, secretary,
treasurer and auditor.
Participation of Civic Organizations and Poople of the Community.
The adult education progran anywhere vill elther fail or succeed depending upon the degreo of active participation of conrumity agoncies
and people of the cormmunity. Any existing civic organization in the
conmunity should first be appraised that the objectives of the pook
organization are parallel and not in contradiction to the aspirations
of the former. In fact in Meycauayan the teachers have roported that
the different civic organizations have been capitalized to facilitate
the organization of nany pook associations. The mutual aid association
in Likod, the S.P.O.A. of Saluysoy, the athletic clubs in Malhacan,
and the Youth Social Circle in the poblacion are all convinced that
in helping the various pgok organizations they are also promoting
their interests.
The noticeable improvement in the general cleanliness of the
private yards and the streets of the municipality; the poultry and
piggery projects found in Bancal which are owned by former members
of the adult education classes; the availability of trash cans in
front of almest every house; the presence of many presentable sign


- 8-
markers of the pook organizations throughout the toun; and last but
not least, the construction of fifteen reading centers with costs
ranging from P300 to P2,000 nay help reveal the degree of participation of the people of the cormunity.
The conversion of the slun district of Mahinhin into a sanitary
dwelling place would have been impossible without the people's full
participation. This district was very low, damp, and vithout alley.
One had to pass through the neighbor's yards to reach the min street.
Empty cans and aninal wastes were scattered. Nith the active participation of the people of the comrnmity, well-laid out paved alley lined
on both sides with uniform bamboo fence has been constructed. The
yards are now clean; the stagnant pools and pusali are drained; and
tho beautification of the community through planting ornamental plants
along the fence has been started. It may be of interest to know that
the owners of different lots had to give free of charge a meter or
more of their yards to givo space for the alleys.
In so far as community improvement is concerned it may be safely
stated that the people of the community are doing practically the
whole job. The teachers are merely supplying the inspiration.
As stated in the secend paragraph the first week of August, 1951
marked the beginning of the intensified activities of Meycauayan.
The accomplishments se far achieved are thorefore the results of
intensified efferts of the people in three months. It has been noted
that ence the pecple are totally sold to any good idea they are
capable of accomplishing wonders. It may be added that the frequent


- O

visits of delegations fron all towns of Bulacan; the visit of two
hundred students with their instructors from the Philippine Normal
College; the visit of one hundred fifty students with their professors
from, the University of the Philippines; the visit of one hundred
graduate students with their professors from the Arellano University;
and the visit of prominent men and women as Father Barth of the
U.S.E. F., American Embassy, Mrs. Paz M. Benitez, and lately, Assistant Director of Public Schools, Mr. Venancio Trinidad have all
boosted the enthusiasm of the people towards further accomplishment.
Dr. Williard W. Beatty of the UNESCO Office in Paris who visited
Meycaunyan on September 19, 1951 with Mr. Vicente Garcia, Chief of
the Adult Education Division, remarked that it was well worth his
long trip half around the world to come and see the Meycauayan adult
education progran.
From all indications it appears certain that the adult education
program in Meycauayan is there to stay. One who has seen the different
reading centers vill not fail to notice that they are the embodiment
of thoughtful planning of the people with due consideratien of the
various uses they can make out of them. In truth the reading centers
are real community centers. Play facilities such as basketball court,
pingpong tables, play apparatus for young children, together with
plenty of well arranged bamboo benches are provided. In one center
a weckly concert is held and the pook asseciation has to put up a
cooperative canteen to meet the need of the people assembled every
night. The prosident of the Pook Likod has given the information


- 10


that all expenses for lighting can be paid fren the prefit roalized
from the canteen.
The junior pook association whese members are the young men and
young ladies of the paok has been formed te cooperate with the adults.
In one place, Tincg-llulo, the association has cenented the frentage
of the center which now serves as the auditorium of the place. Similar
organizations in different pgoks are likely to follow suit.
The centers in different pooks are convenient places where
adult education classes can be held. The problems of distance of
the homes of adult pupils frem the school building and their inconvenience of dressing up just to attend classes appear solved. Lectures
or demonstrations of reseurce persons can be held conveniently in
the community conters and so with the extension work activitios of
the home econonics classes. The latter has already been tried with
success in connection with the divisien home economies work-conferenco
held at Meycauayan on October 1-4 and 8-11, 1951.
If the different pook officials are sincere in their remarks,
plenty of activities for comrumity improvement are yet to be expected.


PRELIMINARY ACTIVITIES ON FUNDAMENTAL
AND ADULT EDUCATION IN MAGSINGAL


By Santiago Dizon
Division Superintendent of Schools for Ilocos Sur


Survey of Illiteracy and Organization of Adult Classos
During the workshop and conference of Supervisors and Principals
of this division which was held in Vigan from August 8 to 10, 1951,
inclusive, adult education in its modern concept was among the topics
brought about for discussion. In line with the principles and plans
worked out during the workshop, the Supervising Principal of Magsingal
Elementary School with the cooperation of his teachers formulated a
community school service program of activities with the primary aim
of reducing illiteracy in the municipality to the minimum. A survey
was made te determine the extent of illiteracy throughout the locality,
with the folloving results:


Toble 1 - Showing the distribution of
illiteracy by harrios


ROIROO OP
Barrios er
Diatricts.



1
1


No. 61
houses


TNO. po1
I pula!
tion I


NO. Ant
PopulaLION


T NO. ARule 1
!Illite¬!
I ratos 1


TOCONEGO V1
Illiteracy


E2


San Vacente


74


!


369


!


201


1
55
!


7.3


San Ramen


143


707


419


1 146 


31.8


San Julian


98


Z04


272


!
35


12.8


San Dasilio


75


450


219


50


22.8


San Clemente


1


8-


435


228


!
4l


1.9


San Lucas


75


366


175


38


21.7


PAURIOS


Alangan


A
227


!


80


!
!
48


60.0


Barbarit


128


475


!


172


!
1
58


29.7


Dacutan


56


268


1


125


!
58


M.k


Cadanglaan


22


88


59


!
27


79.6


lhcatcatud


4


284


1


140


!
59


42.1


Ma-as-asin


84


475


!


239


!
91
!


38.0


Maratude


52


236


!


104


1
34


80.0


Manzante


135


1


658


312


!
 83


26.6


- 12 -


(cen't-)


Rapo


77


!


373


!


229


84


36.6


Pagsanaan


!


184


!


663


1


221


1


84


38.0


Panay


!


192


!


965


!


529


!


185


35.71


Puro


!


61


!


619


!


352


!


137


38.9


Tagaipuz.


1 159-


1-$12





-380.


—






A


CLa


IL


AOO


IS. OAl


—L


KaAo





1.523..


a3


The surve:


roven


1s


that ingsingal,


Iloc


os Sur.


has a total popu

latien of 3,941. There aro 4,456 adults cut ef which 1,559 are unable to
read and writo in the local diclect. The percentage of illiteracy in
Magsingal basing upon these figures is 34.9, which is lower than 40.4, the
illiteracy percentace of lloces Sur province is of 1948 census. The
tenchers of Magsingal however are determined ti decrense the number of
illiterates in their municipality and if pessible te vipe out illiteracy
entirely. Nith these situntiens as criteria, the teachers were able to
organize an adult class in each of the 19 barrios or zones with an aggregate enrolment of 320 beginners, distributed as follows:


Table 2 - Showing enrolment by barriog





N. 395


IO ENE1


 i


—or gones


IIlliterates!


mont


lenrolled! Names of Teachers


an a 
Ga)
MAL


San Vicente


55


!


6


49


!Miss V. Tolentino


San Ramon


146


9


137


¡Miss M. Luczon


San Julian


!Mrs. N. G. Odarbe


San Basilio





11


!Mr. F. A. Mercado


San Clemente


n


25


16


IMrs. A. A. Farinas


San Lucas


38


2


36


!Mrs. L. O. Tipon


BARNIOS


Alangan


!


48


22


26


IMiss I. Flores


Barbarit


58


11


47


IMrs. F. Soliven


Dacutan


58


!


11


!Miss V. Oandasan


Cadanglaan


47


17


Mss F. Flotildes


Macatcatud


59


!


28


!Mrs. C. T. Oandasan


Ma-as-asin


12


!Mss D. Luczon


Maratudo


!


14


!ifiss C. Daldoria


Menzante


fss C. Cdarbo


Napo


84


36


48


IIass Tomaneng


Pagsanaan


84


12


72


IMiss C. Nobino


Panay


189


42


LA7


Ifr. L. Raquel
Mr. D. S. Palos


Puro


137


36 1


1o1


IMr. A. Pacleb
Mr. Jacinto.


Tagaipuz


112


-





1 IOA


TIIr. J. Viscerra


TOba


—


1,553





120


11.222.





- 13 -
The different barrios were recently dividod inte smaller units
known as "Gunglos" similar te the vell advertised "Purok" system of
bataan, in order to make supervision of the different projects more
effective. There are 1,239 adults remining un-enrolled in adult
classes in the whole municipality. Granting that at least 300 adults
could be made functionally literate every year, the crusado against
this social evil undoubtedly requires a long-range program covering
a peried of not less than 5 years so as to liquidate illiteracy in
Magsingal completely. This is precisely what the teachers of the
mumicipality desire to carry out. As a supplement to literacy instruction in regular classes, reading centers are being established in
strategic places to provide opportunities for the adults to develop
the reading habit, as well as to improve their AC knowledge obtained
in the classroom. Incidentally, a reading center serves as an excellent
place for spending leisure hours on the part of the rural folk instead
of the cockpits and other gambling places.
Teaching Vocational Subiecta
The secondary objective embodied in the school's program of
activities is to help in the improvement of the economic vell-being
of the people of the rural areas with the adult schools as resource
units. Subjectsof immediate functional values such as poultry, hog
and vegetable raising are included in teaching program and are given
in informal lectures. In connection with these subjects, each adult
is required to engage in actual project at home by raising a certain
number of pigs, chickens, and to cultivate the vacant lots in the
home premises for vegetable production. In many cases these home


-I

projects are carried as joint projects between the parent and the
school child. Defore a cortificate of proficiency is awarded, an adult
pupil must first shoy evidences of having engaged in one or two useful
undertakins that tend to improve the livina condition of the family.
Health apd Home Life
The last objective of the adult education program of the school
but not the least in importance has something to do with sanitation
with the following goals: (1) to see that every home is provided with
a sanitary toilet, (2) to see that all low places under the kitchen and
around the house are filled with earth or gravel, (3) to help improve
the beauty of home surroundings by initiating the planting of ornamental
and flowering plants in proper setting, and (4) to see to it that home
grounds are provided with suitable fenees. Subjects on health and home
life are given through the lecture methods supplemented with demonstrations if materials are available. During week ends, teachers visit the
homes of their pupils to sse that what is taught in the adult class is
actually done in the homes.
Conclusion
The community-school idea has now gained general acceptance throughout the division. Magsingal, however, according to reports, has gone
ahead of other schools in the attempt to carry out the principles involved in Fundamental and Adult Education in particular, for which the
Supervising Principal, Mr. Samuel Carino, is highly commended for his
leadership. The results of these preliminary activities will be
evaluated from time to time.


- 15 -
LUMBAN COMMUNITY SCHOOL MISSION

(Report on Visit to-Lumban, Laguna, Sept. 13-L,1951)
By Artemio C. Vizconde
Chief of Section, Adult Education Division
It is quite premature to discuss in this report the success and
failure or make any presumption of what may be the outcome of the
Lumban Community School. In the first place, the movement is barely over
a month old, and in the second place, I did not have any chance to
see the community before the Community School Mission was inaugurated
on August 6, 1951. However, here is Lumban as I saw it on the 13th
and LAth of September, last.
Lumban is divided into fourteen zones or "puroks" Every district
has a "purok" organization which has all inhabitants in the district as
members. To add interest to the movement these "purok' organizations
adopted names such as Purok Dayao, Purok Lumban, Purok Bagong Silang,
Purok DapiteHanon, Purok Kasipagan and other catchy names. As in other--
places, these "purok" organizations are the chief agencies of the Community School Mission through which its plans are made to work out in
each zone or district. However, to facilitate planning and execution
a community counoil is organized. It is composed of representatives
from each "purok' organization.
The school, as anywhere else, is always an agent of society which
serves not only the pupils but also the community. In the light of the
foregoing idea, the teachers and other school officials in Lumban have
assumed the responsibility of establishing among the people desirable
habits, ideals and attitudes which are instrumental in creating interest
in community improvement. The public school of Lumban being the only or

- 16 -
ganized agency at the start of the movement has to undertake the initiative
and leadership with this end in view — to shift the responsibility of
improving home and commmity life to the inhabitants through the
"purol: organizations. It cannot be denied that the teachers of
Lumban are doing the lion’s share of the work, most especially, during
the organizational stage of the community-improvement program. The
people as a whole have to be awakened from lethargy not through lipservice but through an objective course of action. So, the teachers
cleaned their surroundings, fenced their yards, built their own toilets,
kept their stray animals from roaming around and started simple projeots
of their own in food production. This was followed by other "purok'
leaders and officials. Mindful of community service, the teachers take
active part, not enly as "enablers" but also as consultants, in the various activities in their respective "puroks", and in persistently
gulding the "purel members to realize the purpose of the mission.
Now, the project of sanitation is being carried out with vigor
and it seems that the community has quite felt the need for sanitary
measures. Mentioned below are some of the health and sanitation activities emphasized:
1. - Nost yards in the different "puroks" have been fenced and
the maintenance of clean homes and surroundings is indeed noticeable.
The use of garbage receptacles in each home and the digging of compost
pits for garbage disposal have been started through the school children.
This is baing performed in connection with their community service.
2. - The residents in the community have made a positive response in making Lumban strecis free from roaming domestic animals by


17-


keeping their pigs in pens and their hena and duoks-in a chicken-wire
enclosure, or by keeping the animals within their own yards.
3. - Now, in almost all the neighborhood water is constantly flowing for it cannot afford to stand in filled-up places and in newly dug
neighborhood canals. In all Lumban streets, big and new culverts have
been constructed lately for the town’s general drainage.
4. - For quite a number of years now the health agencies and the
schools have been campaigning for every home to have a more decent
sanitary toilet. So far, the teachers in Lumban have made a considerable advance in the campaign through the "purok' organizations. The
teachers did not prescribe the type of sanitary toilet to be constructed for each home, but advised the. "purok' members that anything
other then the "pig system', provided it is sanitary in the sense that
human waste falls in a pit that is shut off from animals and flies,
may be in order.
5. - The school children in Lumban as a part of their community
service have helped put up green-painted streets' names and bulletin
boards with white letterings for purposes of town beautification and
zone identification.
It is also worthy to mention that remarkable interests have been
shown by twelve "puroks" in the community in the promotion of cultural
and recreational aspect of home and community life together with the
literacy work. They have established some sort of reading center in each
zone.' The Lumban Academy, a private high school in the heart of the town,
has opened its library to Lumban folk up to nine o'clock at night.


- 18 -


Food production is being intensified. School children in connection
with their community service are required to plant at least one fruit
tree seedling or banana plant in their yards. Poultry and piggery
projects have also been started in some "puroks".
COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. In an effort to seek the improvement of the whole community
on the different aspects of community life, the community school gears
its programs and services to the immediate needs and wishes of the
people, namely, promotion of economic and health conditions. In this
attempt all agencies, most especially the school and the church, seek
to enroll the support of as many men and women in the locality. However, practices that vill tend to produce spurious and superficial
outcomes should be avoided, most especially when they are initlated
and directed by our teachers and other community leaders in their
attempt to show accomplishments in their respective purok. It is
stressing the obvious to say that the program of adult education as
provided in the community-school movement should be built around the
voluntary and expressed interests of the adults themselves. The role
of our teachers in a community school is to enable the people to get
things done by more of arousing their (people) will to face and solve
their own problems rather than by requirements.
2. The petty discussions among the "purok' members about the different
activities launched in their respective zones as related by inhabitants


- 19 -


with whom I had a chance to interview are certainly cormendable. They
are manifestations of a growing consalousness of the need of improving
their homes and comnunity living.
3. The examples set by our teachers on definite home and community
underbakings For the promotion of health and sanitation and food production seem to have been effective. However, for obvious reasona,
I suggest the use of wall posters, connected pictures, film strips
and other audio-visual means. They may be secured from the Bureau of
Plant Industry, Bureau of Animal Industry, Bureau of Health and the
United States Information Service.


Local workshops, in which the best
techniques emerging from the experimental
program have been applied, have been found
an excellent means of analyzing resources
in relation to needs and for planning a
program of actien on the basis of study.


Jean and Jess Ogden


- 20 -



TURT
T.AS AD'LT ED CATION ACTIVITLES OF THE DAMANG
HIGH SCHOOL
Dy Alberto A. Genato
Acting Principal, Dambang High School
Dambang, Ilueva Vizcaya
Campalgn Against Infant Mortality
The Dambang High School this year has dedicated itself actively
to the different phases of community improvement. One of the movements
undertaken is a crusade against the high rate of infant mortality in
Hueva Vizcaya. The drive is conducted through donations of old clothing
to indigents. The members of the faculty have appealed to their students
to campaign for old clothes so that the lome Economics students could
renovate them to baby clothings for distribution to the indigent
children of the nunicipality. To forge the campaign ahoad, a big box
marked: "DUMP YOUA OLD CLOTHES HEAE AND SAVE A LIFE!" was conspicuously
placed in front of the building so that students giving old clothes
may just drop them into the box. The Child Care and Advanced Clothing
and Related Arts students deserve special commendation for the services
they are rendering on this phase of community improvement.
Var Against Ipdesirable Social Customs
The inhabitants of this toun like other towns and places in the
Philippines have some ancient customs that need to be eradicated.
Such customs block the progress of many of the families here. Unless
measures are taken up to eliminate these social ills the people will
remain conservatively unprogressive. One particular case is about the
Isinay customs on death.


- 21 -


The Isinays, the native inhabitants of Southern Hueva Vizcaya,
practice a tradition of lavishly spending for one who has gone to the
life beyond. This practice is believed to have some bearings on their
religious as vell as their superstitious beliefs.
To discourage such objectionable practice, the Dambang High School
has started a campaign through the Parent-Teacher Association, community
assemblies, and the high school students. It is believed that through
these media obsolete social practices associated with death, agriculture, child birth, sickness, etc., can be gradually eradicated.
Thrift Campaign
In order to encourage the people to lead a thrifty life, tha
Bambang Iligh School started a thrift campaign among the students so as
to serve as a model organization for the parents and other members of
the community.
Starting with only fifty-nine members last January, the school
can now boast of having gone beyond the 505 mark of its student population with a total deposit of P3, 244.00. Before the school year
closes it is expected that all students shall have rallied behind the
thrift campaign program of the school. Again, through the ParentTeacher Association and community assemblies the school is forging
ahead in this drive.
Neokly Commumity Services
The Dambang High School students and teachers are rendering community service every Thuraday during off hours. The community has been
divided into tyo community-improvement areas between the Dambang Elemmentary School and the Dambang High School. The area assigned to this


- 22 -


school was re-divided into blocks with one or two teachers taking
charge of each block. Placards and signboards have been placed in
conspicuous places to mark the boundaries and area limits of each block
assigned to each of the classes.
To encourage cleanliness of the homes and their surroundings,
a sort of competition has been made. In response to such competition,
the adults have shown their interest in keeping their homes always
neat and clean. Fences which had been falling because of neglect are
mended properly. Yards which were lying idle have been planted or
utilized for some economic purposes.
Lectures and Demonstrations
The Dambang High School has been holding a series of demonstrations
and lectures with parents of the children and tounspeople attendingEven meetings of the Parent-Teacher Association vere utilized to include two or more demonstrations on some phases of vocational education
or home economics. Caponizing cockerels, preparation of balanced diet,
preparation of a cheap salad that contains the elements necessary for
the body, etc., were ably demonstrated by either members of the faculty
or students. During such demonstrations, the parents displayed much
interest as evidenced by the fact that the hall was turned into an
ordinary inquiring room. The teachers and students enjoyed answering
questions of the parents.


- 23 -
THE "LITTLE TEACUEV' METHOD IN LITERACY VORK!
Dy Vitoliono Bernardino
Division Superintendent of Schools for Bulacan
Since we launched our community school program relatively little
has been accomplished on literacy instruction for adults as compared
with what has been accomplished in the other aspects of the pregram.
The difficulty of organizing literacy classes to be taught exclusively
by teachers is easily understandable. The unfavorable attitude of
an illiterate adult being taught by another person, unless he be a
relative, has also been realized. The possibilities of the "little
teacher" where a literate child teaches his own father, mother, or
other members of the household should be fully exploited.
In using the "little teacher" method, it is necessary that the
pupil be given training on how te teach his relative. Every pupil
from Grade III up te the Fourth Year of the high school should be
encouraged to serve as a "little teacher.” The training of the "little
teacher" may be done during the national language period, since the
language of literacy teaching is the vernacular.
The method of teaching the vernacular is based on the phonetic
and agglutinative nature of this language. After learning the sound
of the vowels a. 2. 4, 2. u, and the common consonants, and the syllables made by blending them as ba, ka, ma, na, ta, sa, la, pa, etc..
the individual may be able to read any word composed of one or more
of these syllables. If writing is taught simultaneously with reading,
using the printed form at the boginning, the pupil himself may be

1 From Division Bulletin No. 2, s. 1951


- 21, -
able to print a fey beginning lessons in Tagalon. Such lessons may
be developed in a cooperative manner durina the class in Hational
Language.
Abakada by Untalan is a primer based en the syllable methed desmn
cribed above. This cannot be purchased from government funds since
it has not yet been approved by proper autherities, llowever, parents
and other adults who may wish to use this book can buy the same from
the printer, Inana Vika. Copies of the Citizens leaders and other reading matter published by the Zureau of Public Schools should also be used.
After an adult has read a reasonable number of words, simple
Tagalog readers as Tayo na Magbasa, which is available in all municipalities, may be used. Families may be encouraged to acquire books in
the vernacular of different reading difficulties for their use in
learning to read. Where reading centers have been established their
facilities should be used to maintain the literacy of the new literates.
--- ---
Improvement of the life of the
people must be paramount. Literacy
training and other tools for education should be drawn upon to contribute to these objectives as necessary.


- Homer Kempfer


25 -


SAYTAN, A LITTLE DELOCRACY INI ACTION
Dy Amado L. Agorrilla
Chief of Section, Adult Education Division
Saytan is a typical rural community in La Uhnion. It is a small
barrio of the mountain toun of Pugo, about six or eight kilometers
from the poblacion and composed of about 300 houses.
Onder the heat of the scorching sun, the Adult Education Supervisor and I hiked from the highway and arrived at Saytan at about
two o'clock in the afternoon. My companion was complaining of blisters under his feet and I told him not to mind them because those are
the "blisters of adult education."
Saytan is one of the places in La Union where they hold regular
classes for adults. They have two classes, one is for the adult beginners and the other is for those adults who desire to know more about
practical arithmetic, citizenship duties and local occupations. The
adults are interested in their classes as shoun by the regularity of
their attendance. The school principal who is the moving spirit in
their adult education projects handles the advanced class for adults.
At the sound of the school gong the barrio folk came. It was a
manifestation of the fine spirit of cooperation among the barrio people
of Saytan. They can be easily gathered if there is something important
for their community. About 120 men and women came to the school. Some
brought with them their copies of "Pagbasaan ti Umili,” Ve opened
an impromptu program where the Principal, the Adult Education Supervisor,
the President of the P.T.A. and myself spoke on adult education and
community improvement. All the community leaders of the barrio were


- 26 -
present. According to the P.T.A. president it was an old custom in
their place that in all community movements, every home in the barrio
should be represented in the discussion. Every man is his oun representative and that makes Saytan a kind of pure democracy.
After the meeting we went to a special place which they called
Abong-Abong. The whole crowd came with us. The President of the P.T.A.
told me that it was good for me to come to their barrio. According to
him that was the first time a Manila Supervisor came to visit them, the
people. He said that there would be a good effect of my visit on the
people because they would feel that the government is truly interested
in their welfare.
The Abong-Abong is a place for commumity gathering. The people can
not trace its beginning, but they can recall that the Abong-Abong has
existed as a community center since the days of their ancestors. The
people gather at the Abong-Abong where they weave their baskets and
nets, make ropes, sacks, plows and other things which are ordinarily
made at home. The people work and help each other in the AbongAbong. When there is no work to be done, the people gather there just
the same and discuss problems of the commmity. The Abong-Abong is a
symbol of neighborhood cooperation and democratic practice. A good
thing developed in the Abong-Abong is honesty and respect for personal
property. The people leave their tools, utensils, ropes, fish traps,
nets, bolos and mortars made of hides in the Abong-Abong without
fear of being lost. They stay late at night working, helping each
other or discussing problems and resume activities next day without
losing a single article in the Abong-Abong.


- 27


A clear demonstration of the spirit of helpfulness in Saytan is
told in the story of the adult education teacher. The barrio folk love
her for two reasons - as teacher of their children and as teacher of
adults. One week before my arrival at Saytan, the house where the adult
oducation teacher lived was accidentally burned. The barrio folk
built a modest nipa house for her in three days without costing her a
single centavo. Most of the bamboo furniture was made by the people
in the Abong-Abong. The Abong-Abong which represents a unique
spirit of community life in the Philippines has done much to improve
the life conditions of the barrio folk in Saytan. It is the AbongAbong which makes Saytan, a little democracy in action.
----O----
Action should be a keynote to
all adult education programmes,
mere reception of ideas or information given out by a "teacher"
or "leader" is not enough.


Yang Hsin-Pao


- 23 -


TE PULO IMPAOVEREENT P.: JECTS OF THE DIMANGAS
AIGN SCIOOL
From the heport of Mr. Elpidio L. Cabus, Principal
Dumangas High School, Dumangas, Iloilo
Our experience in community work during the last two years
has shown us the difficulty of achieving workable and lasting
results by taking the whole toun as a field of operation. In view
of this, the pule improvement projects are being undertaken primarily by the people under the guidance and motivation of the
teachers. Pule is a local name for a small area in the locality
with a limited number of houses. There are two pulo improvement
projects in Dumangas. In Ilaya Pulo Improvement Project, there are
26 houses and in Mabini Pule Improvement Project, 18 houses
are included.
O..GAHIZATIOF. - Through the initiative of the high school
teachers in Dumangas, the owners of the houses within the perimeter
of the project organized the pule improvement comcil which fundamental function is to effect improvement in the locality through
group activities and social processes. The officers are all lay
persons, so that it can be said that the improvement council is
for the people, by the people, and of the people of the pule.
PAOGRAM OF ACTIVITIES. - Through cooperative discussions and
constructive clashes of opinions among the owners of the houses
included in the project, it was agreed to direct the work on pulo
improvement toward the following areas of living: (a) hygiene and
sanitation, (b) home improvement and beautification, (c) economic
improvement, including food production, (d) literacy work, (e) civic


- 29 -


life, and (f) cultural and social improvement.
CAMPAIGN METHODS. - The campaign for pule improvement includes
the following steps:
The pupils and the students as well as the teachers living in
the pulo, with the cooperation of their parents, brothers or
sisters aro encouraged to undertake the pulo improvement.
The teachers are stimulated to tie up their subject
matter offerings to the needs and problems of improving life
and living in the community.
The Psycho-Socio Approach - Attempts were made to solve the
problems of pulo improvement through a better understanding
of the nature of the people and through group activities and
social processes. During the meeting with the people, discussions were centered not only on the nature, type, and motives of different reactions and responses, but also on the
utmost importance of group activities and experiences in bringing about improvements in the lecality. Provision was made to
Secure from the people not only facts concerning their environmental factors but also information concerning institution that
takes active interest in the needs and problems of improving
life and living in the community.
It is hoped that these pulo improvement projects vill serve as
"show window" for commumity improvement, so that, through them,
the rest of the people of the town, through their own resourcefulness and responsibility, vill effect improvements in their life
and in their respective localities.

INITIAL ACALEVEMENTS, - The following may be mentioned as the
substantial results obtained through the pulo improvement projects:
1. The increase in the enrolment in the Dumangas High School
from 706 of last school year to 877 is primarily the result of the
confidence of the people in the activities of the school.
2. The municipal officials have given immediate attention to
the request of the school to improve Habini Street, which is adjacent


to the school site.


- 30 -
3. The board of directors of the P.T.A, succeeded in putting
up the nipa ceiling of the temporary building, thus solving one of
the pressing problems of the school. They are presently undertaking the following projects:
a. The construction of the girls' study hall
b. The construction of the boys' study hall
A. The people living within the porimeter of the pule have
responded cooperatively to the activities leading to the improvement of living conditions in their localities.
5. The Independence Day was enthusiastically celebrated for
the first time in Dumangas, and the affair through the cooperative
spirit which pervaded in the pule was jointly undertaken by the
municipal officials, the people, and the school teachers with their
pupils and students actively participating.


- 31 -
TE
THENDS AND PRACTICES IU ADULT EDUCATION ADOAD


In the Delgian Congo it has been demonstrated that films can be
effectively used in literacy campaigns. A narrative film entitled
"Savoir Lire" tells a story of a young man, Alphonse, who cannot
read. He receives a letter from his brother which tells him - when he
finds someone to read it - that there is a vacant job on a plantation.
Alphonse starts for the plantation, but he wastes a lot of time because
he cannot read sign posts. He arrives at a polluted stream and drinks.
He is taken ill because he carmot read the warning notice. Uhen he
reaches the plantation, the job has been filled. He has lost his
opportunity because he could not read.
(Social Education News Dulletin, September 1, 1951)
Training Village Leaders
The Indian Hinistry of Education in cooperation with tha Delhi
State Depariment of Education caused the establishment of the Janata
College Center in a rural area outside of New Delhi. The aim of the
Center is "to train village leaders who will return to their oin
villages to do adult fundamental education work.” Starting from the
villages near the Center, fundamental education work will be expanded to
the whole territory of Delhi State. A village is first surveyed and
an educational program is developed on the basis of the needs discovered.
A production program of follow-up literature for the newly-literates
is imdertaken in the Center with the assistance of a Unesco expert.
(Fundamental Education Dulletin, April, 1951)


- 32 -


Hotives of Adults in Extension Classes
Adults enrolled in extension classes differ from those in regular
day classes. They compose a heterogeneous group widely varying in
age, interests, abilities and academic background and therefore possess
different motives in attending adult education classes. Their motives
may be classified as follows:
(1) To enrich their personal living.
(2) To improve their occupational proficienoy.
(3) To prepare themselves for new vocational or professional fields.
(Z) To amass academic credits to satisfy employers.
Students in extension classas are "mature adults who are serious,
conscientious, eager to attain their objectives, and appreciative of
interest and effort in their behalf."
(Adult Education, June, 1951)


The Tamale Vegk
In order to discover the best way in which mass education methods
can be applied to the particular problems of the Northern Territories
of the Gold Coast, Africa, a Mass Education Conference was organized at
Tamale, the capital of the Northern Territories. An important phase
of the community devolopment program of the Conference was the holding
of "The Tamale Veek.” An exhibit of the community development projects
was held and thousands of people viewed the educational show. There
were displayed photographs of works, such as dams, bridges, and landplanning schemes from all parts of the Northern Territories. Industrial
products were also shown, like hats, baskets, salt, soap, school arts
and crafts and paintings. For the benefit of farmers, methods of


33


making composts and contour-ploughing were demonstrated.
(Gommunity Development Bulletin, June, 1951)
Fundamental Education
A definition of fundamental education as presented to an InterSecretariat Morking Party of the United Nations and Specialized Agencies
states! "Fundamental Education is that kind of minimum and general
education which aims to help children and adults who do not have the
advantages of formal education, to understand the problems of their
immediate environment and their rights and duties as citizens and
individuals, and to participate more effectively in the economic and
secial progress of their community."
(Fundacental Education Bulletin, April, 1951)
Post-literacy Classes
In order to provide greater opportunities to the new literates
who had finished thein literacy course from the fifty Social Education
Centers in Ajmer State, India, post-literacy classes have been opened.
The "follow-up” or "continuation course" is necessary so that the adults
after passing their literacy test may not stop and relapse into illiteracy.
Richer courses are offered dealing on Health, Sanitation, tivics, History, Geography and Culture. The local libraries, recently established
in the Social Education Centers, supply the adults with the necessary
raupplementary reading books and materials.
(Social Education Dulletin, September 1, 1951)


- M -
TG
ADULT EDUCATIOU ACTIVITIES IN THE PAOVINCE


Reports received in the General Office on the extent of the
promotion of activities in fundamental and adult education showed
encouraging results. Under the leadership of division superintendents
of schools and with the cooperation of supervisors, principals,
teachers, and community leaders much improvement of the living conditions in both urban and rural localities had boen effected through
the agencies of adult education. The following showed the variod
phases of adult education activities in the provinces:
MANILA
The Philippine Normal Collage in Manila recently conduated
a series of conferences on fundamental and adult education. Several
lecturers spoke on the various aspects of promoting adult education
through the comramity schools.
On October 22, the Punta Commamity-School Mission was comctly
throe months old. Superintendent Maceda is in charge of that
project,which was inaugurated on July 22 by Professor Medellin of
the UNESCO. Mr. Maceda said that hewas surprised to learn that
theremere only nine adults unemployed in Punta, Santa Ana.
The Free Adult Education Class in Hamemaking of the Philippino
Vomen's Uhiversity held recently its closing exercisas. Iwanty out
of about 45 vomen and out-of-school youths in the neighborhood ef
the HU recelved their Adult Education certificatos. The suecessful
adult studenta vere very happy to receive their certificates after
attending their classes one hour everyday for a period of ona month.


- 25 -
TO
CAVITE


The Tanza Junior High School and the Tanza Elementary School
have joined forces to undertake adult education activities for the
improvement of the living conditions in Tanza. Principal Jose T.
Bernal of Tanza Junior High School has reported that there are only
51 illiterates in the 270 families in the territory covered by the
high school. Most of the illiterates are past 65 years of age.
The teachers and students will teach them the rudiments of readina
and writing. Due to their campaign for health and sanitation,
196 families now have the pit systen of toilet.
PANCAS ITAN
Several conmunity assemblies were conducted in many barrios
by the San Carlos Rural High School, San Carlos, Pangasinan.
According to Principal Soriano, "the local farmers vere interested
in the community assemblies held in their respective barrios becanse
they actually learned a lot in the art of scientific farming and
homemaking.” In these assemblies several demonstrations were made
on methods of caponizing, grafting, budding, food preservation,
and other homecrafts.


ZAMBOANGA
The Katipunan High School in Zamboanga launched a literacy
drive under the leadership of the Junior and Senior classes. The
students began teaching their illiterate parents and helpers at
home. Principal Adan reported that "the adult students are eager
to learn even just to write their names. From time to time, the


- 30 -
teacher in charge of each class checks the progress made by the adults."
The teachers of the Basilan City High School have intensified
their literacy campaign by training the students as tutors. They employ the "each-one-teach-one method and all parents who do not know
how to read and write are given literacy instruction. The parents
are willing to learn because they want to sign the report cards of
their children in school.


LA UNION
Mrs. Susana P. Ganuelas, Principal of the North Provincial High
School, Bacnotan, reported "that her school helped in an intensive
drive for citizenship training through community assemblies. In
order to extend the influence of adult education to more people,
the Citizen's Letters were mimeographed in sets of 50 copies each
and were sent to the parents through the students.” She said further:
"The students helped in reading them if the parents are illiterate,
and discuss with them the contents of the Citizen's Letters."
CAGAYAN
According to Mr. Alfonso Ponce, Industrial Arts Supervisor for
Cagayan, Zone No. 1, Bagumbayan Community Improvement Association,
is considered as the leader in community activities in Tuguegarab.
The following are the accomplishments of this zone:
1. General cleaning ef vacant lots of Bagumbayan and converting
some of them into playground and food production projects.
2. Fixing and partly graveling the streets of this zone.
3. Making the historical Hurno as a park.


- 37


4. Establishing mutual aids of the people to one in distress.
5. Putting up weekly community programs.
6. Labeling the different blocks of the zone.
EVII
LEITR


Superintendent Isabelo Manalo reported that the Leyte Trade
School has offered free courses to adults living in Tacloban. On
account of the absence of any educational qualification as requirement, ettendance durina the first meeting of the different classes
was high.
The folloming courses are offered:
I Auto Driving, Auto Repairing
Autemechanics
Building Construction 1 Concrete Work, Plumbing, Steir
Building
General Metal Work
!Blacksmithing, Sheet Metalwork,
Lathe Work
Prectical Electricity I House Wiring, Power Installation,
Rewinding
Home Mechanics.
Farm Mechanics
Furniture Making
Cooking
Sewing
Hair Dressing
! Mat Making, Basketry, Net and
Handicrafts
Bag Neaving
IReading, Mriting, and Prectical
Academic Subjects
Arithmetic
Clesses are held at 4:00 - 5:00 p.m. during scheol days and
at 8:00 - 12:00 noon on Ssturdays.


CEBU
The Cebu Schoel of arts and Trades, according to its Superintendent, Tranquilino de los Trihos, has intensified its food pro

- 38 -


duction campsign. Demonstracions have been conducted on-the-utilizetion of by-produets andthe improvement of the ways pf food
preparation. In order to encourage the cultivetion of "camoteng
cahoy, " demonstrations on the preparation of cassava flour are shown
to the people. Since the people of Cebu are not fond of esting
fresh water fish, like "hito", "dalag", and also gost mest and “balut",
demonstrations on the proper way of prepering those foods are held,
and Mr. de los Santos said: "It is encouraging to report that some
people are non becoming accustomed to esting fresh-water fish as
pell as drinking goat's milk, and it is hoped that these demonstrations vill encourage people to raise mud fish, gosts and duaks."
AGUSAN
How the community school has tried to save the people from
hunger is told in a report of Superintendent Mariano Manaligod of
Agusan. He said: "It is known that food shortage in Upper Agusan
occurs every year. This may not be the result of idleness since the
people are industrious. It is rather the effect of not cultivating
the right crops which are suited to the soil and climstic conditions
of the place. Camote end corn with small patches of gabi are the
main crops raised. These crops are perishable during rainy days
and Upper Agusan is noted for rain floods. For more than two yeara.
now the people have not been able to raise crops enough for home
consumption. To remedy the situntion the community schools demonstrated to the people hos to cultivate lowland rice by making the
achool pupils actually reise experimental crop. The principal objeot


- 39 -


is to show the people that rica gan be grown succeesfully in wet
soil, the soil in which corn and camote cannot grow. The reaction
is slow at the beginning but it has been noted that many people are
now asking seeds frem the schools for trial planting."
MISAMIS OMIEHTAL
The Medina High School in Misamis Oriental has done its initial
share in promoting the adult education movement in the municipality
of Madina. Mr. Dominador D. Sierra, the Principal, reparted that their
high school studants have tutored some adults with suecess by using
the alphabet or cartilla method. Mr. Sierra said: "Sixty-one adults
are able to read and write in the vernacular. They can read and
write with understanding because the native tongue is used as medium
of instruction.” Aside from the literacy drive, the Medina High
School has been able to hold community assemblies in nine different
barrios of Hedina.


BULACA!
Adult classes are conducted by the Balinag Provincel High
School. The literaey class offento adults the following subjects:
Dalarila, Reading, Vriting and Aritenotic. The class is conducted
by Mrs. F. B. Santos and Mr. A. C. Cruz, and the adults mest on
Tuesday and Thuraday. The other class is for vecational instruction
and the following subjects are given: Economics, Handicraft, Sewing,
Cooking and Home Economics. Mr. P. Jimenez, Mr. N. Tiemsin and
Miss C. Austria conduct the vocational class for adults. They meet
on Friday and Sunday.


- LODATANES
Batanes has regular adult education classes. The adults are
very eager to learn how to read and write in the vernacular. According to Hr. Jose larona, Detailed Adult Education Supervisor,
classes are held more than three hours in order to satisfy the needs
of the adults. The influence of adult classes makes themoparticpate
actively in the literary-musical programs of their barrio fiestas.
They become interested in all activities connected with commumity
improvements. To make teaching in the adult classes effective,
literacy instruction has been supplemented by lectures given by
government officials, supervisors, principals and teachers on various
topics concerned with local eccupations and duties of citizens.
Mr. Barona said: "A wide awakening of the people to the need
of being literate has been noted recently. Even those persons above
the age of 60 still find time out of their daily labor to attend
adult education classes. It is not uncommon to see a person as old
as 68 reporting to his teacher for instruction. In some cases, a
son, a daughter or even a grandchild acts as tutor."
IONO
The Oton High School, reported the Principal, Lazaro P.
Fernandez, conducts adult education through the curriculum approach.
Describing the procedure, Hr. Fernandez said: "After the study of
a unit is completed in which the unit technique and the integration
of community experiences by means of survey, personal interview,
documentary materials, etc., are used, the class is conducted in the


vernacular. The group leaders and the teacher-decide—the subject--
matter to be taken up in the elass for dissemination to their
parents in written form. A bulletin in the vernacular containing the important facts or ideas for dissemination is issued
periodically to the parents through the students. Another method
is by inviting the parents to attend the vernacular classes. They
are encouraged to raise questions and to perticipate in the
discussion."
Two adult classes have been opened by the Barotac Viejo High
Sahool, Borotao Viejo, Iloilo. One class is for adult women who
ore studying dressmaking and other related arts, and the other is
for male adults who desire to leorn scientific methods of farming
and poultry reising. According to Principal Pablo E. Espanola,
their experience told them that "it is not a hard job to orgunize
a class for adults nfter all."
ANTIOUE
NA community where illiterate adults abound is likely to fail
in fts program of improvement," wrote Mr. Jose A. Managuit, Principal
of Tibino High School, Tibiso, Antique. He continued: "It is
difficult, nay, dangerous to deal with people sho don't understand
reason. Tibino is a toun where many illiterotes live. Most of
them are out-of-school youtb. The result of the recent survey
of the cormunity reveals that of the 1,026 inhabitants in the elght
"puroks'in the town 357 are illiterate or about 34.82 of the
residents do not know how to read and write. Hence, the first


- L2 -


phase of the adult education program of the Tibiso High School will
be an intensified literacy drive."
LANAO
The Iligan City High School has opened a class in adult education
starting with an enrolment of 15 adult beginners. Principal. Cerlos
Cardona reported that the high school teachers took turns on
Saturday from 7 .to 8 ofclock in the evening teaching the
adults. On the other hand the Fourth Year class in Philippine
History and Government undertakes a literacy project using the "eachone-teach-one" method. Esch student is assigned to make literate
one illiterate during the school year.
ROMBLON
Under the leadership of Mr. Juan G. Marquez, Acting Principal
of the Odiongan High School, Odiongon. Romblon, a literacy survey
was conducted in the municipality. The survey reveala that out of
148 families comprising the six zones, only 6 families have each an
illiterate member. About one-half of the total number of families
read at least one daily paper at home and almost the same number
have from three to five kinds of adult reading matter. Mr. Merquez
seid: "Efforts are being exerted by the teachers to encourage
people who do not have, access to newspapers, books and other reading
matter to avail themeelves of those reading materials available in
the school librery Juring Saturday mornings. The six illiterates
ere being tutored by the high school students."


- BNETA
AATE
RESOUMOS AMIMLAIS FOR FUPDAMETAL AND ADULT EDUCATION


T
I. LITAACY
Magazines


Hama of magazine. Date. Page


1. A Mass Literacy Campaign in
Southeast Higeria ......! Iass Education Bulletin, Sep! tember, 1950, p. 73
2. An African nuler Undertakes Community ! Mass Education Bulletin, SepImprovement .... .I tember, 1950, p. 62
3. Dritish Army Fights Illiteracy . . ... ! Social Education Nsws Bulletin,
! June, 1951, p. 4
! Social Education News Bulletin,
4.. Dr. Trachand Stresses ilemoval of
Illiteracy .........1 February, 1951, p. 2


5. Education Classes In Ills ..... 1 Social Eduoation News Bulletin,
! March, 1951, p. 6
6. Fight Against Illiteracy .......I Mass Education News Bulletin,
! June, 1950, p. 55
7. Harnessing Studonts for Literacy Drive 1 Social Education News Bulletin,
!February, 1951, p. 3
! Adult Education Journal, Jen8. Labrarios .....
uary, 1946, p. 16
9. Literacy An Answer to Commumism . ..! Social Education News Bulletin,
! June, 1951, p. 5
10. Literacy Drive In Ajmer ....... I Social Education News Bulletin,
! July, 1951, p. 10
11. Litoracy Drive in U.P. Jails .....I Social Education Nevo Bulletin,
! Fobruary, 1951, p. 6
12. Literacy Vork of Churchos in Hyderabad! Social Eucation Neus Bulletin,
! Juno, 1951, p. A
13. Making A Man Fit For Life In Goneral
1 Social Education News Bulletin,
! February, 1951, p.


-k

14. Objectives and Methods of Literacy Teaching' The Filipino Teacher,


in Adult Education
15. Patterns of Adult Educotion in Latin america!


16. Project for Adult Education of Negroes .
17. Public Cooperation Con Help In Fighting
Illiteracy ..


dugust, 1951, p. 42
Adult Educ. Journol,
Januory, 1951,p. 13
Adult Educ. Journal,
July, 1946,p.166
Saciel Euedtion. News Bulletin
July, 1951,p. 7


18. Reoding Materials for Adults ..
19. School Girls Urged to Educate Illiterates
20. South Indian adult Education Neek in
Modros .
.......
21. The National Seminor ..
22. UNESCO Fight Agoinst Illiteracy ...
23. Adult Education Gampoign in Bombay City ..'
24. Mass Lteracy In Northern Rhodesio ...
25. A Study of Functional Literacy in the Fhilippines .

26. Literacy - Mhy and How? ..
27. Education Stirred by New Approach to Continental Campaign against Illiteracy ..


Adult Education,Oct./50, p.26
Social Educotion News Bulletin,
December, 1950,p. 6
Social Educotion News Bulletin,
March, 1951, p. 2
Social Education Nens Bulledin,
Jonuory, 1951, p. 1
Social Education Ners Bulletin,
Februory, 1951, p.7
Querterly Bull. in Fundomentol
Educction, July, 1949, p.3
Quarterly, Bulletin in Fundamental Education, July, 1949,p.11
Querterly Bull. in Pundomental
Education, July, 1950,p.24
Querterly Bull. in Fundomental
Educotion, July, 1949,p. 18
UNESCO Courier) Vol.II,
No. 9, October, 1949


Pamphlets
1. Essentials of Rurel Eelfere, FAO Publicotion, Morch, 1949
2. Literacy Ststistics from available Census Figures, UNESCO Occosional
Papers in Educotion, april 30,1950
3. Reading Interests Shorn By Choices of Books ih School Libreries,
USIS Educotion Nensletter, Vol. I, No. 12
4. Suggestions for the Preperotion of Reading Matter, UNESCO Occasional
Fapers In Education, December 15, 1949


BOOks
1. Little Democracies of Batoan by Juan G. Laya


II. ECONONIG


Nanazines


' Name pf Magazine. Date. Pane
Title of Articla
1. adult Education in the Iloilo School. of ' The Filirino Teacher,
Arts and Trades .. 
October, 1950, p.LA
2. Afult Education In Ohio .........' Adult Educstion Jaurnal
July, 1945, p. 176
3. Adult Education in Rural Schools in the ' acult Education Bulletin,
Aucust, 1948,p.163
Middle Nest ..
4. Adult Educstion In Vienne .... adult Edueation Bulletin,
October, 1949, p-24
5. Adult Eduention Under the duspices of ' acult Education Bulletin,
Public Schools .... Dctober, 1944, p.3
6. An Employee Treining Program ......! Labor NotesUSIS, 1950
3rd Querter, p.19
7. an africon Ruler Undertal es Comrunity ' Maas Education Bulletin,
Development .... September, 1950, p.62
8. Facts About Our Agriculture ......' The Filipino Tescher,
Januery, 1950, p. 42
9. Finding Industrial Jobs For Disebled 8 Labor Notes - USIS, 1950,
3rd Querter, p.?4
Persong .. 
10.Food From The Forest .......... IThe Fi icino Teacher,
Tehnurry, 1949, p. 27
11.Functional Home Economics ........ Phikippine Educetor,
October, 1950, p. Al
12,Home Economics and the Corunity . .. .! The Filirino Teacher,
Maroh,19-1, p.37
13.Industrial Arts, a Vitel Link to Community' Philippine Educator,
life ....... October, 1950, r.29
14.Man Perfects Himself By Workina ....." Teacher's Journal,Janx, 19477p729
15.Mass Educetion Through Cooperstion Develop-' llass Education Bulletin,
ment of Cooperative Movement ..... ' Decemher, 1950, p.10
16.Papaya Turns to Engs ..........' Philinvine Educator
March, 19*1, p. 21


17. Peasant Ferming Project In Eastern ' Community Develorment Bulletin,
Province of llorthern Rhodesis ..
June, 1951, p148
18. Possibilities of Cooperatives in the ' Teacher's Journal, Apr.1946, p.25
Phildiprines ...
19. Potential Home Industries in the
' The Filipino Teacher, I949,
Philippines Besed On Materials and Labor! Feb.-p.29;Mar.p.31, Apr.P.23


20. Rural adult Education ........' Adult Educstion Journal,
Jenuary, 1946, p. 33
21. Secondary School Curriculum to Bolster' The ilirino Teacher,
Economic Development .
February, 1941, p. 2
22. Self-Help agricultutal Economy . .. Philippine Educator,
april, 1950, p.15


23. Some Guides to a Vider Use of Rural' ¿dult Education Bulletin,
School to Adult Education Purposes ' Octoberyl948, p.212
24. The CLaS, Its Role in Thilippine
 Philippine Educator,
griculture .
 .. 
October, 1950, p.24


25. The Economie Volue of Trade and Indus-' Philippine Educator,
t rial Education ..........' October, 1950, p. 27


26. The Filinino Teacher and Education
For Economic Productivity ...


 Philirpine Educator,
July, 1948, p.7


27. The Preparation of Home Economics in ' The Filipino Teacher,
the Program of Better Community laving!
July, 1951, p-42
28. The Relation of General Educstion to ' The Filinino Teacher,
Julv, 1949, p.19
Vocational Education....
2 The Filipino Teacher,
29. The Role of Vocational Teachers in the
Proriotion of the School Community Relotions' March, 1950, p.25


30. Vocotional Adult Education....'


Adult Educstion Journal,
January, 1946, p. 52


31. Vocational Education.........' Philiprine Educator,
tpril, 1949, p.23
32. Vocstional Educdtion and Our Econemic ' Teacher'a Journal,
July, 1946, p.11
Security ....
33. Vocationel Education, A Vital Factor ' Philippine Educator,
in Our Economic Life .
Octohe r, 1956, p.3


34. Common Ground in Gommunity Development' Community Development Bulletin,
June, 1951, p. 41


35. Delhi School of Social Work


! hocial Edecation News Bulletin
sugust, 1950, p. 6


-K

Eemoblets
1. Cooperatives and Fundamental Education by M. Colombain, UNESCO Monograph
2. Credit-Union Handbook (Cooperative Banking) - Huber and Manongdo.
3. Philippine Vocational Journal - March,1951, Vol. 1, No.1
4. Technical Assistance for Economic Development - UNESCO - Peris, 1949
5. The Teaching of Hondicrofts in Secondary Sehools - UNESCO , Puhlicotion,

Genevo , 1.B. E. ,1923
6. Improving the Community School Progrom -Report on the Second
Educational Workshop Conferenco, Haloles, Lulacon, 1851
Books
1. Little Democrocies of Bataon by Juan C. Layo


III. GELTUEAL -RECNEATIONAL


Title of Article


Magazines


1. Adult Educotion - A Necessary Activity
2. Adult Education In U.S. Zone in Vermany
3. Adult Educstion, The Future of Our Civilization ....
4. After the Fact ...
5. Aging and Ldving ....
6. Arts and Crafts ..


7. Audio-Visual Division in Rochester Public' adult Education Journal,
Librory
 ......
8. Britain'8 Youth Service ...


9. Radio Educotion in the Service of FundamentQuerterly Bull. in Fundamental
al Education.
... 4
10. Mobile Museums Units .....! Querterly Bull. In Fundamental


11. The Development of Lbraries
12. Cultural Missions of Mexics .


Name of Mogozine. Date. Paga
' Adult Education Bulletin,
April, 1948, p.103
Adult Education Bulletin,
December, 1947,p.37
Adult Education Journol,
Octobery 1949,219
adult Education Journal
October, 1959,p.74
Adalt Education Bulletin,
Gatober, 1948, p.204
Adult Education Journal,
Jamuery, 1946, p.8
Jamrory, 1950, p.19
acult Education Bulletink
duguet, 1$43, p.134
Education, Soril, 1950,p.17
Educotion, Cctober, 1950,p.12
.' Querterly Dull. In Fundomental
Education, January, 1951,p.1
.'Querterly Bull. In Fundementel
Educotion, Januery, 1949,p.16


9. Common Ground in Gormunity Development
10, Community School Oejectives ...
11.Course In Human Relations ..
12.Culture in Our Cultural Institutions.
13.Delhi School of Social Vork,.
LA.Domesi Community Development Scheme .
15.Educational Radio - An Uphill Fight .
16.Expanding Horizons In Human Relations
17.The Functions of the " Break "..
18.The Indian Cooperstive Union .
10.Afuseums .
20.New York Lxperimental Praject.
21.Oklahome A & M's Community Developmont .
22.Public Education in atoric Enersy ...
23.Radio Set Installed st Karhalgoon.
24.Sociel Educstion Centre at Hetpanjara .
25. Social Education Seminar ..
26.Social Work -gencies..
27,Special Schools..


t .Cormunity Development Bulletin,
June, 1951, p-Al
' Adult Educntion Journal,
Jenuary, 1948, p.l1
' Adult Education Journal,
april, 1950, p.61
The Filipino Teacher,
Fetruary, 1951, p.5
1 Social Education News Bulletin,
aucust, 1950, p.e
'Hass Lducation Bulletin,
March, 1951, P.51
Acult Education Journal,
Januery, 1950, p.23
' The Filirino Teacher,
Fekruory, 1949, p-lo
 Adolt -cuertion Journel,
Octo'er, 1949, p.224
 Sociel Mducation News Bulletin,
September, 1950, p.10
'¿ult ECucstion Journal,
January, 1976, p..20
adult AQucation Journal,
Janur7, 1946, n.57
' ¿cult Educction Journal,
Octover, 1949, p. 213
t ¿dult EQucstion Journal,
Octeher, 1948, p-163
Soni.1 bducstion lens Bulletin,
July, 19 1, p. 9
1 Sacial Education lws Pulletin,
June, 1951,p.5
 Sociel Eduention News Eulletin,
June, 19SI. p.5
scult Equcation Journal,
Jamuary, 1946, p.37
¿cult Education Journal,
Januery, 1946, p.38


- 1-


28.The Theory of the Basic Lrts Program ' Adult Education Journal,
October, 1949, P-237


1. Preservetion and Development of Indigenuous Arts, UNESCO
Occasional Papers In Education, October, 1950
tion, Scheme —-Digector of Public Instruction, Central
2. Sociffofimtes ana Berar, 1
3. Improving the Community School Program - Report Of the Second Educational.
Vork-Conference , Halolos, Bulacan, 1951


Books
1. Little Democracies of Batsen by Juan C. Laya


TaTo
IV. CIIIZENSHIP - CIVIO


Largzines


Title of Article


'Neme of Magazine. Date. Pags


¿dult Educstion Bu letin,
1. Adult Lducation In Fall River,
Octoher, 1914, p.19
Massachussets ..
2. Adult Lducation in the United States . .' adult iclucation Bulletin,
October, 1949, p.15


3. Aims and Purposes of adult Education in Adult Education Bulletin,
October, 1944, p.l1
Californis ....
A. Discussion of Daan Horn's Article . . .' Adult Education Journal,
July, 1950, p.115


5. Educstion for a Brosdened Citizenship . ' Philippine Lducator,
July, 1950, p.13
6. Education for Morel Development .... 1 The Filipino Teacher,
Le cember, 1948,p.20


7. Education for the Development of Perso' The Filipino Teacher,
nality ..
Ferruary, 1949, p.17
8. Family Life Educstion ......... Acult Aducstion Journal,
January, 1946, p.l0


- 50—


9. Helping Rer York Communities to Help ' Acult Lfucation Journal,
January, 1950, p.6
Themselres ..
10.Internstional Understandin ......' Adult Education Journal,
July, 1916 , p.109
11, MoralReconstruction and Character
 Teacher's Journal,
Educction ...........' Nay, 1946, p.31
12.Naturalization and Citizenchip .....' Adult Education Journal,
Januery, 1946, p.?2
13. Reighborliness and Social Responsibility' Teacher's Journal,
July, 1946, p. 34
14.Ner Movement in Adult Education - Political' adult Education Bulletin,
Action Committee of the GIC ....... 1 October, 1944, p.6
15.Responsibility of Adult Educetion . ...' Adult Education Bulletin,
December, 1949, p.37
16.The Citizen's Roundtable ........ 1 Adult Educction bulletin,
Februery, 1949, p.68


17.The Philippines Fromotes Internstional ' Philippine Educator,
Cooperction and Understandin.
July, 1950, p.9
18. Understanding - Key to Norld Harmony . ' Adult Educational Journal
April, 1948, p.65


Pamphlets
1. Bssentials of Raral Lelfare - FAO Publication, Merch, 1949
2. Improvine The Cormurity School Program - Report of the Second
Educational Vork-Conference , Malolos, Bulacan, 1951
Booka
1. Little Democracies of satenn by Juen C. Laya


V. HEALTH


MACADINeS
Name of Marazine. Date, Page
Title  of Artigla
1. a Realth Cemrcian in Tasanyika Territory ' ComrunityE evelopment Bulletin,
June, 1951, p. 54
2. An Exveriment in Community Development  Gomrunity Development Bulletin,
June, 1961, p.52


3. Guidance in Mental Health Program
4. Housing ....


Philippine Educator,
January, 1951, p.52
adult Education Journal
Jarmery, 1946, p. 15


5. Quiet Revolution


6. Safaty Education


Filipino Teecher,
Februery, 1951, p. 8
adult Education Journal,
January, 1946, p.36


7. Wanted: lientally-Healthy Teachers


Pha liprine Educator
Decemcer, 1949, p.*14


8. Common Ground In Community Development


Community Pevelopment Bulletin
Cune, 1951, p. Al


9. Delhi School of Social Werk


Social Education News Bulletin
aucust, 1950, D.6


Pamphlet


1. Essentials of Rural flelf, re - FaO Publication, March 1949
2. Imppoving the Gommunity School Program - Report of the Second
Educstional, liork-shop Gonference Halolos, Bulacan, 1951
3. The Healthy Village - An Experiment lin Visuel Education in
Nost Chine -. UESCO honograph


Book


1. Little Democracies of Bataan by Juan C. Laya


- -
Am
Topra
SMANSL...92
AN

m
9
TRENDS AND PRALA CHA IN ADUL EDTICATION
Magazines
Name of magazine, Date, Paga
Title of articla


1. Across Educstlonel Fromtiers


 Phili pine Educator, 1950-51,
' Sept.P.5; Oct.P-62; Nov.p.15;Jan.p.46


2. Adult Education ..


 Philiroine Educstor, April,1949
pane 26


3. Adult Education -american Plan.


'Reult Education Journal,
July,1940: p.143


4. Adult Education An Investment 
in Democrecy ..


-The Filipil.o Teecher
 Decenve r 130, p.15


5. Adult Eduection, 4 Vit,1 Concern of
the Country.


' The Filitino Teocher,
 Aurnet, 120, n. 7


6. Adult Educetion In 4 Democracy ..


' The Filipino Teacher,
July, 1961, 9,22


7. Ldult Education for Independent
Philiprines ..


Teenhe.'s Jourral,
api.. 115, p. 15


8. Adult Education in Other Countries .


 Philipoine Canestor,
hegenur. as, p.45


9. Adult Educstion - The School of the
People ..


Philirene Eduestor,
aych, 1931, p. 3


1O.Adult Edvestion Nork ir Bataan Throuch t
the “Semchang Pampurek"..


Philippine Eduestor,
Feres, -8., P. .5


11.A Formula for Measuring Adult
Eoucation Progrand ...


adult Ecuestion Bulletin,
O.deor, 194*, PalE


12.A Handbook for Commurity Scheols .


The Filipino Teacher,
Jeruar?: Al. 2-25


13.A Methods Course for Teachers
ei naultS ..


-
adult nfucstion sulletin,
august, 12.2, pelea


1A.A Partnerahip In Learning .


79
Adult Education Journal,
brril. 19,6, p-33


15:Challenge to Education for Aning People!


Adult Education Pulletin,
dugust: 1930. p.1e3


16.Characteristics of an Adequete adult t
Education Frogram..


adult Educetion,
Gchchar. 1930, p.25


'. Sempetencies or Teacners i or Conaunity
School.    0
18. Conference in Use of Films in Adalt
Education ...*
19. Content, Structure and Nethods of
Laboratory .. e


: Philippine Eucaver, 1951,
! March, p. 9: April, p. 21
! Adult Education Journal,
! July, 1949, p.-198
! Adult Education Bulletin,
! February, 1950, p. 75


20. Democracy Advances Through Philippine  The Filipino Teacher, 1951,
Schools ...! March, p. 8; April, p. 7.


21. Education for All


22. Education in Rural Areas for Detter
Liying .
23. Education in Rural Arees for Better
Living   
24. Evaluation and the Now Education ..


3
! Philippine Elucator, Feb/s1,p.15
1 Philippine Elucator, 1950, Feb,p3;
! March, p. 3f April, p. 40

! The Filipine Teacher,
!..! July, 1950, p. 9
! Philippine Educator, Jul/51,p.33


25. Factors Responsible for the Suecess of -! The Filipino Teacher, April,
Adult Education Program in Cagayan ..! 1951, p. 23
26. Fundamental Education and the Problem of ! The Filipino Teacher,
Language Instruction .......! November, 1949. p. 12
27. Fundamental Education for All.....! Fil. Teacher, Mar/51, p. 13
28. Fundamental Edacation Through Comnunity! The Filipino Teacher,
Centered Schools in the Fhilippines . ! September, 1951. p. 8


29. Gelahads In Search ....
30. Groug Discussion ..


! Phil. Educator, Culy/51,p.8
! Advlt Elucation Bulletin,
1 February, 1947, p. 77


31. Group Dynamics ?.. !Adalt Education Journal,
! April. 1950, p. 54


32. Has Education Taken The Challenge of


! The Filipino Teacher,


Service to the Common Man?.....!August, 1951, p. 9
33, How Administrative and Supervisory Per! Philippine Educator,
sonnel Help Vitalize the Cormunity Sch, ! Suly, 1951, p. 28


34. How Do You Encourage Initiative In
Communisy Development?


! Mass Education Bulletin,
!December, 1950, p. 1


35. How To Put Your PTA Into Gear ...! Filipino Teacher, Feb/51,p.15
36. Improving Schoolwork and Community Life ! Prilippine Elucabor, Mar/5l,p.26
37. In-service Training for Califernia leacher Adult Educatien Bulletin,
for Adults.... IApril, 1947, p. 99


38.


- Sl

—IAdult-Education—lournal,
—lanuary, 1948, p. 16


39. John Devey and Adult Education ......1 Adult Education Bulletin,
1 October, 1949, p. 7
AO. Method In Adult Teaching ...... 1 Adult. Education Bullstin,
1 August, 1949, p. 186
Al. Modern Trends In Vocational Education .....! Filipino Teacher, Jan/51,p-33
42. Must Prepare Our Youth To. Play Thair Role I
As Intelligent Productive Units In Every 1 The Filipino Teacher,
Conmmmity ...1 July, 1951, p. 5
43. Need for Publie Cocperation In Adult
1 Secial Edueation News Bulletin,
Education .... July, 1951, p. 3
44. News From The Field .... Adult Education Journal,
1 January, 1948, p. 17
45. On Defining Fundamental Hlucation .....1 Quarterly Bulletin In Fundamen! tal Education, Jan. 1949, p. 24
46. Organizing Community School to Help Itself I Phil. FlucatoraJuly/5Ln.13
47. Plan For Adult Education In Hyderabad ... I Social Education News Bulletin,
1 July, 1951, pe 3
48. Preparation for Living In Later Years ... !Adult Education,Dec./450,p.43
49. Principles of Organizing Community School 1 Philippine Educator,
Improvement Program..........IMarch, 1951, p. 12
50. Problems and Conditions of Learning in
The Filipino feacher,
Rural Areas .1July, 1950, p. 15
51. Psychology of Adult Learning ........ 1 Adult Education Bulletin,.
1 December, 1949, p. 55
52. Public Schoal Education Program . ...... I Adult Eduoation,Dec./50,p.56
53. Report On The UNESCO Seminar on Adult Eduna-! The Filipino Teacher,
tion for Community Action in Mysore, India 1 March, 1950, p. 9
54. Retraining for Later Maturity . ........! Adult Education, Dec./50, p.66
55. Revising and Enriching the Currioulum of 1 Philippine Hucator,
the Community-Centered School ......1 July, 1951, p. 21
56. School and Community ..........IPhil. Educator; March/5l, P-23
57, Settlements Educate Adults ........ I Adult Education Journal,
1 January, 1946, p. 59
58. Some Evidence On How Adults Study . .... I Adult Education Bulletin
I August, 1949, p. 178


-155 -


57. Some Norking Principles On the
 Philippine Educstor,
Community Schools....8 July, 1951, p.39
58. Technical assistance In Bactad, Fangasinan' Filipino Teacher, Aug .451, p.13
59. The Basic arts for adults .......' adult Education Journal,
October, 1948, p.161
60. The Community School In Action . ...' Filipino Teacher, March/51, p.16
6l.The Community School In Brooke's Point ' Filipino Teacher, Oct./50, p.22
62. The Helili High School in Sta. Maria, I Philimrine Educater,
March, 1951, p.18
Bulacon ..
63. The. Losing Battle of General Education' Philippine Educator, Oct./50,p.5
64. The Most Pressina Question ...... I Adult Lcucetion Journal,
January, 1948, p.l4
65. The Nev Educction ...........' Philippine Educator, Sept./50, p.3
66. The Organization of the Community Schools' The Filipino Teacher,
February, 1950, p.13
anc Its Instrumentalities ..
' Adult Education Journal,
67. The People's Univsrsity of Stockholm
July, 1950, p.119
68. The Role of Fundamental and adult Educa¬'
tion in the Realization of Our Education-' The Filipino Teacher,
July, 1951, p.19
al Objective ..
T.
69.the Role of Radio In Fundamental Education! Philippine Educator, Sept./49,p.51
7C.The "kills for Adult Education .....' Acult Education Bulletin,
ebruery, 1950,p. 72
71. The Teacher and the Community . ....! The Filipino Teacher, Sept./50, p.23
72. The Teachers Reorientstion to Education! The Filipino Teacher,
in Rural areas for Better Livin .
July, 1950, p.12
73. Treinina adult Educstors ....... ' Adult Education Journal,
1 Januery, 1948, p. A
' Cuartarly Bulletin in Fundamental
74. Training of Norkers In Fundamental
' Educction, January, 1949, p.3
Educction ...
75. UNESCO'S gustrian Seminar On adult ' Adult Education,
February, 1951, p.51
Education Methods...!
76. UsESCO'S Concept of Fundamental Education'Philippine Educator, Feb./49, p.8
77. UNE3CO Conference on adult Education . I Adult Lducation Journal,
October, 1949, p.214
78. U.ESCO Resclution On adult Education
Adult Education Journal,
Jancety, 1946, p. 68


-S

79. Ehat Do The California Adult Schools
Adult Edugation Journal,
Teach? .
Getober, 1949, p-123l

80. Ehet Is Functional Teaching? .
Ihil. Educotor, Dec./49, p.20
81. Mhot the Schools of rangasinan Are Doing' Fhil.Bancotor, Mar.'51, p.28
82. Vhy Adults Attend School ....... 1 Adult Educotion Dulletin,
Aagust, 1949, p. 172
83. World Understanding - The Community's Job
Adult Education Journal,
July, 1948, p.121
84. Youth of Batoon .

Filipino Tencher, July/51,p. 35
85. Tovord s Theory of approach in adult
Adult Education,-
Education..
June, 1351, p. 17
86. Effective Instruction in an Evening
Adult Education,
Progrem for adults .
June, 1951, p. 183
87. Promotion Throuch Service ...
Adult Education¿June, 1951, p. 190
88. Frogram of a dult Group Guidance .
Adult Educction, June, 1951,p.194
89. Fundamental Education Progromme of
Querterly Dulletin in Fundgrental
UNESCO 1951. .
.. 4
Education, April, 1951, p. 73
Pamohlets


1. Activities in the Associated Project of Vianni, UNESCO Occasional
Popers in Educotion, April,1950
2. Adult Education (Current Trends and "ractices) -UNESCO - Problems
in Education
3. Adult Education In Mysere, Indio , My sore adult Education Council,1949
4. A Fomily Living Frogrorme in Vionni - UNESCO Occasional .
Popers in Education, Februury 1, 1951
5. Community Education In action, American associotion for adult Educstion,
1948
6. Community School Ilons and Organization, 1950-51, Division of Iloilo
(himeog caphed and laper Bound)
7. Fundamental Ediccation - Cemmon Cround for all feople - UNESCO, 1947
8. Greece Finds One Key To Development by Glen Leet, UN Bulletin, 1951,March
9. Imrroving the Community School Progrom, a Reopfteon the Second
Efucationol Norkshop-Conference, Malolos, ulonen, 1951
10, Mexican Cultural Mission frogremme - Lloyd Hughes - UNESCO Monogroph
 
11. School Centered CommityFrEsOCIH Paprhlet by Torsten Lund
12. Surmary Report of the Internotional Conference on adult Educstion
in Elsinore, Lenmark, June, 1949
13. The Use of Mohile Cinema and Radio Vans - UNESCO - Film Centre, London, 1949
14. UNESCO Educotional Report of the Mission To The Thilirpines, July, 1949
15. UNESCO Seminar on Rural Adult Education, Hinistry of India in Education,


1. Education in Rural Areas For Detter Living - FASS Yearbook, 1950
2. Handbook of Adult Education in the United States - Institute of
Adult Education, Teochers' College in Columbia University, 1949
3. Little Democracies of Pataan by Juan C. Laya


- -



praT
OT!
LITERACY IN THE PHILIPPANES BI PROVINCES


The following figures furnished by the Bureau of the
Census and tatistics shor the literacy status in tho Philippines
of persons ten years old and over for the year 1948:


PROVINCES
!




TINS TO NG BISNO E
TOTAL ¡READ & ! TO READIPURTED
I RRITE 1& NRITE IOR DE7
 AHFMINED!



TAAAAllAII


ABLE TO!NOT ABLEINOT REPORTREAD & ITO READ !ED OR DE
TTCTERMINED
MRUIE ! & NRU!S:


1. Abra .


.!


63,3951


35,19k1


 26,4311


1,170!


56.5


!


Al.


!


1.8


2. Agusan .......


.!


81,4961


51,2931 30,9221


2,181!


62.2


!


35.4


!"


2.4


3. Albay ........


.!


265,3524


136,8551 92,Eli


96,3261


51.6


!


3.7


!


P
13.7


A. Antique ......


.!


163,97124


89,8401 72,6101


1,5221


5A.8


!


L.3


!


0.9


6. Bataan .......


.!


66,0731


A2,6741 22,2181


1,181!


61.6


!


33.6


!


1.8


6. Batanes ....


.!-


- 7,8781


5,219! 2,4101


189!


61.0


1


30.6


!


2.1


7. Batangas .....


.


355,965


203,0911 142,555!


10,319!


57.1


!


40.0'


2.9


8. Bohol .....


.!


380,630!


212,760 163,3081


L,562


55.9


!


A2.9 1


1.2


9. Bukidnon .....


.!


M, 2121


21,764


 21,1591


1,4551


19.0


!


ma


!


3.3


10. Bulacan ....


.I.


289,6701


203,9311


 79,720!


5,9591


TO.A





2.5


!


2.1


11. Cagayan ......


.!


223,5661


121,1661


 95,4581


6,9421


5L.2


1


M2.n


:


3.1


12. Camarines Norte!


61,719


52,1191


 14,9381


22


76.9


!


22.0


!


1.1


13. Camarines Sur


!



333,h2l


201,164!


122,0101


19,9981


53.9


!


32a


!


13.4


1A. Capiz ........


.!


298,3051


148,8711


133,039!


16,3951


19.9


!


LA.6


!


5.5


15. Catanduanes ...!


75,3151


M6,213


25,3001


3,8621


61.3


!


39.6


!


5.1


16. Cavite .......


.1


184,712


128,3161


 53,9861


2,L101


69.5


!


29.2


!


1.3


17. Cebu ........


.!


793,9131


31,722


365,2131


30,3061


m.6


A8.6


!


3.8


18. Cotabato .....


.!


296,51ki


100,5661


1 140,5571


55,4211


33.9


!


RAA


1


18.7


19. Davao ..


.!


248,001!


138,237!


1108,1261


1,6381


55.7


!


43.6


!


O.7


20. Ilocos Norte..


.


160,347!


103,9791 73,6111


2,757


51.


40.8


!


1.5


21. Ilocos Sur ...


.!


201,237


119,1291 81,3791



729!


59.2


LO.


!


O.4


22. Iloilo .......


.!


$16,3861


312,9161 201,41


2,0631


(A.7


!


3k.9


!


O.4


23. Isabela ...


.!


183,5251


103,2541 "1,L681


2,803


56.3


!


12.2


!


1.5


24. Laguna ....


.!


225,161


162,1441 61,2311


1,7861


72.0


n.2


!


O.8


25. Lanao ...


.!


251,6981


125,6781 121,,07


4,6131


19.9


13.3


!


1.8


26. La Urion .....


.!


170,0681


108,1771 58,7501


3,171i


63.6


3k.5


1.9


27. Leyte. ........


.!


68L, C381


361,2451 303,1361


AST


55.7


!


A.2


!


O.1


28. MANILA.......


.!


794, 36k1


631,1981 95,0551


2,1111


86.8


!


12.9


!


0.3


29. Marirduque ...


. 58,431!


39,804! 18,0201


6071


68.1


i


30.9


P


1.0


-.-
1
From G. O. Bulletin Ho. 20,


s. 1951


31.
32
33.
3.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39
Z0.
41.
42.
43.
AA.
45.
6.
1.
38.
49.
50.
21


30.


INOR IEN TAAl I

!ABLE TO INOT ABLE 1 PORTED!ABLE TOINOT ABLMINOT RE
PROVINCES
! TOTAL FREAD AND ITO READ IOR DE! READ GITO READ IPOPTED OR
TTE
1 DALA TAND TRITEITERMINED MIUTE 1& BRITE ¡DETERMINED


Masbate ....


.!


135,8451


69,0781


Mindoro ....


.!


13,3251


69,4381


Misamis Occ.


139,C061


8L,1661


Misamis Or.


53,314


166,8621


Mountain ...


.


1,7051


70,783!


Negros Occ.


712,8641


438,017!


Negros Or.


300,184!


138,7381


Nueva Ecija


317,2481


209,6181


Nueva Vizoaya!


58,071i


36,0111


Palawan ....


.!


75,1481


3L,CILl


Pampanga ...


.!


286,3601


190,8841


Pangasinan.


.!


623,0311


388,6041


Quezon .....


.


283,6631


216,5761


Rizal .....


.1


483,1951
TA,LAA!


319,6781
38,8361


Romblon ....


.!


Samar .......!


AST,KTN
192,3651


716,7561
130,1931


Sorsogon ....!


Sulu ..


.!


166,1581


11,0821


Surigao ....


.!


179,361!


105,1831


Tarlac ......!


219,7424


135,5961


Zambales ....!


24
95,5991


72,0201


Zamboanga..


L


12.3891


191.,981


61,5511


5,2161


50.9


1


15.31


3.8


42, 6701


1,217


61.3


!


3.


1.0


52,6291


1,2111


60.5


!


38.6 !


0.9


85,907!


5251


65.9


!


33.9 1


0.2


126,1051


517


35.8


1


6L.O 1


0.2


Z,22


5751


el.A


!


38.5 1


O.1


161,0081


4381


Mo.2


53.651


0.15


101,1821


AAS!


66.1


33.8 1


O.1


21,797


263


62.0


!


37.
!


o.5


an
3,an


303!


19.9


50,3 1


O.A


85,347!


10,1291


65.7


29.8a


3.5


206,7001


7,733


62.k


3221


kk


72,19k1


8931


7L.8


24.9 1


0.3


1C0.C91!


3,726


18.5


20.7


O.8


31,0561


1,252!


5L.6


!


13.61


1.8


219,7181


1,0031


55.6


M.2)


0.2


61,9181


194!


61.


32.21


O.1


118,5851


4911


28.9


!


7.A!


0.3


13,7801


398!


58.6


1


Al.2 1


0.2


83,11o1


7261


61.8


!


37.8 1


O.A

22,58L1


7551


75.5


!


23,1


0.8


152,5361.


7501
-Sl


-222


—


AA.2!


I.A


T C!


It will be noted from the foregoing figures that the literacy
status of 316,429 persons or 2.42 of the population of the country ten
years old and over was not determined.


Republic of the Philippines
Department of Fublie Vorks and Dexmunications
DEREAU OF POSTS
Hanila


SUORU STATEMERT
(Required by Act No. 2580)
PI
The undersigned BENITO PArCILINAN, Editor of THE ADULT EDUCATION
TA
IN ACTION published once in every tuo months in FIGLASH LANGUAGE, at
the War Damage Commissien Compound, Manala, after having been duly
sworn in according ta law, hereby submits the following statement of
ownership, management, circulation, etc,, which is required by ActNo. 2580, as amended by Commonvealth Aet No. 20l.
Post oscica Adress
Nam.
Editor:
BENITO PANGILIMAN a/o Purean of Public Schoole, Mar
VICENTE GANCIA
Damage Consission Cempound, Manila
Hanaging Editor:
15
Business Manager:
R.9
ni
n
"
n
n.
Ouner: 2UREAU OF PHOLI SCHOOLS
PNU
nR.
n
21
Publisher: BINEATOF PUNLIO SUNCOLS
1
n
T.
.
Printer: BINEAU OF PUDLIC SCHOOLS
nn
n

Office of Publication: DILUTAU OF PUALIC SCECOIS
If publication is owned by acorperation, steckhelders ouning one per
cent or more of the total amount of stocls:
NOHENONE

Bondholders, mortgagees, or other security holders, owning one per
cent or more of the total amount of stocks:
NONEMONE
In case of daily publication, average number of copies printed and
circulated of each issue during the preceding month of.
19....
1. Sent to paid subseribers ------------NONE2. Sent to others. than paid subscribers -KONE
TotaNOHE
In case of publication other than daily, total nuriber of copies
printed and circulated of the lest issue dated September, 1951:
1. Sent to paid subscribers --------E-NONE
2. Sent to others than paid subscribers ------ 2,000
octa l  2,000.
(SGD) DENITO PANGILINAN
Lditor
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 7th day of November, 1951, at
Manila, Philippines, the affiant exhibiting his hesidence Certificate
No. A-922 issued at Manila on January 3, 1951.


(SGD) VENANCIO TRINIDAD.
Assistant Director
Dureau of Public Schools





O












UEW VSSOS
ESUMMOIU SO
EMISESVO


—

3


-
2
 G

—


an
SN
EV RLI
M
ODZ
PA
----
y
  
E



57



CEEN
I.

Ll!
2
—--
-7
2
7

-—
—


A
-—1
I


P

2
LE,



2
EE
—

2
HIA
E
HA
IA

S
AIL


EN

M
N
-L


E
AA



—


D.
IMMALAL
I
2

—a


—
—








E


S
—
E

PA

A.
R
 aa

MAT


YAYNg
2

Z
A
a
N
2


Z
 

YL
JA
A
E





—


—
L.
E



. 55
A
  
AN
aN
—
C.
D0
S
A
 A
L
(FORMERLY  )
WOIE 
BLAIN
 5)
INCO



E
A
.n





Lipanune Conomunity Gthoot Sulletin
No.7
VOL IX
JAN. 1952
Au
oo fano Qosane *
THE PHILIPPINE COMMUNITY SCHOOL BULLETIN ................ 1
A Prefatory Note by A. C. Vizconde
THE SEMINAR COURIER - IN APPRECIATION ........... 2
ORADE ALLOCATION OF ADULT PUPILS IN THE
REGULAR ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS . 6
I
FUNDAMENTAL AND ADULT EDUCATION IN THE DISTRIOT
OF POLO, BULACAN  8
By Mariano C. Nicolas
MACHINERY AND ORGANIZATION OF FUNDAMENTAL AND
ADULT EDUCATION IN THE DIVISION OF ROMBLON .......... 13
By Fructuoso I. Ilar
THE CULTURAL MISSION IN LUMBAN, LAGUNA..... 26
By Rev. Alejandro Lualhati
CALINAN COMMUNITY SOHOOL, DAVAO .......... 28
By Artemio C. Vizconde
CONDENSED ARTICLES
TRENDS AND PRACTICES IN FUNDAMENTAL AND
ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD ......................... 31
NOTES AND RECORDS . 33



2
A
E
E
A
E.
E


e.


THE PHILIPPIHE COMMUNITY SCHOOL BULLETIII
(A Prefatory Note)
Artemio C. Vizconde
Adult Education for the last few years has developed a new orientation,
a new inspired program of action. The movement has acquired a broader outlook and has created a new passion upon which a new confidence, a new outlook for the future of adult education in the Philippines is built. It is
worth confessing that after these years of thought and experience in the field
of adult education in the Philippines, there came the upsurge of the "Cormunity School", which had its germ of growth in our soll even before the last
War. It has found itself within the framework of UNfSCO, program, and is now
the medium through which we travel hopefully to attain our objectives in fundamental and adult education, which in its entirety, is the improvement of
home and community life, and the promotion of better human relations. Through
this medium the adult education pregram finds increasing number of people villing to work with utmost zeal and patriotism for the enhancement of literacy,
economic, health, civic and cultural aspects of living.. It is the medium where
effort is exhilirating and functional; where company is congenial; and where
horizon beckons to richer vision of human endeavor.
This being the case, the publication of fundanental and adult oducation
activities finds, without secking for it, a name whichagives more meaning to
its contents and stands for the actualities of the program.. And in consonance
with this natural and vitalized development of adult education, the Adult Education in Action magazine is fading away, although not dying, but simply giving way to the Philippine Community School Bulletin. It is a rebirth in spirit of the old paper that has served its purpose during the best years of its
life. Vith this issue, therefore, the Philippine Commmity School Bulletin
rings itself in the field of Fundamental and Adult Education in the Philippines as the Adult Education in Action rings out of its physical existence.


- 2. -


THE SEMINAR COURIER
DI APPRICIATION
One far-reaching accomplishment of the Seminar on Fundamental and
Adult Education is the stimulation of the interest of parent-teacher
associations, civic organizations and civic-spirited groups of citizens
in the fundamental aducation program and the comnmity sehools all over
the country. As has been stated in the first issne of the Courier, it
would have been hardly possible for the 639 delegates and observers
to attend the Seminar without the cooperation of these organizations
and associations of the provincial communities. These sponsoring organizations gave their moral and financial support to the adult education workers and representatives who came to Manila not only from the
big towns and cities but also from barrios and small communities.
And it must be said that it has beer possible to arouse the interest
of the civic associations and organizations, public-spirited citizens
and educators in the program of the Seminar through the encouragement
and support given by the Director of Publie Schools, the Director of
Private Schools, the President of the PPSTA, the Secretary of Elucation
and the National Chairman of the Golden Jubilee of the Philippine Educational. Systam. The Directorate pf the Bureau of Public Schools, which
is most, coneerned in the work of the Seminar, has provided freely the
expert services of the division superintendents and other facilities
to carry out the program of the Seminar. The members of the Seminar
staff, particularly the group chairmen, devotedly played their respective roles and enabled the Seminar to conduct all its activities as planned.
Hith this enthusiastic backing of civic organizations, public-spirited citizens, and oun educational authorities and leaders, and with the


3.


earnestness with which the delegates and observers gave themselves to
the work during the Seminar, it is believed that the last Seminar will
play hereafter a dynamic and irpoortant role in the furtherance of our
fundamental education program. Many delegates and observers havo already expressed the intention of holding provincial, district or town
seminars in line with the prograa of the Seminar on Fimdamental and
Adult Hlucation. It is hoped that they vill be able to inspire and
stimulate prominent citizens and local leaders, including the wellto-do and the educated class, to join forces in this movenent, which
is designed to ameliorate and enlighten the less privileged elements
in our underdeveloped areas of Luzon, Mindanao and the Visayas.
SOME SIONIFICANT RECORDS OF THE SIMIEAR
The folloving records vill help to appraise the interest elicited
by the Seminar:
Number of parent-teacher associations, teachers!
associations, commity councils and civic organizations
that sponsored the attendance of delegates and observers
at the Seminar:


Sponsoring Orcanization
Humber
Private Uhiversities and Colleges ..... 67
PPSTA, Provincial & City Chapters .. 50
Local Parent-Teacher Association.... 27
Provincial Federation of Parent-Teacher Associations............. 10
Fational Federation of Parent-Teacher Associations............... 1
Womon's UluD 

RotarUlll.) 
Provincial Alurmi association .......
Armed Forces of the Philippines School for Enlisted Hen ..... 2
Puericuitore Center ..... 2
Univercity of the Philiprines .. 1
Community School Massion Council...1
Bo: Sconts of the Philippines Local Council ....1
Girl Scouts of the Philippines Local Council .....1
1
Llons Uluo .
Quiezon Elucational Associatlon ............
Veterans' Associatlon ........ 1
Young Nomen'e Christian association .....1


Sponsoring Organization


Number


Philippine Home Economics Association ........
Philippine Accrediting Association for Universities & Colleges .......
Philippine Association of Jutrition ....
Catholic Eucational Association of the Philippines ....
Commmmite Sebool Council ...
Grand Lodge, J A HP..........
Supreme Cormcil, 2 & A.S.l. .
Philippine Association of Imiversibr Nomen ..
Now Pilibid Prison .......
Association of Christian Schools and Colleges ..
Philippine Associatiorr of Universite Professors ......................
Soclal Melfare Aeministration .


Total


191


17
T
ATTELDAECE AT THA DAMI'AR


man
PUBLIC SCHOOL PEASORNEL
esisnatien
Division Superintendent .......
Assistant Division Superintendent ....
Division Academic Supervisor ........
Division Indastrial frts Supervisor ...................
Division Hoalth Supervisor ........
Division Jone Economics Supervisor .s.....
National Language Supervisor .....
Adult Mucation Supervisor .......
English Siroervisor ..s..
Physical Education Surervisor ........
Trade School Principal ...
Secondar:- School Principal .
District Supervisor ....
Supervising Principal ......
Elementary School Principal .
Classrool Teacher ....
Adullt Education Teacher .......
Total ..
-I
T
E
TT
Ganng

OFFICIALS OF PRIVATS SUROOLS, COLLAMES AA UESITAE
Dasignation
Bureau of Private Schools Supervisor ........
Prosident ......
Director ..
Deanl .
ProfeSSol ...
Instruictor ....
Principal .-
TOachel ---
Studenlo .----


Numoer


.10
.16
.. 18
- 3
 
. 8
.IA
.13
. 2
.. 2
2
.18
.. 63
..81
,.. 90
. 30


Number
.. 12
.... 10
.... 19
.-.. 12
... 12
... 90
.... 20
. 22

... 293


Total


Namber


- 5-
T
 "D
I



CIVIC LEDDENS, LAZMEN AND RPRASETATIVES OF OTRER CINAC AGENUIES
Pesignatien


Member, Parent-Teacher associasion ......... IA
President, Parent-Teacher Associstion ....... 13
Leader, Loung Women's Christian Association . 9
President. Vomen's Clno ..
2
Vice-President, Nomen's Clun ... 1
Instructor, Armed Forces of the Philippines - SEM & Training Center
2
2
Nurse, Puerieulture Center .
Reprecenbative, Masonic Dodies .. 2
2
Momber, Rotary Cluo J...
Provincial Bey Scouts Executive s.... 2
Member, Provincial Board ..... 1
Justice of che Peace ........ 1
Torp Hatror ... 1
President, Comunitr School Council ....
Local Civic Leader .....

Member, Catholic Hincation issociation of the Thilippanes ...........
*
Member, Thilxppine Mome Economics association ....................... 1
Member, Philippipe associetion of Futrition ......................... 1
Member, association of Uhristian Colleges : Univorsities ....
Worker, Social Velfare Administration ..... 1
Vice-President, National Federation of Parent-Teachar Association
of bhe Philippines ......
Vice-Fresident, Parent-Teacher Association ........
Chief, Mncational Section, Surear of Prisons ....................... 1
Mombor, Liomg Olt? ..
Total .. 03


SUEMANZ


Number of Provinces represented in the Seninar
Number of Cities represented in the Seminar..
Attendance:


Staff


Public School Personnel ...
Frivate School Officials ......
SinLc Loeders, cte. ........
Total
of the Seminar ...


50
11


373
203


"A 22


939


55


--Oo


6-


GRADE ALLOCATION OF ADULT PUPILS IN
THE REGULAR ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS


In an l1th Indorsement, dated November 20, 1951, the Undersecretary of Elucation approved the giving of validating test to
students in the adult education classes in Canlubang, Calamba, Laguna to determine their grade allocation in the regular elementary
classes, subject to the conditions contained in a 2nd Indorsement of
the Acting Director of Public Schools, dated July 19, 1951, which
follows:


"Respectfully forwarded to the Honorable, the
Secretary of Elucation, Manila, with the infermation
that in some places adult students are attending classes which follow practically the curriculum prescribed
for the elementary grades of the public schools, with
the possible exception of physical education and industrial arts. The requirements for these two courses,
hovever, are made up by the outside activities of adults
who work as laborers or are engaged in gainful occupations, and who have in their homes productive projects,
such as poultry, piggery, gardening or home industry
prescribed by the adult education program.
"In cases uhere the Division Superintendent is
convinaed that the school work done by the adults in
the adult-education classes, provided with adequate
learning facilities, substantially covers the requirement for the completion of a grade, it is recommended
thet the adults concorned be given validating oral and
written examinatiors by the Division Superintendent
for promotien to the next higher grade of the regular
elementary school curriculum. The promotion of such
adult students shall be subject to the approval of
the Director of Publie Schools.
"In this connection, it-is specifically understood
that the expensesafer teachers' salaries and maintenance
of adult education classes shall not be charged against
the Bureau of Public Schools but shall be borpe by local civic organizations, such as parent--teacher asso

7


ciations, labor groups, etc., and public spirited
citizens, thus leaving entirely the matter of financial support with the people of the communities
where the adult classes are offered. This financial
arrangement is now found in seme localities, a notable
example of which is Canlubang, Laguna, where the Canlubang Sugar Estate provides company’s fund for teachers' salaries and maintenance of adult classes.
"This recommendation is made in view of the fact
that there are adults who have studied in the public
schools and can continue their studies only by attending
classes in the evening or during off hours from their
labor. Furthermore, this arrangement vill induce
the adult learners to continue their education and
vill prevent their reversion into the group of illiterates."
The Canlubang Sugar Estate in Calanba, Laguna has sponsored
the first group of students enrolled in the adult education classes
to be given grade allocation in the regular elementary schools
upon approval by the Undersecretary of Education of the foregoing conditions and of the curriculum of adult education in
Canlubang as submitted by the Division Superintendent of Schools.
The Canlubang Sugar Estate is paying the teachers' salaries and
providing the necessary facilities for the adult education classes.


"It is a truasm to say that adults must
continue to learn in order to live in the
changing civilization of today. Heny resist
learning, however, and so get along poorly;
while others make it their business to carry
on self-education on their own initiative."


C. Hallenbeck


-


n
E
Amp
*
FIEDAMA"TAL 19 ADELT EDUSATRE E. THE DISERICT OF POLO

PEAETAY
DI-EIN OF FILLGAR
Iriano C. Iicolas
District Supervisor
The progran of fondarental and adult education in the district
of Polo is barely tuo years old. At the outset, Mr. Vitaliano
Bernardino, the present Division Superintendent issued to the field
a set of aduinistrative and suporvisory otjectives for supervisors,
principals, and teachers to comment on ard criticize, if necessary.
One of such objectives is "to derelon and imolement the philosoohz that
the scheol snould concern itself not onlr with the teaching of childran
but with the education of the adults and the improveneut of the coupumitr as well.” That very important objective has been the basis of
the prograa of findamertal and adult education in this district, and
for that matter, in the whole province of Bulacan. This objoctive up
to the present, is being imolemented and evaluated by all concernedschoolmen, children and all ontside agencies suck as the "pool' organizations.
Tuo relatel approaches are being used to accomplish the desired
objectives of the program of fundamental anl adult education - the
direct and the indirect. The direct approach is done thront the
activities of the "pook' orcarizations and the indirect is throngh the
child and the curriculun. Realizing the broader concert of adalt education which does not limit itself to the teaching of literacr alone,
the oconomic, health, cultural, recreational, and civic aspects have
been Included in the progran of activities. The point of attack in
solving su h comrmumitr probleme is purelr br the local or br what is
conmonlg imoma as the "pook' level. The town or barrio is divided into


-9-


little "pooks" composed of from 30 to 40 families. The "pook is
usually organized under the advisorship of a teacher residing in the
localitr. The officers of the "pook' electedl br its own memhers
preside over all meetings of the organization to rlan and decide tho
kinds of improvement they want to carry ont for the welfare af the commmity based on the needs, interests, and resources of a particular
place or barrio.
Although all the various phases of adult education for communitr
improvement have been includel in the program, yet all those who are
concerned in improving the ways of living in the commmity are unanimous
in giving top prioritr to the econonic and health aspects. Such being
the case the economic phase, has been given the attention that it deserves.
Poultry projecta have been started in many schools in the district with
the ain in viey of helping in propagating this home industry in the
commumit:. The elemantarr principles of poultry raising are tauht to
children in school and have been adopted as a part of the curriculun.
Poultrz clubs have been revived and organized so that this gear the nunher
of bacicrard poultries in Polo has multiplied to suca extert that this
Mmicipalitr is noy leading other touns in Bulacan in poultrr raising.
Pig raising has also found its place in mana homes. Pigs of both.
.*
local and foreian breeda are steadilr increasang in numer. Food production has been ermphasizel through pupils' home gardens and through
the cultivation of vacant lots by adults.
Remarkable progress hage neen made along the improvement of health
and sanitation in nang barrios and towns. Trash cans line the streets,


and yards and home surroundinas are kept clean. Sanitar: toileta that
are trithin the reach of the average family hae been constructed in manr


- 10 -
homes. Proper drainage is heing attended to and compost pits are dug
in many places for proper disposal of waste naterials.
It is gratifying to mention that remarkable interest haya been
shown by mary "pool erganizations on the caltural and recreational
aspecta hy establishing reading centera in towns and harrios. The establishment of such reading centers in the far barrios tendsto satisfy
the dire need of the people for a place where the can meet and cet
information from the printed page. The recent article of the Division
Superintendent for Bulacan entitled "Cormmitr Reading Centers" whicn
vas published in the Evenin News on December 1, 1951 has vith it the
picture of the reading center of Torres Bugallon, a barrio school of Polo.
Recont investigations and studios made on the number of adult
illiterates in the Distriet show that not many of them are fomd in the
hearts of Polo and Obando not even in the barrios situated along the
highiay near Manila. But quite a number of those who need literacinstructions are found in the renote barrios of these two towns. To help
selve the problem of illiteracg in these far-flung barrios, regular adult
elucation classes are organized in places where their organization is
practicable and in places where they are not, the "each-one-teach-one"
method is used to advantage. On account of the seening indifference of
the adult population to attend regular classes, the former method seens
not to produce the desired results. To further impleent the latter,
the "little teachers" who, it is believed, can carrr on the work are
being trained for the jon in the classrooms during the National Langnage
period br the teachers fron Grade IIIl up as per Division Bulletin No. 2,
s. 1951. Ln the whole district there are now 493 of sach "little


-11.
teachers” teaching 827 illiterate relatives in the homes. Evidently, the
training of the "little teachere" in the scaool is one of the means of
tring up classroom activities witr the needs and problens of the conrunity. Classroom instruction therefore, and for that metter, the curriculun is heing nsed indirectlr in the furtherance of the corrumityservice program along this line. As to whether or not this method will
prove better than all others that have been tried remains yet to e seen.
Nhenever there is an opportunitr to do so, during, the period of
Socialize Initegrative Activities, classroom teachers are also exerting
efforts to tie n classroom work with the problens of conmunitr living.
In this way, the chillren are siven opportunities to learn correctly in
school what ther should do at home. To give development to the allaround personality of the child, the teachers are planning and selecting
classroom activities that are based on the, needs and interest of the
punils and sulted to the conditions of living in school, home and the

comaumity.
*. * .
In conclucion, it mar not be amiss to state, that tlrough the encouragement ard imselfisa guidarce of the Division Superintendent for
Bulacan, the classroom teachers of Polo, in groups and ng grades, have
made a fair trial in writing supelementarreaders from drades I to VI
on various phases of the poultrr industrr. These readers ave alrcadbeen editod and aprroved hy the Division Superintendent. The coodes for
Grados I and II aro nou heina disbriouted to the field readg for use.
The Polo teachers were overiored when ther first saw the finished hook
m:
that ther have written. Tner, could not believe thet they were anthors
at last.

The following figures will s on the progress of the district of Polo


.- 12


on the conrmmity-school progran to date:
T
A. LAlEACY
9no-ol
198l-52
6
1. No, of literaer classes organized .......
2. Vo. of enrolnent in literacr classes:
a. Dy class nethol .. 81
15
327
b. Dr eacirpno-teach-one .............. IIIg
O
3. To. of "Little Teachers" trained ....
493
4. Lelatives taught by "little teachers":
O
69
a, rabher ..
O
122
Do mother s.
O
46
C. Orother A
d. SSter T. O
51
9
19
S. Mslo .....
2
I. Ul6 . 

g. Cther relatives .. O
30
o
53
h. neighbors .s.
B. ECONOLIO
1. No. of poultrr projects:
12
2. In School........... 8
543
b. (t Homo .. 531
63,015
2. Ho. of layers a..23,777
32,503
3. No. of non-laying fouls ........20,475
PAGL, $15
A. Total value of egas produced .........₱183,251
321
S. No. of Pingerx projects ................ 189
385
6. Total number of pigs s 662
35
30
7. No. of duckery projects ..s
y
4,105
8. Total nuuber of ducks as
9. No. of home gardens .............. 1, 034
1,M42
₱16,583
10. Estinated produce ....................₱11, 598
3,315
11. Number of trees plantol .............. 2,079
2,571
12. Number of trees living ................ 1,149
2
13. No. of conmunity nurseries .......
235
1A. No, of seedlings distribnted to people.
577
15. Io. of adults comleting vocational
15
52
training 
C. HOlES INPALAVELITT
792
490
1. Ito, of homes with toilets .........
389
1,393
2. Yo. of homes with drainame imoroved ...
73
1
3. No. of yards kept clean ......
1,
1,672
A. No. of homes with fences improved ..... 757
734
5. Fo. of homes with flower gardemns ...... 515


D. SOCIAL AD CTERIRAL IEM79
24
1. No. of "Poolf' organized ...........
12
5
2. No. of Neading Centers .......
3. No. of books in Reading Center:
el
33
a. Tagalo;? .
239
87
b. Emglisl ..
5. No. of community assemblies, programe,
59
30
ste. held .--.


MACHINERY AND ORGANIZATION OF FUNDAMENTAL AND ADULT
EDUCATION IN THE DIVISION OF ROMBLON
.1
Fructuoso I. Ilar
Division Superintendent, of Schools, Romblon
The Problom in General
In order te deviso a workable machinery and organization of fundamental and adult education in this division, the problem of illiteracy
was considered first, literacy being fundamental or basio in any program
of fundamental and adult education. A survey on illiteracy was conducted
by teachers For the whole division. According to the results of the
survey, the following facts vere revealed:
1. The centers of population have very high percentage of adalt
literacy and it varies inversely as to the size of the communitios
in point of population.
2. The toachers avuilable for fundamental and adult education
are mostly found in the larger centers of population and the supply
of such toachera also varies inversely as to the size of the communitios in point of population. This is to be expected because
the larger centers of population havo more oomplete school facilities while the smaller ones havo incomplete facilities and, of course,
in communities whero there are ho schools at all there are no toachers
available.
3. Most of the adult illiterates under 35 years of age were
once school children, baving finished grade one, or grade two, or
grade three. Most of them are found in sparsely populated communities with one-or two-teacher-barrio schools or without schools
at all.
4. The public school system is partly responsible in spending
huge sums of money in order to maintain one-or two-toscher barrio
schools under the two-single session plan - all for ultimate illiteracy bocause of the economic inabilities of those pupils in
remote communities to go to contifiue thelr studies in places where
the school facilities are more complete. In a fow months after
finishina grade one, or grade two, or grade three, and even grade
four, and then stop their schooling for good they become illiterates
after a few weeks.
5. Illiteracy incofar as among pernons of 13 years of age or
abpve is low, it bein: only abont 73 of the population. Mowever,
if illiteracy of childron below 13 years of age is considered, the
percentage of illiteracy is about 515.


All Phasea of Fundamental an Adult ghucation Censidered
While tho literacy campaign, is basic and, therefore, most important,
tho hoalth, economic; citizenship-civic, social-cultural, leisure, and
moral aspocts of fundamental and adult education are taken into account
in devising a vorkable machinery and organization on fundamental and
adult oducation in the'Division of Romblon. This Office beliovos that
a general program of public enlightenment through literacy, community
assemblies and reading centers should be the basis of a sound program
of fundamental and adult education.
Machinerr and Organization in Genaral
For lack of a better term the machinery and organization of fundamental and adult education in this division may bo odlled the "SchoolPTA-Purok' aystem or composite plan. These thrde organizations constitute
the core of the whole machinery. Throngh them the cooperntion of other
government and civic entities like the local and national government
agencies, the Red Crosa, the Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Labor Unions,
etc., is enlisted. The folloving describes in brief the rolo of each
organization:
T
La The Rolas of the School Organization
The school organization furnisbes the leadorship through the division
and field supervisors, principals, teachers, and pupils. It performa the
function of oreating inter-actions betweon the school and the community.
a. Literacy Camonign - Adult illitoratea are taught by the teachers
diroctly and through the pupils and students by the use of the one-teachone plan. Not only that but also it provides the children in schools
with more functional literacy. A period of 20 minutes has been, added
to the daily school program in which reading and writing in the vernacular


- 15 -Vi
are taught to children in rural areas with a vlew to making them liternto.
in their everyday language before they become adulto. In this way the
growing illiteracy problem can be solved at its very roots.
b. Economic Aapgots of Adult Education - A survey on local materiala and resourees was conducted in the whole division. How those
local materials aro being used in the different communities by the
poople as well as their potontial unes wore cerefully analyzod. Theso
local materials and resources are now being used in the curriculum in
making articles and producta that tho meople of the cormunities use,
*.
introducing, however, the making of articles that may be adopted by
the people of the communities. In this way the children are preporod
to participate in a practical and nseful manner in the economic life
of their communities. At the same time new things are introducod
which may bo adoptod by the people of tho communities.
To popularize these artioles mapufactured by the school children,
. .S.
a markoting plan has been adopted so that during market days these
articlos manufactured out of local materials by the school children
are put on sale in the public markets. According to reports from the
field the articles which are of great uso to the pewple in the communities sell like hot cakes.
In the field of food production the same procoss of intor-relation
between the schoels and the commities has boen carried out. The
cultivation of native plants and vegotables is emphasized. The products
of the school and home gardens can find a roady market or immediate use


16 -


to the people of the commmity. Tho cultivation of foreign vegetables
is not, however, neglected in order to introduce into the life of the
communities something that may improvo their diot.
What is said about gardening is also true to poultry and awine.
The oare of native-breed chickens which are more adapted to local conditions is emphasized. Tho care of foreign-breed chiokens is not,
howevor, neglected with a view to doveloping a breed that is improved
and more adapted to local conditions.
In the field of home economics tho use of local materials and resources is also emphasized. In the cooking classes, coconut producta,
cassava produects, and other local materials, for instance, aro used in
the preparation of recipes tht are found popular among the people of
the community, liko, ginatan, nuto, auman, mavennaiso, hibinka, cakes,
eto. Care, however, is being tuken to include also foreign recipes
that may improve or add variety to the diet of the peoplo. Imphasis
is laid not only on the utilization of local materials but also on the
acquisition of varied and improved techniques of thoir preparation in
order to retain as much as poscibla their nutritive values. To inject
these school practices into the lifo of tha people in tho communitios, a
program of sinvey, study, practical application, and follow-up is being
conducted by the home economios teachers and their classes
In handicrafts both for boys and girla, availability of matoriala
in the locality for the manufacture of articles suited for boya and
girls in various grade levols is taken into consideration. For instance,
the weaving of ginamay is done in places whero there is abundance of
abaca, thus, through the school curriculua local industries are being


-17


revived. This practice, of course, enlists the holp of resource persons who are experts in certuin lines in their communities.
A syatem of markoting school handicrafts made by girla is also
launohed in order to popularize the usos of local materials and renourcen.
in the manufacture of things that are useful in the comunity. Caro is
also taken that through the schools improved techniques especially in
design and color combinations are introduced. In the art of home
making school practices are being injectod into tho comamity through
home visitation with a viey to effeoting carry-over of such bractices
to the homes. A soore card for this home visit is used. Every pupil
keeps a soore curd showing the progress in the differont items therein.

A program of developing love for productive work among pupils and
studenta is also followed in this division. High school boys, for instance,
are wed as workers anl carpenters in government-financed school projects
on a wago basis. In Romblon, boya are engaged to earn monoy by helping
load oopra when big freighters call at Romblon for that purpose. This
is made possible by a spocial arrangement made with the local labor union
authorities. School projocts not financed by the governmont are undertaken through the student governmont without compensation. In (iongan
the 12-heotare rice land of the achool was parcelled among the poorer
students to cultivate, with the help of their parenta under the guidance
of the toachers, on a 757-25a basis fixed by the Provincial Board in
fuvor of the students. In this way these students carned money to pay
their tuition fees.
c. Citizonghip-Civign - In the celobration of such days like Arbor
day, Nationel Heroes Day, Mothers Day, Conatitution Day, and other days
prescribed by the Bureau of Public Sohools to be celebrated, programs


- 18 -


dre prepared in which children and adults jointly participate. Suitable


popular native songs are incladed in the program.
In community work the school organization sometimes leadsin improving
tho comumity with a view to make the purok members, the PTAs, and other
civic and government organizations participate. For instance, if the
streets and yarde in a purok are neglected, the school teachers and children
do the cleaning themselves and invariabhy the poopka are made to de likevise.
That is true in all phases of fundamental and adult edueation. Both the
children and adults are in this manner taught to contribute their bita
towards a copmon good which is the true basis of sound citizenship.
d. Social-Cultural Aspoct of Fundamental and idult Elugatien - The
sohool organization likewise takes the lead in effecting inter-actions
between the school and the community in this field. The teachers in this
division have collected cultural and social matoriala pertaining to tho
province and municipalities to be used in the classes and in connegtion
with commnity assemblies, school-adult programs, etc. Native songs
have been compilod by this Office in order to popularize tho songs and
airs of the community. Proverbs and legonda have also been compilol.


e. Tha Ilse of Leisure - Reading conters were establishod wheros
adults can read vernacular and English reading matters. Athletio games
among adults are alwaya popular during school athletio maets which are
well attendel. Undesirable use of lelsure suoh as playing of pools and
other forms of gambling are discouraged.


The PTA bridges the gap between tho school and the dommmity. Every
commmity with a school has a PTA with the usual president, vice-president,


- 19 -
secretary, and treasurer as its officials. In rural areas all the members
y
of the comuity who have children in school are "ipso facto" members of
the PTA. It is no exaggeration to say that vithout the PTAs it would be
impossible to run the school system because they provide sites, temporary
buildings, and even equipment for the schools.


a. Cit


-It may be seen, therefore, that the


AY


PTA is one of the most potent agencies of civic-citizenship training among
the adult population. Their activities are primarily centered in providing school facilities which they consider a felt need. When a community desires to have a school, the membors of the commmity sonstitute
themselves dnto a PTA and elect their officials. Thoy acquire sites
either by purchaso or donation for a school. They construct temporary
my
buildings. They provide equipment. All these are under their own expense.
Starting from this point it is not a difficult matter to extend.
the sphero of activities of the PTAs. They help in the organization
2
of adult education classes. They include appropriations in their
budgots for honoraria of adult education teachers. They provide funds
for the purchase of materials such as newspapers, magazanes and other
reading matter for their reading centors. They undertake the construetion of community basketball and volleyball. courts. They help
provide athletic equipment for the use of the community. Above all,
they appropriate money to help run school athletic meeta.


b. Literagy - The PTA is found especially to be useful as an ally
of the cormunity school in sparsely populated arehs. Through this or

20 -


ganization it is quite easy to organize adult education olasses and to
help maintain attendance. In doing so, adult pupils are first drafted
from among the members of the PTA itself. The few non-members are being
won into the fold either by tho PTA or with the help of the municipal
officials.
The PTA invites, with the advico of the school authorities, speakers;
lecturers, and demonstrators, to community assemblies, which are generally
undertaken under the auspices of the association. They gathor the members and the people to these assemblios for gonoral enlightenment on
various topios of interest to them.
Through the PTA and under the leadership of the school, reading
centers are established. The reading centers are mostly provided with
reading materiala by the associatjon at its oun expense. To these
reading centers the new literates as vell as other literate people go
to read. Reading matters in the vernacular such as gorridos and ngvenas
are denated by private citizens. It must be borne in mind that the
rural folks are imaginative, romantie, superstitious, and religious.
These types of reading mattor appoal to them.
o.. Litaragy. Hoalth and Sanitation - As the PTA is an organization
covering the whole community, it is a valuable ally of the commmity school
in its efforts to improve health and sanitation. It is very difficult,
however, to convince the rural folles to construct toilet facilities.
They prefer to hide behind the bushes for thoir necossities. The PTA
members, however, construct school toilots which serve as modola for
their home toileto.


21-


d. Enonomic Imorovement - In sparsely populated centers where there
are plenty of vacant lots, the PTA is especially effective as an ally
of the school in food produetion, in promoting home industries, and in
improving economic life in general. In the old days one of the features
of a Filipino home is a banana orchard in the backyard and a kitchen
garden consisting of boxes on which plants such as onions, garlic,,
kutchay, medisinal plants, etc., were planted for imediate use by the
housewife. Due to the impact of Vestorn culture these traditional practices gradually died out in most compunitios. Through the FTA these are
being revived.
The production of other crops which goes to the intensifying of
food productien among the people can be best effeeted through tho
agency of the PTA.
Handicrafta on which local materials are used can also be improved
through the ETA.
e. Sogual-Cultural - The PTA, being the largest organization in the
commmmity, is an agency of gathering the people together to disouss their
conmon problems formally or informally. They listen to lestures from
local resource persons. Those meetings or gatherings are oftentimes occasions for wholesome social activities. On these occasions conmunity
singing, in which popular native songs are sung, is an important part of
the activities. The Office is compiling native songs fur use in these
community gatheringa.


22 -


f. Usa of Leisure - School athletic meets, as has been pointed out
olsawhere in this report, are always attendod by big crowds showing the
people's interest in athletics. As a matter of fact local athletic meets,
provincial meeta, and the participation of Romblen in the NVal meets are
partly Financed by the PTAs.
Capitalizing on the peoplo's love for sporis, school athleties are
gradually being introducod through the PTa among the adult population in
rural areas. Inter-PTA meets aro oncouraged and undertakon under tho
direction of field supervisors and teachers.
da The Rolga ot the "Purok'
Another importaht oog of the machinery and organization of fundamental
and adult education in this division ia the zono or purok organization.
Compact commmities like the poblacionos and big barrios are divided into
zones or puroka, each under a purok leader. Aa thene puroks are small units
they operate undor the overall control of the PTa. The purok lenders are
also memboro of the board of directors of the PIA. In this division, thorefore, the cpmmunity leaders nre dispensed with. Their places are taken by
the board of directors of the PTA. This arrangement is possible because
of the fact that the PTAs in this division are very much alive indeed, unlike those that are found in some other provinces.
The nurgk, therefore, ls utilized as a means to implement thoroughly
the compunity school program. The activities of the purol in a community
are coordinated by the PTA through its board of directors, whioh consist
of its officers and the purok leadero. Matters or general community
oonoern, especially those that need financing, are the concern of the PTA.
Mattors which affect a purok are, of course, the concern of the purok


- 23 -
leaders andtheir assistants. The purok is thus especially effective as
an agency of community improvement in compact communities like the poblacionos and big barrios.
a. Litaraay - In compact commnities, as has been pointed out
elsewhere in this report, the percentage of adult illiterncy is very
low. The fow illiterates found in each purok aro being taught by the
use of the "each-one-teach-one' plan. In the town of Romblon, most of
the adult illiterates are prisoners of the provincial jail anl menbers
of the Romblon Labor Union. Those organizations are considered as puroks
and tenchers are assigned to teach the illiterates who belong to these
organizations. The puroks are especially helpful in discovering adult
illiterates.
b. Hsalth and Sanitation - Because ot the congested nature of the
housos in each purok, exch purok is responsible in providing a toilet for
a number of familios, it being quite impractical to require every house
to construct a toilet of its own. A purok is under the supervision of a
toacher assigned with her oun pupils so that if the people in a purok
are quito slow in improving the sanitation of their purok the pupils with
the guidance of their teachers visit the purok ard if necessary do tho
oleaning themselves. There are few purokd, it is observed, whose members
are indifferent in improving their sections. Under the cirqunstances, the
teachers in charge are authorized to put the members into line by dirlomaoy and persuasion.
o. Economio Imorovement - The puroks are also useful agencies in
implementing the program of food production especially in reviving the
traditional practice of our people to have a banana orchard in every


24


backyard. It must be remembered that the banana is the apple tree of
the Philippines. The owners of vacant lots and backyards have been
induced to make them productive by planting bananas and vegetables.
In case the owners of some lots eannot be induced to do this, which
happens rarely, the school children under the guidance of their teachers and with the consent of the uwners do the fenoing and planting
themselves as a part and parcel of their food production activities.
d. Cixia Citizanshin - The purok is not as effoctive as the PTA in
training the adult population in the art of citisenship because of the
limited aren that it occupies in the community. It is, however, useful
in fooussing the consciouanesa of the mombers of the purok on the importance of cooperativo work in improving their mode of living in a very
limited neighborhool. Small group consciousness for the common good is
thus fostered. The traditional Filipino custom of helping one another
in tho neighborhood can thus bo cultivated.
e. Social-Cultural.- In this field of fundamontal and adult education
the cooperation of the school and the purok is important. The home economios teachers and their pupils and students hose houses are located
among these puroks, are gradually exerting efforts by froquent visitation to improve the home conditions of the members of the puroks with
their cooperation. The Industrial Arte boys whose homes are located in
these puroks, with the guidance of their teachers, arc also gradually
winning the cooperation of the members to improvo their homes by providing
privacies and by improving the home facilities.


- 25 -


f. The Use of Leisure - Because of its limited seope, the purok is
not effective in promoting the use of wholesome leisure. It is the PTA
that takes care of these activities in the division of Romblon.
Sulamary
To put it in a nutshell the machinory and organization of fundamental
and adult education contain three important cogs in erdor to effect group
dynamics in cormunity improvement, namely: the school organizations which
provide the leadership, the PTA which provides funds and coordinates the
activities of the purok as well as takes care of vider comraunity problems,
and the purok which intensifies cormunity improvelient on a limitod scope
in coordination with the activities of the school organization and the PTA.
These three cogs of the whole machinery enlist the cooperation of
other public and private organizations such as the municipal and provincial government agencies, the National Government agencies, the Red Cross,
the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts, local youth organizations, labor anions,
etc.


"What dream shall we dream or
what labor shall we undertake? I
answer: The first thing to do is
to create end realize the feeling
for the community and break up the
svil and petty isolation of man from
man."


- AE (George Rassell)


- 26


THE CULTURAL MISSION IN LUMBAN, LAGUNA
Rev. alejandro Luelhotil
I havo been a resident of this municipality for tuelve yeors. During
my stay, I came to knos that the people of Lumben are industrious, lawabiding, and hospitable. They are engaged in productive pursuits such
as ferming, enbroidery, pot making, rope making, blackamithing, ond
fishing. According to a historical morker posted an the front wall of
the church, the tonn of Lumban had been once the center of missionory
activities in the province of Laguna. In times of old, the church had
ployed an important role in this activity and it is no wonder that at
present, it is toking an active part in the cultural mission established
at Lumban.
mithin the short period of existence of the Lumban Cormunity
School Mission, I hove observed that its objectives are being carried
out successfully with the cooperution of the tomn people and municipal
officials. The physical sppeurance of the conmunity has greatly improved since the establishment of the mission. Foed production has been
given impetus. Small hackyards are planted to crops of verious kinds.
Some fomilies have started poultry projects in addition to the piggery
projects for which the tosn of Lumban is vell-knoun. The number of
toilets has incrensed according to a recent survey of teachers. Each
"purok" has a small reading center provided mith Tagalog and English
books, magazines, and newspapers. In the nfternoon, you can see people
reading magazines gad neuspapers in their respective "purok" reading
centers.
-
IRev, Alejandro Lualhati is the parish priest in Lumban and a member
of the local Cormunity School Missien.


- 27 -


The folloving incident sugurs vell for the success of the mission.
In a certain "purok", the members had an agreement that no pig should be
alloved to ge astray in the streets, and if there js-one, it must be
13
killed right there and then. So all persons concerned built pig pens or
tied their pigs in the yards. Cne day, a pig with a market value of
around P50.00 got loose on account of the poor quality of the rope. The
people of the "purok" including the ovner, one Zosimo de Remos, san the
pig. The owner, vithout any second thought of the pig's ownership ran
after it, caught, and did his job as a good member of the "purek". He
brought the pig to his companions and divided it among themselves. He
remarked, "I prefer to live up with the agreement we have made than to
save the life of a pig vhich I onn." The incident shoved a positive
changing attitude of the people towards cormunity improvement.
as parish priest of the toun, I hove accepted membership in the
mission vith the full belief that in a movement like this, the church
should not fold its honds. I am using the pulpit in selling to the
members of the flock the objectives and purposes of the mission. The
mission is too young to be judged on its success. Homever, considering the reaction of the community to the verious activities being
undertaken by the mission, it is safe to say that a bright future oweits
it, and I hope that time nill come vhen the toun of Lumbun vill he a
model community in cleanliness, economic self-sufficiency, and procressiveness.
I om always praying to the Divine Frovidence for the success of the


mission.


28 -


CALINAN COMAUNITY SCHOOL, DAVaO
Artemio C. Visconde
adult Education Division
Calinan is n distriot at the outskirteof Devao City. It has an
ever-groving population composed of people fror the different parts of
the Philippines. They come to settle looking foruard with the hope for
social as vell as economic amelioration.
To a casual observer, the nay people of Calinan move about and
the conditions of their homes and public places are manifestations of
the existence of pence and order, common interests, cooperation, and
mutual understanding. Upon inquiry, it ves found that the present community condition in Calinan hos been promoted nith the help of the
Calinan Elementery School Porent-Teacher asseciation and other civic
organizations which have been continuously playing on important role
in community inproverient work.
The marshy creeks in Calinan that have long been used as dumping
places of dirt ond garbage started and stimulated cormunity improvement.
One of the creeks that cuts through the school ground caught the attention
of the teachers. They thought of improving it with this objective in
mind - to preserve it for its aesthetic value and at the same time to
utilise its possibilities in promoting interest in gainful enterprises
among the people of the community. There was at first no definite comprehensive plon. The first step taken sas the presentution of the filthy
condition caused hy these marshy creeks to the attention of the people
through community assemblies, parent-tencher association and cluh meetings.
The presentution of facts about these creeks raised questions and created
problems for deliberations. Various points of vien vere presented and


 29 -


suggestions of ways and means were made for improvement. According
to informution, it took many meetings and mony heated discussions
before a "thought-through" plan of action was ugreed upon and laid
out by the people themselves. The locul PTA together with the "ang
Kuliwat sa Bohol", a losal civic orgunization, began to take port in
the project. The creek was cleaned, its bunks were cleared and
ornomental lilies vere gromn. an old resident of the place voluntarily
gave some guorumi to be cultured in the creek. Other similar contributions for the improvement of the fish pond were received. This
mas the beginning, the birth, I should suy, of the Calinon Community
School, with its two worthuhile activities, the beginning of sanitetion
and the growing of guerami.
It did not toke long before the first projest assumed proportion.
“The effect is contugious," informed the principal teacher. It
aroused the interest of meny including the parish priest of Calinan.
The community improvement then became the subject of talks in the
locality. Civic spirited citizens and local organizations began
assuming responsibility in carrying to accomplishment home and cormunity projects. The people storted making their fish ponds right in
their farms and home yords. These fish projects in the homes led and
brenched into other projects especially for the improvement of home
and community health and sunitution. For instance, in converting
the ereeks into fish ponds, the people huve to think of other ways
by which they may he able to dispose of their garbage. This gave the
teachers and community leaders opportunity to take up with them the
proper disposal of waste and plan for keeping the homes and surroundings


- 30 -


sanitary. Health and sanitation work became an outgrowth of the
fish culture.
Thus the community improvement in Calinan was launched through
the community-scheol movement. It is a kind of "grassroot" approach
through which home and community problems and the essential needs
of life are brought for consideration and for solution by the people
themselves. It is the service that can be very well extended to the
communities with the teachers as "organizers" and "enablers." It is
the best approach that is conducive to permanency of activities for
improvement.


"So long as adult education is concerned
with helping to build better communities as
vell as helping to make better people, and
the two are inseparable, it has a responsibility to facilitate a greater participation
of people in community life. The circumstances under which this can be done are
ideal for adult learning. Neighborhood
groups working together to understand and
solve their common problems are the richest
form of educational experience."


- W. C. Hallenbeck


-31 -


CODENSED ARTICLES
TRENDS AND PRACTICES IN FUNDAMENTAL AND ADULT
EDUCATION ABROAD
1. Saranak - A successful pilot literacy scheme among the Saribas
has been reported. The extroordinary prosperity coming from
the rubber boom caused quite a demand for arithmetic and so
all the adult men and vomen vere only too ready to cooperate
in forming literacy groups.
2. Kretos. Togoland - Kpetoe, noted for its foodstuff market in
Togoland, has been a training center for child care and nutrition. Momen leaders, mestly fermers and traders from villages
in the cormunity, attended the courses. Each day's activities
sterted vith lively cormunity singing, and the momen soon learned
to sing folk songs taught in the center. This mas usually
followed by intensive lectures and denonstrations on child core
end nutrition by a nurse. Using local foods, fruits, vegetubles
and utensils, the preparation of suitable food for the child has
been demonstrateda
Populor cormunal games were held in the afternoons; in the
evenings films on which the course was based were shown to
illustrate their lessons.
3. Indonesia - about 58 per cent of the adults in Indonesia have
no school education. The attack on the illiteracy problem is
being corried on in several purts of the country.
a special Llteracy Department has been established. Government efforts are supplemented by the private initiative of insividuals and organizations which participate in the literecy


- 32. -


cumpeign, with the Literacy Department acting as adviser to such
groups in the country as a whole.
4. Hyderabad - During the last ten yeurs in Hyderabnd there has been
created in the villages a desire to rend but there is a serious lack
of teachers. To solve the problem the Christion Church is endeavoring
to supply this need by its adult literacy progren.
S. Bombay - Nearly 600 literacy classes held under the control of the
Bombey City Sociel Education Committee, have just completed their
session.
About 12,000 adult men and vomen appeured for their literacy
end social education test and about 9 to 10 thousand adults speaking
Marathi, Gujornti, Hindi, Telugu and Urdu are estimated to have passed
the test. Most of these persons are workers of the mills, factories,
-
workshops and dockyards, domestic servants and municipal workers.
The test comprises of reoding, mriting and general knokledge.


"Adult education, in its nost modern
form, takes as its starting point the
real conditions of life, and aims at enablina
each individual to luve as full and rich a
life as possible. It does not mean a distribution of knowledge, but an initiation
in the art of living everyday life."


- J. Dumazedier


- 33 -
NOTES ARD RECORDS


PAMPANGA
Report on econorric irtrovement through the cormunity scheol
has begn reported hy the Acadenie Supervisor of Pampang.. He seid:
Literocy - "Out of the tuenty one t-ans in the prevince, sixteen
undertook the promotion of adult educatien indder the "esch-one-teachone" systen and the group pien. Difficulties nere encountered in
encouraing edults to attend classes, expeciilly these sho live
in the tomna proper. The adulta are either too shy or too busy in
their occupations so that they de not seen to find extra time to
attend clesse3. Hozever, in the barrios where life is not so
brisk and fast es it is in larger torns, spprecialle numbers vere
enrolled nad promoted both in the primary and intermediate levels.
Haalth and Hone Life - “The collection and disposel of vertate
is successful in nany communities. Drums ere used as receptacles
in some pleces and these ere distributed in conveniont places lonEL
the thorouzhferes. Hhere there ere no drums avnile le, rueriah is
either burned right sherc it is dumped, or is deposited in the
compost pits to he turned inte fertilizer. Seritary toilets have
been constructed in nany homes. The pit type or ernr type rhich
is essier and chesper to construct is "aininporularity amona the
masses. In fact, this type of toilct entrils no idition-l expenses
at allif one is resourceful. It needs only  little extre effort
on the pert of the indi-iuel to make one.


- 34


"Houses and fences are sometimes constructed through the cooperative efforts of the conrunity members. Even the planting and
harvesting of crops is done often sinilarly. This shows that tho
average Filipino is not lacking in spirit of helpfulness tovards
his fellow individuals.
Economic Improvement - "In alnost all the towno and barrios,
the ilea of improving the lot of the people through the raising of
poultry, rigs, ducks and other animals, planting of vegetables in
home gardens or the planting of fruit trecs in the backyards to supplement the table if not to gain extra pocket soney, was acclaimod
by the communities. Evarybody saemad agreed anl sold to the visdom
of the idea, so that by the niddle of the school year there was noted
an increased production on various projocts mndertaken ard a senblance of peace and prosperity among the people vas manifest. In
Angeles, Mabalacat, San Fernando, llexico, Bacolor, Porac, Magalang,
Sta. Rita, Floridablanca, Lubao, poultry raising, hog raising, vegetable gardoring and the growing of fruit trees have gained
popularity. In the touns along the Pampanga river - from Candaba to
Apalit, mat and hat weaving, pottery and blacksmithing are the favorite
sources of income of the population. In Nacabebe, Masantol, Minalin, and other touns where rivers, ponds, and marshes are found, duck
raising has gained a ney impetus. It could be gleaned from the
foregoing statements that the snccosa of any given enterprise dependa
primarily on the natural potentiallties of the locality or region
for ray materials, 1.e. it is the regien for an indastry, and not
the industry for the rogion. Vith this concept in vien, the success
of a given industry depends on the availability of raw materials.


- 35 -
Citizenship and Cultural Improvements - "All the school population are engaged in one or more civic undertakings, are members
of clubs, discussion groups, cooperatives and recreation centers to
promote better understanding among the members of the community and
to encourage the people to be conscious of their rights and obligations as citizens. Libraries and roading centers vere established
or organized in many towns and barrios. Whenever it was feasible
literary-musical programs were held to break the drudgery and monotony of rural life. A number of towns succeeded in showing educational films to the public."
ZAMBALES
Improvement of community living has been implemented by the
Home Economics classes in Zambales according to the report of the
Division Home Economics Supervisor. The classes in Home Economics
undertook community work by taking part in the promotion of some
industries, such as salt making, bagoong making; vinegar making,
food preservation, and pottery. Food preparation and serving
vas also demonstrated for the benefit of the rural folk.
CAGAYAN
From the report of the General Office Industrial Education Supervisor, the following have beon noted:
Home Industries - "The development of new home industries and
the improvement of old ones are gaining a good headway through the
joint cooperative efforts of all teachers, principals, supervisors,
and other school officials. Some of the home industries that show
promise of development are the following:


- 36 -
1. Weaving. Although weaving 14 an old industry in the northern
provinees, Cagayan has not developed it as muah as the llocos Provindes. Weaving loons are found only in fen homes. Honever, with
the nan trend of eduestion in Cagayan which is diracted tomard the
produetive development of community resources, including the trsining of an appreciable portion of the people in ereative eraftwork,
veaving stands out to be one of the promising home industries.
2. Silk-Horm industry.- The production of silk thread has gone
bayond the stimulstion stage. It is now a productive activity of
the peopla of Pamplons. Hovever, inasmuch as the people are hot
yet adept in the weaving of silk yarn, there is a need of training
the people in this line.
3. Pratar cultuxa. The oyster sulture of the sehools in Buguey
Ls giving a good incentive to the people to embark on its commercial
posaibilities. The projeot ig having a good headway.
4. Pottarr prolaats. The pottery project is found in Iguig.
Many families are engaged in this home industry. Honever, there
is a need of improving the erude method of making elay articles.
I observed a woman in sstual work on a pot. Her toola were very
erude, gonmisting only of a rough nood mallet, a piece of pooxly
shapad bamboo stiek and a piece of rosk - all used in making the
pyoject. The processes she used were erude and tedious; hence, she
could fimiah only a fen articles a day. Inasmuch es the school is
also engaged in pottery work, modern methods and processes should
be introduced gradually in order that the home industry of the
people may be improved. The use of a simple potter's wheel and


improvised kilns for firing and alazing objects should be studied
and introduced to the people as soen as feasiblo and practicable.
5. Poultry and Swine. Nith the leadership of the school,
especially the Cagayan High School, poultry and swine projects
have aroued the interest of many people in the community. Many
people from all walks of life are now engaged in these projeots."
ILOCOS NORTE
In Batac, Ilocos Norte, a five day farmers' institute in the
school, jointly under the auspicon of the Ilocos Norte Cooperative
Marketting Aasociation and the Patac Rural High School was held.
The enrolment was limited to the farmors from oach barrio in Batac
and the same for each municipality in the province of Ilocos Norte.
Featuring the institute were lectures and demonstrations in scientifie farming, gardening, poultry and hog raising, and reoling silk
thread for which the teachers of the Rural High School had rendered
the most contributions.
The holding of a farmers' institute in tho Batao Rural High
School is significant in several ways. It dispels the idea that
the school is intended only for students of educational age; the
farmers' institute opened the eyos of the public that the school is
also for illiterates and other farmexs desirous of improving their
methods and practicos and broaden their knowledge and outlook in
their occupations. Tho enthusinom of the attendants more than justifios the opening of short courses in vocational courses in agriculture and the introduction of a greater variety of farming enterprises and houschold industries.


38 -


ILOCOS SUR
In line with the community-centered school program, opportunity
courses have been offered free at the llocos Sur Trade School.
Professionals, employeos, and others, male or female, who are
interested in hobbios have been invited to enrol. The length of
time of each course will depend on the ability of the individual to
finish a projoct or projects.
MISAMIS ORIENTAL
In response to community life improvemont campaign it has been
reported that in Misamis Oriental encouraging results have been registered in tho increased food production, beantification of home
surroundings, increased enrolment in literacy olasses, and in the
establishment of reading centers. Presently, reading centers are
found in Villanueva, a barrio of Tagaloan, Malugan, barrio of El
Salvador, and in the barrio of Looc, Ampanioan and Binuagan, in
Initao and Lagonglong.
ILOILO
A number of reports from Iloilo are very encouraging. Home
economics education his been extended to reach the underprivileged
class without neglecting tho uppor or average class. Some of the
interesting measures adopted are the following:
1. Lumbanao: The H. E. teacher in charge of Fooda of Lumbanao
High School held adult classes for sometimo in culinary art, giving
emphasis not on foreien dishes but on the experimentation and modification of local native recipes. These demonstratlons wore held


- 39 -


on Saturdays and Sundays in the H. E. Bldg. Facts in nutrition
and principles in food preparation were also discussed.
2. Dingle: A more expanded and better planned program for
adults was adoptel by the Schocl. Community Council of Dingle.
Claases to heip adults in the vecatioral and avocatien proficienicy
were organizol,
The class for women in eight lessons in maternal, and infant
care, home and family relations, interior decoration, food and
nutrition, clothing and handicrafts wes given. Now to reduce
family expenses and how to increase family income were also taken
up. The popular courses were home, and family relations, foods and
nutrition. Courses of study were propared-by the teachers teaching
the courses with the help of the adult pupils who were given the
freedom and privilege to select the courses they liked best.
The classes were under the, charge of five H. E, teachers ofboth Dingle High School and Dingle Elementary School.. The classes
were conducted in the vernacular using materials and references
translated from the English texts.


"Adult education in, always a community
funetion, no matter what programs may exist.
This is brue because peoples' problems find
so ruch of their expression in the community.
Gormariny advlt odmatien is the respomsibilit, nf maay gaows in the cormpait.. Po
.T-
roron al.. funes the sel cels, li racioa, social serrice gromps, ciubs, goverrwert agencies, an. citizens shuld werk segetherg
ench asscring cemnain rosponsibilatios."


- From the Hitorial
Adult Bincation Bulletin
October, 1942.


VOL.VILTOI JANUARY A9SO


page
1
EDITORIAL.
EDUCATORS STIRRED BY NEW APPROACH
T
TO CONTANENTAL CAMPAIGN AGAINST
Pa
2
ILLLTERACY ..
THE ROLE OF SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN
8
ADULT EDUCATION .
By Benito Saavedra
15
ADULT EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR CEBU ..
By Dr. Pedro G. Guiang
ADULT EDUCATION PROBLEM IN NEGROS
OCCIDENTAL... 21
By Fernando S. Fuentes
THE LITERACY CAMPAIGN IN ILOILO.. 23
By lazaro P. Fernandez
TE

OIIIZEN'S CARIILLA. 25
N
PRACTICAL AND PSYCHOLOGIGAL APPROACH TO THE TEACHING OF ADULTS. 27
By Artemio C. Vizconde
29
TRENDS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD ..

ET
m
Um
HIGHLAGHIS AND SADBHIGMES OF
Ta
TIES
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIV.
IN THE PROVINCE . 35
ENROLMENT IN ADULT EDUCATION CLASSES.. 42
PROMOTION IN ADULT EDUCATION GLASSES.. 43


1-


ADULT EDUCATION, A UNESCO NORLD-RIDE MOVEMENT
IINESCO, one of the specialized agencies of the United Notions
Organization, has embarked upon a dynomic project of educational
development for the unlettered and underprivileged peoples of the
countries of both the Nest and the East. Unesco conferences have
been instituted to promote literacy among these peoples and to improve their economic, social and cultural state of life. The
UNESCO realizes that no global peace, happiness and safety can be
established with "half the world's population" living under educational blackout and in submerged social conditions. During the
year 1949, the Unesco held three adult educction conferences, namely, the Internotional Conference on Adult Education in Elsinore,
Denmark, the Seminor on Illiteracy in the Americas in Rio de Janeiro, Brezil, and the Seminar on Rural Afult Education for Community
Action at Mysore, India.
Ne in the Philippines cannot continue to be indifferent to the
serious problem of illiteracy and the low standards of economic
and social life of over 502 of the population. a serious threat to
our democratic form of government vill remain so long as the conditions of these unschooled citizens ore not improved and omeliorated.
Our membership in the UNESCO makes it incumbent upon us to fall in
line with the Unesco program of fundomental and adult education,
which is simed to bring about educational enlightenment for the
masses, world understending, and security of mankind.


-2 -
EDUCATORS STIRRED BI NEN APPROACH TO CONTINENTAL
CAMPAIGN AGAINST ILLITERACI
(From UNESCO COURIER, October 1, 1949)
The mid-vinter months of July and August, the tourist books
say, ore the most delightful periods to visit Rio de Janeiro. For
a small group of edueators, uho had come to participate in the
Inter-American Seminar on Literacy and ddult Education, the plaasant
Brasilion winter, however, was no holiday.
They began to arrive, mostly by plane, towards the end of July,
At the Sentos Dumont airport in the heart of Rio, they were bundled
into high-povered, spacious taxis and whisked through the Federal
Copital past the Sugar Lonf and Guanabara Bay. Two hours later,
still breothless and dissy from the winding, tortuous road trip
through tha Orgen Mountains behind Rio, they were deposited at the
door of the sumptuous Hotel Quitandinha, near Petropolis. Here,
they remained for five full weeks, from July 27 to September 2,
to examine one of the most burning problems of the entire American
continent: 70,000,000 adult illiterates and 19,000,000 American
children deprived of schools.
To the Inter-American Seminar, orgonised jointly by Unesco,
the Organization of American States (Oas), and the Brazilian Government, come some of the most distinguished eduestional leaders from
the New and the Old World: the originator of Mexido's famed Cultural Missions for literaoy Professor Guillermo Bonilla y Segura
knoun throughout his country simply as El Maestro; young, energetie Ismael Rodriguez Bou, edacational researcher from Puerto Rico;
witty Ernesto Nolson, statistical giant of Argentina; Suiss


- 3 -
psychologist Jean Piaget; literacy primer specialist Ann Nolon Clark,
of the United States; and Colonel George Selwyn Simpson, bringing
with him 35 years experience in literacy teaching in the British
Army.
For the occasion, the Brazilian Government called in some of
its best educational experts: Fernando Tude de Souza, Antonio Almeida Junior, Mario Teixeira de Freitas and Mario Paulo de Brito.
Dr. Lourenco Filho, director of Brazil's highly successful
2 1/2 year campsign against illiteracy, left his desk, on the fourteenth floor of the ultra-modern Ministerio de Educacso e Saude to
take over leadership of the internstional seminar. With him were
Guillermo Nannetti, 39-year old former Minister of Education of
Colombis and special OAs representative, and Dr. Frederick J. Rex,
eminent American educator and Unesco's field representative, in
Fundamental Educetion.
FRESH IDEAS AND TECHNIQUES
In spite of this impressive teom of educstionista the Seminar sought and achieved no miracles. The 70,000,000 adult illiterates still remain to be integrated into the life-stream of LatinAmerican communities and nations.. But from the careful five-week
exchange of ideas and experiences there emerged a series of new
ideas, new methods and techniques, which have set the bases for
the first co-ordinated attack ever planned on a continental scale
against what Torres Bodet has termed "one of the most disquieting
problems of our century".
During recent years, a number of Latin-dmerican countries
have made special efforts to combot illiteracy among their urban


--


and rural populations. In-spite of successful advances in some regions, progress in most Latin-American Republies has been slon.
khat was needed, it was felt, was a linking up of forces, a pooling
of experiences, the weeding out of out-moded methods and techniques,
and a fresher approach to the entire problem.
This the Unesco-sponsored Seminar at Quitandinha definitely
provided.
It provided, above all, a fresh approach to the continental
problem of illiteracy by inspiring all participants, in all five
groups, with the new concept - for Latin-dmerica - of Atult Eduestion, which aims at raising the general living conditions of the
people through the improvement of health, agriculture, and family
and community life, vith literacy training as only one step towards
the sccomplishment of that end.
In this respeot, the inspired contribution of Dr. Guillermo
Nannetti, as leader of the working group on Literacy and Adult
Education, won the admirstion and enthusiastic praise of the entire Seminar. This vast and unexplored field in Latin amorica,
came alive in the short space of five veeks and took on breadth and
force. By the end of the Seminar, 30 educators and experta, working under the guidance of Dr. Nannetti, had produced the first Handbook on adult Education ever to appear in Portuguese and Spanish.
This 65-page volume, which represents the most ambitious achievement of the Seminar covers an extensive range of subjects, ranging
from the role of the medie of mass conmunication and agricultural
extension in adult educstion to labour organizations and co-operatives.


5-
MOST HEATED DEBATE OF SEMINAR
Perhaps the most importatt and certeinly the most heated debate
of the Quitandinha Seminar was touched off when the working group
studying literacy teaching methods, led by Dr. Frederick Rex, presented its findings and conclusions to the final plenery session of the
Seminar.
For five weeka, the group of educators had studied and analyzed the different methods for tesching people to read and write.
This included the method most widely used and adapted in LatinAmerica and in other parts of the world - The Laubach Method - based
on the use of "picturable vords related to group of sounds". The
educators also made a detailed and careful study of the “Global
or Sentence Method” - based on the principle that the student first
understands the meaning of a sentence or thought before he knows
and anelyses its parts (i.e, words, letters and groups of sounds.)
In its conclusions the group uent on record unanimously favouring
the Global Method.
mhen these conclusions were presented to the plenory meeting
of the Seminar the "battle of the methods" raged for over three
hours. Tempers rose, nerves were frayed. But in the end, the Global Method was upheld by an overmhelming majority of Seminar porticipants, who agreed that:
Concerning the problem of method, the Seminar wiahes to go
on record that it accepts the scientific evidence in favour
of the sentence or global method for teaching children to
read. On the basis of objective data and corroborative evidence of the psychology of adults, of their interests and
ways of learning, the Seminar recommends the same method for
the teaching of adult illiterates until such time as the results
of research and controlled experiments prove the contrary.


E


This preference does not suggest, in any way, the inadvisability of extensive experimenta to strengthen, modify, or
change the methodological position expressed by the Seminar.
TEACHER OF THE AMERICAS
It was fitting that Dr. Lourenoo Filho, those work as leader
of Brasil's suecessful literacy campsigns has won him international
recognition, should have taken over responsibility of one of the
most important working groups of the Seminar on the Organization of
Literacy Compaigns. At the end of the five weeks, Dr. Lourenco,
with the sid of his small group, had completed a series of basio
popers which will be invaluable to any government or organization
seeking to undertake or improve a campaign for literacy in any
given part of Latin-Amerioa.
For his leaderahip at the Inter-American Seminar, for his
unselfish devotion to the cause of education, not only in his oun
country but in all the dmerican Republics, every member of the
Seminar acclaimed Lourenco Filho as "El Maestro de las Americas".
already, the influence of the Inter-dmerican Seminar has left
its mark. During the final days of the plenary meetings, the State
Representatives of the Brazilian Literacy and Adult Education Campaign met at the HotelQuitandinha for their annual conference. 4s
s result of their direct contact with the participants of the Seminar they voted to put into appliestion immediately one of the final
resolutions passed calling for the organization of national seminars shose sim would be to study the applicstion in each country of
the conclusions resched at the Rio de Janeiro Seminer. The first
national seminer to be held in the Americas will take place next
month in the city of Sao Paulo.


Finally, the participants unanimously voted a recommendation
calling for the crestion of a Centre to train writers and illustrators from different countries to prepare basic, supplementary
and general reading materiala, as vell as a Centre to troin teachers of adult education.


o 0 o


"The role of adult education is
to make every possible member of the
State an effeotive and efficient citizen and thus to give reality to the
ideal of democracy".


— B. M. KAPADIA
Secretory, Bombay City adult Education
Committee


8


THE ROLE OF SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN ADULT EDUCATION
By Benito Sasvedra
Asst. Division Superintendent of Sehools, Leyte
What Functions of Adult Education Are Our Secondary
Schools at Present Performing?
For the purpose of this paper we shall, with lyman Bryson in
his excellent book entitled - Adult Educstion, divide the functions
of adult education into five types, namely, Remedial, Occupational,
Relational, Liberal, and Political functions.
Remedial function of adult eduestion includes the liquidation
of illiteracy, elementary troining in home making and child core,
and all the simple rules of health and civilized behavior. In
other words, this function of adult education gives the adult the
troining that brings his educational equipment up to the minimum
necessary in the performance of the duties of a useful citizen.
The occupstional function of adult educction gives the adult
training for advancement on his job, or for advancement to another
job of a different sort, or for guidonce in choosing or adjusting
to an gecupation.
Relational education includes parent education, and the study
of emotions, sttitudes and paychological habits which ore designed
to help us understand better ourselves and our relations with
other persons. It is education for human relationships, study in
the setisfactory adjustments in all personal contects. For women
it includes a more scientific study of the care and protection of
children.


-SRelational education eliminatas quackery and fallacies, and
utilizes facts and the useful conelusions of science.
Liberal edueation is the pursuit of the study of philosophy,
arta, literature, history, the seiences and all other human cultures,
for their oun sake and for the pleasure derived from them.
Political edueation, according to Bryson, includes those studies,
practices, and experiences which men deliberately undertake to make
themselves better members of the commonwealth. This includes not only study of “politics" as a subject, but also all forms of training
for political action.
From these definitions it is cleor that our present public
secondary schools are performing, as far as adult students are concerned, the occupational, relational, and political functions of
adult education for both boys and girls, and remedial education for
girls. Indirectly, our secondary schools are performing these functions outside the schools thru the contact of teachers and students
with the adult population.
Hon Can Our Secondary Schools Help in Remedial Nork, Particularly in the Elimination of Illiteracy?
Citizenahip training for adult citizens is a constitutional
mandate; yet 50X of our population is illiterate. This is too big,
too appalling a percentage of illiteracy in a modern democracy. If
peace, happiness and prosperity of a country depends upon the education and enlightenment of its citisens, then the Philippines is only half peaceful, half happy, and half prosperous. Who can say that
the present disturbance of peace and order and the present recurrent
food crisis would be happening now if our citizen population were


- 10 -


better enlightened?
Our secondary schools, therefore, are called upon to cooperate
in the complete stamping out of illiteracy, in prosecuting the other
pheses of remedial work, and in the performance of the other functions of adult education to make this country fully prosperous, fully peaceful and happy. All the resources of the secondary school,
should, as far as possible, be utilized for this purpose.
Sympathy should be aroused in the secondary students for their
less fortunate brothers and elders, and they should be encouraged,
if not required, to teach the illiterates hon to read and write.
If esch secondary student can teach an adult, or an illiterate, how
to read and write each quarter, it is estimated that with the elementary teachers doing their job in adult eduestion, illiteracy can
be completely liquidated in four or five yeors. The secondary
teschers vill give the proper encouragement if, periodically, they
go eround to visit the parents of the students and to determine
the progress being made by their students in the elimination of
illiteracy.
After the parents or adults have learned to read and write,
the maintenance of this literacy becomes a problem. This is especially true of people living far away from the poblacion, in places where there are no books found in the locality, no paper to read.
The small farmers form the bulk of these illiterates.
It has been found that a second grade pupil three years ofter
he leaves school becomes illiterate again, as the little skill in
reading and writing which he gained in school degenerates thru disuse. This happens to adults who have just learned to read and vrite


-11


unless they have access to reading materials, or unless they are
given opportunity to prectice the skills which they have acquired.
The high school paper can help in this. It is believed that
the high school should publish a one-or-tvo page paper for adults,
in the dislect er in English, depending upon what the adult population desires, containing important local and world nens, and informative material on health, citizenship, industry, agriculture,
prices, etc. This paper vill afford the adults not only prectice
in reading, but also essential information and instruction in the
different functions of adult education.
The circulation of nevspapers and magazines in the Philippines
is meagre. If Japan is highly literate, it is because newspapers
reach the nooks and corners of the country all the time.
The project suggested above vill involve expense. If the high
school cormot finance it, the government should come to the rescue.
The ides is to foster the reading hobit and render the adult population in a position to formulate sound publio opinion. In time
the adult population vill volunterily pay for subsoription to the
paper, especially after the reading habit, or the habit of seeking
information, has been establiahed.
How Can Our Secondery Schools Help in the Ogcupational Training
of Adulta?
When the classes in practicalelectricity and sutomechanics
vere opened in the Hilongos High Sehool (Leyte) many adults vere
attracted to them, and inquired if they might take the course in the
evening. These courses met a felt need in the community. Beginning nith the second semester, adult education classes in praotical


- 12


electricity, sutomechanios, and wood working vill be given in this
high school in the evenings.
It is believed that in order to be of the grestest service to
the community, the facilities of the vocational courses of the high
school should be open to the publie for adult education alasses,
2 hours every other day, members of the adult educstion olasses
paying nominal fees for breakage, depreciction, oil, and for the
honorarium of the teacher or instructor.
Rhen adults express their desire for self-advencemant; there is
evidence of the formation of more productive or useful citizens, and
one objective of the establishment of secondary schools in the different parts of the country is to raise the level of usefulness of
the citizenry.
How Can Our Secondary Schools 4id in the Relational, laberal,
and Political Functions of Adult Education?
Because of their training and educstion, secondery school teachers are in a better position, than the elementary school teachers,
to lead in the politicol, relationel and liberal training of adults.
In this work the cooperation of local attorneys, physicians and social sorkers shduld be enlisted. The adults being met in classes,
it is believed that much can be accomplished if arrangements are
made for the teachers or leaders to meet them one hour every evening,
vith the funotions or courses divided into periods of three or four
months during the year.
Inasmuch as all this adult training is essential to a progressive democracy, and inasmuch as it is necessary in compliance with a


13 -


constitutional mandate, it is believed that the government should
not be too niggardly in providing sppropriations needed in carrying
out this work.
Adults attend elasses only when they feel they have need for
them or shen they con use the training or education which they get
from them, in their business in life. If they find that the instruction gives them more strength in making independent decision in
the face of false propagenda, if they find that they are becomingviser and more understanding in their personal contacts vith other
people, and if they experience pleasure in what they are studying,
these adults will not hesitate to pay nominal fees for the support
of these classes.
As stated before, the paper suggested above for adults should
be utilized for instructional purposes in the liberal, relational,
and political functions of adult education.
Then the library is an effective agent in adult education.
The facilities of the high school library, especially in places
where there is no publie library, should be open to the public to
help the adult population in their intellectual activities. It is
believed that adults vill be willing to pay the required library
fees.
Lectures and demonstration work during the year in connection
vith community assemblies may also be arranged for the purpose of
raising the occupational and cultural level of adult population.
What Should Be the Role of Secondary Schools in Adult
Education?
Thus, the secondary school thru its students can help a great


-14 -
deal, thru its vocational and home economios teachers, in the liquidation of illiteracy and in the advancement of the occupational
training of the adult population, and thru the other teachers, perform the other types of functions of adult edugation, - all these
rnising the intellectual and ocoupetional levels of adults and
making them more intelligent and capable contributors to the progress
and prosperity of their country.


--O--


"Nithout universal eduestion the ideal
of freedom is no more than an unpaid debt,
a danglad deceit. The problem of illiteracy
is of course one of education. But it is
more than this: it is a universal tragedy
which affects us all directly and which is
at once economio, political and socialin
character."


Joime Torres Bodet


- 15 -


ADULT EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR CEBU (T)
By
Dr. Pedro G. Guiang
Division Superintendent of Schools
During the present school year, district supervisors and principals are urged to undertake a definite program of adult education
work which can be conveniently carried out with present facilities
and personnel. Such program should be geared to meet the needs
and problems of citizens concerned in the communities. The following suggestions are given:
IUES
OBJECTI
1. To help eradicate illiteracy.
2. To lift the cultural level of the masses so that they
may live efficiently and happily as citizens in a
democracy.
3. To raise the standerd of living of the people by increasing
their economic efficiency and productive copacity.
4. To improve community living through the eradication of
adult illiteracy.
ORGANIZATION
To carry out these objectives the following fields of activities
are suggested:
Adult Education Councils and Committees: A number of communities now have adult education committees for promotional work. Such
committees should be organized in places where they ere not yet found.
The participation of all elements of the community in committee organizstion should be secured by stimulating efforts and sympathetic
understanding. Parent-teacher associations, women's clubs, labor
associations, religous organizations, businessmen, professionals,
and other civic entities should have representetives in these committees. If properly advised and guided these committees cen render


(x) Division Memorandum, No. 19, s. 1949


- 16 -


positive help in providing facilities and means for the promotion
of adult education in their respective areas.
They may be able to maintain a year-round operation of the
folloving projects:
Adult Education Clasasa: In order to provide an opportunity
for the illiterates to learn to read and write, adult classes may be
opened in all schools wherever it may be found feasible to do so.
These classes ere to be conducted at least one hour a day or six
hours a week either in the late afternoon or in the evening if the
illiterates end the teachers are busy during the day. On Saturdays,
longer periods are possible. The length of esch recitation period
depends upon the nature of the subject taught and the ability of the
class. The folloving subjects should be emphasized as the needs
of the learners demand:
1. Reading
2. Ngiting
3. Arithmetio
The course taken by a regularly organised class usually covers
s three-month period. Mithin this period, it is expected that an
adult learner vill learn how to write names and simple expressions
of daily life and be able to read printed matter, such as the exercises given in the Primer, Project I (Ang Basahon sa Lungsuranon).
Efforts should be made to enable them also to write short familiar
letters and to read vernacular publications. At the end of each
querter, gertificates of proficiengy will be issued to deserving
adult students upon receipt of the Report on Promotion.
Lack of suitable teaching materials is a common handicap in


17 -


adult education classes. However, copies of the Primer, Project I,
have been sent to the field. It is suggested that these be furnished
to the schools that have opened adult classes. Materials in the vernacular that are available in the locality and found suitable may be
used.
“Each-One-Teach-One": The procedure involves cooperative efforts. One who is literate renders voluntary service to an illiterate
who is willing to learn. The sim is to enable the adult student not
only to read and vrite names and vord-groups but also to understand
what he reads and vrites and to apply the thoughts and ideas he gets
from books and other reading materials to deily life activities.
Public school teachers, high school stadents, and intermediate
pupils should be mobilized to help in teaching the unlettered masses
to read and write by this method. The coaching may be done in the
house of the tenoher, in the house of the illiterate, or in eny convenient place at any convenient time. In this connection attention
is called to Division Memorandum No. 12, s. 1949, which suggests
that the project be taken up by secondory students and graduating
pupils in the elementary schools in connection with their lessons
in soclal studies.
COMMUNITY ASSEMBLIES
In the past the holding of community assemblies with civicoeducational leotures have proved suecesaful in teaching adult citizens the functions of local and national governments, the duties
and responsibilities of citizens, and various means of improving
social and economic life. To carry this ides further a system of


monthly community assemblies in all schools should be established.
Ench assembly should be s four-point educationel program as outlined
in the following:
Information: Free people need free information from free sources. It is, therefore, desirable that during each assembly there
be an informstion period devoted to local, national, and vorld nens.
It may also present nen ordinonces and laxs, orders of health suthorities, and ennouncements and instructions from the mayor, treasurer, and other governmant officials.
Regreation: It is natural for people no matter how poor and
hard-vorking to seek recreational outlets. Personolity balance requires this. Fermhands need recrestion to soften hardahip during
busy times and to minimize the demoralising influence of idleness
and the temptation of vioes during slaek periods.
One or tuo folk dances or a fen songs that give relief to
tired minds and give food to starving spirits are desirable numbers
in the pregram. Sinoe dramstizations have a powerful appeal, a
brief presentetion prepared by the young men and women of the village or by the school pupils vill be velcome. In these activities,
the teachers ahould lead in developing Filipino folkmays so that
even under modern influences they vill continue in modified forms
to enrich adult life.
Legture: A brief leoture or two lesting not more than tuenty
minutes each on the average should be given to provide for the central theme of the program.
The needs of the people in health, cltisenshin, character,


- 19 -


home life, and their occupations should guide the selection of subjects.
The lecture may be delivered by a teacher or a capable member
of the community. If desired a guest lecturer may be invited among
municipal and provincial officials. Doctors and nurses should be
asked to lecture on-health. Judges and lanyers are competent lecturers on laws and citizenship. Fieldmen of the Buresu of Plant
Industry, Bureau of Animal Husbandry, Buresu ef Forestry, Bureau
of Fisheries, and others are also suitable lecturers.
Oeen Ferum: A number on the program should be set aside for
an open forum during which the people are given a chance to ask
questions or offer information to clarify certain points in the lecture. Silly questions that waste much time should be disposed of
politely and firmly.
SUPERVISORI PLAN.
While it is the duty of the adult eduestion supervisor to
supervise adult educstion classes and other adult education activities, he alone does not have the time and facilities to do the work
thoroughly. Of necessity a great deal of the supervisory work
should be done by district supervisors and principals. It is therefore requested that district supervisors and principals make efforts
to visit adult-education classes in their respective communities.
Furthermore, in their periodio supervisory reports, district supervisors should include the supervision of adult education. The report on supervision should include among other things, the number
of adult classes observed, number of community assemblies sttended,


20


and the general progress made in the adult program.


The guarterly Renort and the Raport on Promotion, should be
submitted together at the end of esch quarter. It should be noted that a change hes been made in the division of the school year
into querterly periods for adult education purposes as followa:


Reports Due
quarter
Ist Querter (July, August & September) ....... Oct. 10
(October, November & December) ... Jun. 10
2nd
(Januery, Februory & Maroh) ...... Apr. 10
3rd
Ath
(April, May & June) ...... July 10


---O---


The adult teacher must have leadership as vell as scholarahip or experience.
This leadership is first conceded by the
olass, then earned by the teacher, and
then recognized by the elass. Leaderahip
must include the ability to arouse and
inspire — something that springs from


the spirit and not from the diploma
- -R.C. Deming


21


ADULT EDUCATION PROBLEM IN NEGROS OCCIDENTAL
By
Fernando S. Fuentes
Division Superintendent of Schools
The problem of adult education is a problem that in ny opinion
has to be approached with much osution. Generally, while a Filipino femily would not spare trouble to entertein visitora, they do not
look vith favor upon any attempt on the part of any outsider, be
he e teacher or a social worker, to pry inte the private affoirs
of their home, perticularly into those things that nould expose
themselves to some embarasament. It is because of this Filipino
family psychology thet if ne expect to succeed in our program to
educate our adult illiterates, we should take care that, in our
efforts to this end, we do not do things that would hurt their
pride.
The ides of teaching adults, in addition to reading and nriting, something that would improve their economio life is an idea
that everybody believes in. The problem, hovever, thet remcins to
be solved is the implementation of this idea. It is vell to say
that ne should attack this through community assemblies and
through sctual demonstration in classrooms or in private homes.
But it is no easy task to find persons who have the qualifications
and are willing or have the time to render this service. Publio
school taachers, by virtue of their training, cre quelified to do
the work. Unfortunately, they have no time for this additional
extra-service losd.
Thot everybody is interested in something that would help im

22. -


prove his social and economie life nobody can deny. Unfortunately,
this interest is often neutralised by the secial and economio conditionsunder shich our illiterate adults usually live. as ne all
knon, illiterate adults are always found among the social group who
depend upon for their livelihood and everyday existence on what they
can earn daily from their labor. They are, therefore, a group of
people who st the end of each working doy find themselves tired and
perhaps too worn out to have any more interest in anything else except to rest and prepere themselves for the next day's grind. Therefore, unless sufficient inducement can be provided to make illiterate
adults attend adult education classes on their own initiative, our
program vill remain merely a beautiful plan.
It is the eornest bellef of the vriter that unless the National
Government foces this problem squarely ond gives it the financial support that it deserves so that instructors rith special vocstional training may be hired to teach the illiterate adults the rudiments of some
special vocstions in addition to reading and writing, the best we can
do sould, at best, be half measures. At present the Government,
through the PaCSA, is spending much supposedly for the common tao:
why can't some of this fund be given in the interest of adult education?
If a solution to the problem would ever be seriously undertaken
it is recommended that Negros Occidental be seleoted as the place
for the starting point. Negros Occidental has an approximate popuIstion of 1,038,758, being the second most thickly-populated province
in the Philippines, end its apparent tranquility and prosperity quelify it to serve as an ideal place for an adult educstion Experiment.


- 23 -
THE LITERACI CAMPAIGN IN ILOILO
By
Lazaro P. Fernandez
Principal, Oton High School, Oton, Iloilo
Adult education is perhaps the cheapest means to combat communism end to preserve the democrstic way of life. Since the present society is largely made up of adults and ran by adults, it is
necessary to provide them with opportunities whereby they could
make themselves worthy members of a democrstic society. Consequently, adult education is given preferential attention in the
campaign to improve the socio-economic life in rural areas as planned in Division Memorandum No. 29, s. 1949.
The organizstion of adult literacy classes as envisioned in
Memorandum No. 38, s. 1949 is not so easy as it seems. Experience
in the field shows that in the absence of a practical incentive -
material benefit that could be obtained after knowing how to read
and write or a strong personal desire - the literacy classes inevitably fail notwithstanding initial successes reported in the papers.
In Iloilo the organization of an adult literacy class in a
pommunity is usually deferred until a strong desire to become literate is created among the people and the leadership of the teachers made an established fact. In carrying out the initial activities of the long-range program they will come in constant contact with the people and through this contact they will be able to
build a strong desire among the illiterates for adult education
classes. The interest of the adults in the literacy program could
also be secured by the holding of ammmunity assemblies and the es

- 24


tablishment of reading oenters.
Mhile the teachers are building among the illiterate adults
a strong desire to know how to read and write, the literacy campaign is carried out through the use of the"ench-one-teach-one"
method. Only the students in the Fourth Year and the teachers
are employed under this method. The suggestion in Memorandum No.
38, s. 1949, to employ even the pupils in the lower grades is
intended to hasten the eradication of illiteracy. It is doubtful,
however, whether their employment would be satisfactory, considering the fact that they are socially, educationally and physically
immature to handle the work. The method should be used discriminately and those who have had preparation for it. Itis not easy
to get an adult to submit to individual instruction. The adult
supervisor should exercise utmost care in reconmending adult students to be awarded certificates lest the certificates be anarded to adults who vere already literates before receiving instruction.


---O---


"Illiterocy is not a thing in itself;
the reading and writing students do are part
and pareel of a total learning situation".


Ruth Kotinaky


25
CITIZENS CARTILLA
IMPORTANT SYLLABLES
a ba ka da ga ha la ma na pa ra sa ta wa ya nga


NOTE: Teach nes words from new combinations of above syllables.


- 26 -
OTHER BILLABLES


ba-ko ba-kal


bel-bas


bar-ko


bas-ton


bat-ha-la bay-bay


dag-deg


dal-dal


dam-dam


dap-dap dat-nin


gad-gad


gem-ba-lo


gan-yan


gas-law gat-du-la


gaw-gaw


hag-kan


hak-bang


hal-bot


hom-bog


han-da


hap-los


kad-kad


kal-bo


kam-pi


kan-di-la


kip-kip


kis-kis


kut-kut gu-lod


ba-lag


bu-lak


u-lan


ma-e-lst


di-law


muk-ha


bo-nal


pak-pak


pul-so


pa-nay


tu-ran


tad-tad


tat-lo


wag-wag


yan-tok


bu-nga


ba-wang


da-yap


NOTE: Teach new words from ney combinations of above syllables.
GOMPLETE ALPHABET
(s) (be) (se) (de) (e) (efe) (he) (etsi)(i) (hota) (ka) (ele)
IL
(elye) (eme) (ene) (enve) (o) (pe) (ku) (ere) (ese) (te)
(u) (ve) (doble u) (ekis) () (seta)
aab d  g h i 4 k 1 11
m n f o PG* * t u V *x y 5
NUMBERS
1 2
3  5 6 7 8 9 0
I IIIII IVV VI VIIVIII II I


27


PRACTICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL APTROACH
TO THE TEACHING OF ADULTS
By Artemio C. Vizconde
In the teaching of adults, it would be vell for adult education workers to keep in mind tvo practical considerations. One is
that adults cannot be taught like children since most of them already hove set habdts. The other is that most adults already have
definite interests in life. They seldom enter upon a new activity
vithout expectation of profit in some form.
Mature people who come within the purview of adult education
seem to fall within fairly well-defined groups, such as:
(1) Those who assume that they are too old to learn.
(2) Those who seem to be uninterested in and unconcerned
about continued education.
(3) Those who, for one reason or another, are not interested
at all in education.
(4) Those who wish to learn but don't know what they need
and don't know what to do about it.
(5) Those sho knon that they need and know what to do about
it.
The above groups represent fairly well the eross-sections of
unschooled adults in almost any community.
To make adults attend classes adequote incentives must be
found ond developed. Incentives are basic in teaching and learning, whether it be children or adults that are to be taught. The
fact that education among adults is optional and voluntary makes


 28 -


incentives indispensable. The first task of an organizer of adult
classes is to find, develop and maintain interest and incentives
for learning. For, after all, teaching must toke its cue from the
motives and incentives which lead people, particularly mature people,
to undertake eny formal program of learning.
It is necessary that the incentives be gesred to practical life
situstions. It will be found that the folloving are the common urges for learning:
(1) For social approbation —
The desire for social recognition and acceptance is fundomental. Approval or commendation for vorth-shile accompliahments is
a stimulant to greater efforts.
(2) For vocational reasons -
The pesitive necessity for moking a living is coupled with the
ambition to make such living a decent one. The desire for better
wages or income, as a means of satisfying wants, stimulates action.
(3) For prudential reasons --
Fear is fundemental - fear of losing one's job; fear of the
future, etc.
(4) For life enrichment - curiosity and the desire for personality
development are basic.
In handling classes and directing the learning activities, it
is the concern of the teacher to maintain or keep alive the incentive in the form of immediate material benefit to be derived from
the activities being undertaken.


TRENDS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD


Million Adults in California Adult Schools
The enormous registration of adulta in Californis's publio
schools is well knoun, running now about one million each year.
These evening schools must “have something" to attract such enormous numbera of gronn-ups, who sre free to attend or not, as they
like. Mhot subjeots do they offer?
The ansver is "practically everything under the sun" of an
ecademio, vocational or avocational nature. Californis adults may
study Chinese er Hussian, caloulus, or arithmetio, opera or harmony,
television or plumbing, landscape gardening or oil painting, or any
one of at least 380 other subjects, if they happen to live within
reach of the school.
Ehat ia Adult Education?
The term "odult eduestion" is subject to varying interpretations. In the Anglo-Sexon countries the term is used to mean eduestion carried on for adults,normally thought of as 18 yeara of age
end up. In France the phrase "eduestion of adulta" is challenged
by the conception of "popular culture” which includes youth groups
and a vide veriety of recreational and spectator activities. In
many countries "adult eduestion" is very far from the conception
of "eduestion of, by and for adults".
In Conada adult eduestion projects had been used to build up
s cooperative movement which helped the fishermen to set up oredit
unions and provide themselves with the toola and the housing necessery to their well-being. In China adult eduention is chiefly re

30 -
presented by the anti-illitera oumpaign, while in Burma and other
areas radio, film, open-air dramatio shows and low-cost books are
the ohief agencies.
In the Elsinore Conferenoe, there was complete agreement about
the necessity for involving the adult education student in discussion and also in getting him to learn by doing and make action
follow study in the various eduestional projects.
atter Communitiss
Puildlne.!
A confecence on Building Better Communities vas held recently
in Stillnater, Oklahoma. Over 306 delegates attended. The program
was built around three "suecess stories" from Oklahoms. One a rural neighborhood, one e village and ene a city. These vere folloned
by three discussion groups on how to improve community life, using
the same divisions of rural neighborhoods, villages and cities.
Socio-dreme roles played by 15 feculty members demonstrated hon to
start discuasion by showing “The First Community Meeting" of the
residents of "any town" who had met to discuss hon to make their
community a better place in which to live. The first scene showed
how this would be conducted by an autooratio chairman. The second
scene showed the democratic process.
Public Sunport for Adult Education
The principle of public support for adult education is, on
the whole, nell established throughout the world. In Gteat Britain
grants from the Ministry of Education and local education authorities to adult education are estimated eurrently to spproximate
2 million dollars. Norway will put almost 1 million dollars in


31


direct state support, and state sid in Sweden vill axceed 3142
million dollars in dollar equivalence. Differences erise, not over
the principle of state support, but rather on the method of channeling this support inte the bloodstream of private and publio
sgencies of adult education. Seandinavia sould give priority to
demands of voluntary groupa on the public funds available for support of adult education.In Englend, although the principle of support
of voluntary agencies is vell established, it is nos obligatory under the Education Act of 1944 for local education authorities to
secure for their areas all the facilities necessary to meet the
demand for all forms of "further education."
The Volkabildung Movemont in Vienna
Over a period of more than sixty years, the Volkabildung
(Adult Eduestion) movement has won the confidence of the Austrian
public and has operated in the best democratic treditions. Of
this institution it can be truly stated that it is "of the people,
by the people, and for the people". It vas reborn during the
difficult postwor period and, from its adversities, it has emerged
stronger thon before, eager to accept the challenge of the present
and to sos the seeds of tolerance, humanity, and understanding
emong the masses of the people thru education.
The four large Volkshochschulen (People's Collegeas) and the
lo smaller centers offer to the people of Vienna e rich and varied
program consisting of regular courses on an American, high-school
and junior-college level, lectures, filma, stage plays, musio, con

32


dueted visits to exhibitions and museums, and excursions vith biological, histarical, or architectural emphasis. For those who are
interested in pursuing studies on college level, there are University Extension courses and Study Cireles condusted by university
instructors. Other agencies nhich offer courses in fields of higher learning are the Institute of Science and Art, the Academy for
Fine Arts, the Vienna Observatory, and the Biolegical Station
wilhelminenberg, all of which have facilities for study and observation. All members enjoy the use of libraries of the city of
Vienna and the world-famous Austrian National Library.
Nhy Agulta Attend Sehool
David H. Nicholson, Persomel Director, Sunnen Products. Company, St. Louis, Missouri, made an interesting study to ascertain
the major reasons behind the school attendance of adults. From
5,211 cases, he made the following conclusions: "People want a
broad program in their evening classes. They want additional
technical or specialized knouledge related to their occupations
and, by this knovledge, they hope to make themselves more secure
occupationally and to earn more money. But they also want oultural subjectsthey want to broaden their mental horizons - they
want to develop their personalities - they want mental stimulation - and they want to find interesting friends and develop
social skills. Thousands of workers in our fectories and offices
today have not gained that sense of human dignity which comes
from a feeling that their work is important. Perhaps that is why
they enrol in classes, seeking substitute compensations in the
satisfactions and nchievements they expect to find in the classroar."


Before the death of Dr. Edward L. Thorndike on Aug. 9, 1949,
he laft a famous study, Adult Leerning, published in 1928. He maintained that the ability of adulta to learn was, up to a point, not
much lessened by advancing years. By the same year Nilliam James
made a dogmatic pronouncement that "Outside of their oun business,
the ideas gained by men before they are 25 are practically the
only ideas they shall have in their lives.” This is the academic
counterpart of the popular superstition that "you can't tesah an
old dog nen trioks." No doubt it was the findings of Thorndike
thet gave reassurance to the working faith of adult educstors and
the struggling new education movement.
Gift for Adult Conseling
Conorete evidence that business and professional leaders are
becoming aware of the importance of counseling for adults is a
gift of $2000 received by the University College, Washington
University, St. Louis. The gift vill assist the College to improve its present adult education counseling service.
Internotionol Meetings on Adult Education
The groning importance of adult education is manifested in the
activities of the Unesoo. Three internotional meetings in 1949
have been conducted for the purpose of promoting the movement and
offering suggestions for the solution of problems confronting the
different countries.
The first adult educstion conference held at the International


- 34


People's College of Elsinore, Denmark, from June 19 to 25, 1949,
brought together 106 delegates representing 27 countries and 21
international organizations. Unesco Director-General M. Torres
Bodet remarked that "of all the special conferencas so far oonvened .............. this appears to be the most important."
The second international meeting was the Seminar on Illiteracy
in the Americas, held st Rio de Janeiro, Brasil from July 27 to
Sept. 2, 1949. There were delegates from 17 American countries
who delved on the quentitative and qualitative analysis of the
illiteracy problem in the Nestern Hemisphere.
The third meeting was the Seminar on Adult Education for
Community Action in Asian Countries, held at Mysore, India, from
November 2, to December 4, 1949. Delegates from 18 Asian countries participated in it, who by living and working together did
a lot towerds international understadding and cooperation. They
poaled their knouledge and experiences together to work out, with
the guidance of expert consultanta, prectical programmes for improving the living conditions of the rural masses of Asia
through educational efforts.
 -O-
If teschers and leaders of
sdults must also be lesrners in
some sphere, then treining progrems must provide the experience
of learning.
- Herry A. Overstreet
Bonerio V.Overstreet


- 35 -


HIGHLIGHTS AND SIDELIGHTS OF ADULT EDUCATION
ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES
The third querter of 1949 (July, August and September) showed renewed vigor and strength in the promotion of adult eduestion activities
in the country. There mere enrolled 29,839 adults in the regularly
orgenirod adult-educstion elasses and 47,404 adults received instruction
under the "each-one-teach-one" procedure, making e total of 77,143
edults enrolled in the litersoy and citizenship clesses during the
querter. In enrolment in the regular adult clesses, the first five
provinces which topped the list were:
1. Mountsin Provinoe - - - - 3,753
2. Sulu --------- 3,455
3. Bohol -------- 2,838
4. Negros Orientel ----- 2,828
5. Surigeo --------- 2,607
The five provinces which led in the number of adults under the
“esch-one-tesch-ons" instruction vere the following:
1. Samer --------- -18,301
2. Surigao -------- -7,070.
3. Leyte - --------- L,518
K. Bohol ---------- 3,224
5. Negros Oriental ----- 2,470
The number of adult education sssemblies and forums held during
the querter reached 970 with spproximetely 147,931 adult citizens in
sttendence. The five provinces which conducted the grestest number
of meetings were the following:


1. Bohol --- 269
2. Negros Orientel ----- 218
3. Misamis Occidentel ---
57
4. Misamis Orientel ----
56
5. Terlec
--------- 33
(elso albey)


36 -


The number of Promotion Gertificetes issued during the last half
of 1949 spoke well of the incressed interest of adults in the movement.
A total of 5,477 certificstes were swerded to adults who hed setisfestorily completed the course of instruction in the sdult schools.
The five provinces which led in respect to number of certificates


awarded during the period were the followings
1. Semer ------- - 1,928
2. Mountein Provinoe -- 1,206
3. Fampange ------ 195
4. Risal -------- 174
5. Surigso ------- 199


The folloving figures show the armuel enrolments and the number
of adult sehools establiahed since the organization of the former Office of Adalt Educatlon in 1937:


Yaar
Number of Adult Schoola
Enrolment
162
1921
10,07
15,706
1,893
1938
1,215
1939
75,833
105,887
1939-1910
1,781
(Records destroyed; adult schools olosed)
1940-1944
1945-1946
17,848
S04
987
1946-1947
35,009
1947-1918
80,010
1,456
1948-1919
190,836
5,720


Of the 190,836 adults who received instruction in 1948-1949.
80,969 were taught under the "esch-one-tesch-one" plan.
ILOCOS NORTE
A nen method of promoting sdult eduestion in the division of Ilocos Norte nas conceived by Superintendent Gregorio Dimssno. He observed: "In vien of the treining and experience of our public school
teechers, they ere expected to play a leading role in the crusade


31 -


against illiteracy in their respective barrios or communities. On
sccount of inadequete funds for paying regular instructors of adult
elasses, it is obviously necessary, in the meantime, to depend largely on volunteer services. It is suggested, however, that the problem
of compensation be brought to the attention of the local PTA. It is
believed that by proper spproach some of these organizations may be
persuaded to finance adult education classes as is being practiced
in other divisions."


PALANAN
Positive measures in behalf of adult eduestion were recently
taken by Superintendent Alfonso Villar. A circular he issued to
his Division provides: "any teacher found to be either against,
indifferent and unaympathetic to the cause or institution of adult
educstion, or disregarding and unmindfully following instructions
contained in this circular or those personally given by supervisory officials fromtime to time should be reported to this Office
for record purposes and future reference. Hereafter, no applicant
for teaching position, etc, should be recommended for appointment,
unless he fully subseribes to help, cooperate or does service to
the couse of adult education."
ALBAL
Mr. Ramon Naves, Adult Education Supervisor, informed us that he
was trying to secure the cooperction of private sohools in Masbate in
the movement. He made a successful demonstration on methods of tea

38 -
ching edulta. Mr. Naves stated: "If the Director of Privste Schools
could enly issue s memorandum enjoining private school principals to
help in promoting the sdult eduestion work in their respective pleoes,
more cen be scoomplished in cormection with this matter."
BATANKS
Mr. Jose Verona, Aoting Arts Supervisor deteiled as adult education supervisor, sent us an encouraging news from far off Batanes. He
observeda “The sdult illiteretes sttending the regular elasses in
Ivena were very interested in their lessons especially in writing and
reading in their Ibaten dialect. A test wes given them in reading -
end writing through didtation. The results showed that prectically
ell the students were proficient. Out of the thirty-eight adult students enrolled, 33 passed the Type 4 Course of Instruction in Litersoy."
Another edult school in Summenga, a berrio of Sabtang, Bstenes,
was organized and began olesses on September 28, 1949.
GAGAYAN
Mr. Trenquilino Basst, Adult Eduestion Supervisor, in his report
explained that one of the objectives of the Division of Cageyen is
“to bring the school closer to the community.” He further stateds
“Through the mess meetings sponsored by the schoola, the people ere
brought closer to the school. The different looal sohool heads ere
taking sctive pert in the holding of mass meetings which are highly
educstionel on the part of the adults."


- 29 -
Special mention is given to the high school principal of Cagayan
who is conducting mass meetings in the neighboring berrios of Tuguegerso. As a pert of the high school students' training in citizenahip, the different elasses led by their class edvisers sponsor the
oommunity sssemblies.. Special intermission numbers for entertainment ere included in the programs.
Gommunity essemblies were held in the different berrios of
Amulung and Penablanes. The following were some of the interesting
comments given by the edults sfter the sssemblies:
1. "Ne sre really benefited by having home gerdens because we
do not need to buy vegetables and we thank you for your
edvice."
2. "If the fermers plant seeds which ere not selected, neturally the corn plents beor small eers or the seede will not
gron, 'but if selected perhaps all or 993 grow and besr bigger esrs."
3. "He thought that the texes we pay ere only a burden to us.
Ne realize that the tax is returned to us in the form of
schools, rosds, bridges, etc."


A report wes received from alfredo N. Vorges, Adult Educetion
Supervisor, informing us that the "Esch-One-Tesch-One" plen is now
edopted in both public and private schools in Cemarines Sur. lecording to him, “The Bay Shore High School students are teeching the


illiterates under Rev. Ermida. He is elso teaching Spanish to the
adult students st Tinembac. The adults st Iking, Canaman had a debote on: "Thet Noman Suffrage in the Philippines is s Feilure.' The
debate, which was initiated by the head tescher end the Barrio Lieutenant, gave vide publicity to the work of the sdult eduestion class."
In one of the adult educetion classes observed in Tembo, Buhi,
it was noted thet there vere l0 Negritos enrolled. They were very
interested in their studies.
The supervisor further informed us that he had solicited the
help of the perish priests in different towns to include in their
sermons the sim of our adult eduestion progrem. "The perish priests
hlvo been very cooperstive and their influence helped bolster the
enrolment in adult educstion classes," he added.
PANGASINAN
Superintendent Federico Piedad of Pengesinan is currently
puahing vigorously his "model berrio" campeign in his Division. He
reported: "In close cooperetion with the adult educetion program,
model barrios ere non being selected to serve as exemples and laboretories where the community-centered school idea may be tried.
Such model berrios will be selected from widely-scattered eress,
including Bolinso to the northuest, Bugallon to the west, Bayambang
and Malasiqui to the south, Umingen and Sen Manuel to the esst,
Binalonen to the northesst, Urdanete close to the center, eto.


- XI


Ocher areas pill also have model barrios — that is, if the teachers end head teschers ere able to present evidence of active scceptence, and ectuel implementstion of, the ides behind the community-centered school."
ZAMBALES
Principal Ancres G. Agcsoili of Zambales High School issued
the following Memorandum to studenta: "all fourth yeer students
should be mobilised to help the unlettered mass to read and write
the National Language. Kech fourth year student should get at lesst
one pupil to teech. Lest periedicel ratings will not be issued to
students unlees they can show evidence of having taught adults to
read and write."


Adult educstion becomes as essential and
necessary as elementary or even primary education. It deserves grester support than it has
ever been given it in the past. In the long
run, it should be possible to show that this
form of adult education vill pay dividends in
grester economio productivity and capacity of
the citizens to support better education all
around.


- - P.T. Orata


- 2
ENROLMENT IN ADULT EDUCATION CLASSES
The folloning table shows the final report of sttendance in orgenized
lult educstion classes, “Esch-One-Tesch-One", and community assemblies, for
e Third Querter (July, August, September), 1949:


Divisito n


Vo, er Lalia Benorere, INe suReive.urora
in Organlof OrgenizedITaught by! for 
izad Claassal Claasas TE-O-T-O" ¡*E-O-T-O")


Cammalty la
& Foruma Held.


INOATimea IAttandanc

1.


Abra


293


1


11


1 187


1


187


1 15


1


13


2.


Agusan


!


1
69
1


3.


Albay


263


!


8


!


62 1


22


1 3853


.


Antique


1


!


5.


Betsan


!


1


5.


Betenes


38


!


96



1 96 1


5


!


187


7.


Betengas


115


8.


Bohol


2838


ag


1 3224


!


3221


!


269


121715


9.


Bukidnon


51


3


1 249.


!


219


L0.


Bulscan


11.


Cegayen


40


1


1


1 204


1


ZOL


!


8


1


1025


12..


Camerines N.!


*


12


341


1


3al


8


A


2143


13.


Camerines S.!


2


1


17


1


1


12


1


2230


14.


Capiz


20


!


24


 96


1


96


1


I


250


.5.


Catanduanes !


272


I


13


 1T


!


ZZ7





1


1820


16.


Cavite


1


17.


Cebu


519


!


33


1 289


!


289


31


!


1918


18.


Cotebato


79


-


1 2R7


aL!


2


1


2251


19.


Devso


708


9


1 632


!


511-


23


1


2158


O.


Ilocos Norte!


23


1 86A


1


843


25


1


M95


1.


Ilocos Sur


1


2.


Iloilo


84


19


1 1042


!


978


11


1


1235


3.


Isabela


!


!
47


1


47


!


2569


?"


Laguns


45


!
21


1


23


!


350


Lanso


1


!





Le Union I


319


!


11157


!


1157


1


880


Leyte


514


!


13


1 A548


!


ASAS


1


4


!


3020


8.


Manila


!


9.


Merinduque I


288


!


1


!


5


!


880


O.


Mesbate


35


1 585


1


585


1


1. Mindoro


llo


!


32.


Misemis Occ.!


1832


al


1 1133


!


762


1


5201


23.


Misemis Or.


1


56


1


2621


4.


Mountain
!


7159


68


I


!


1


35.


Negros Occ.!


760


16:


1 218


1


198


1


14


1


180


36.


Negros Or.


2828


122


1 2470


!


2418


1


218


5
135195


77.


Nueva Ecije I


llol


34


333


!


533


2


135


'S.


Nueva Vizcaye!


100


596
!


1


574


1


24


7024
1n432


Palawan


106


5


1


4


1


7


1 1570


Pampanga


761


1 121


1


62


!


4


!


1220


1.


Pangasinan !


1121


1


!


5


!


1005


2.


Quezon


!


1


13.


Rizal


1


1


A.


Romblon


!
18





15


!


1 1200


5.


Semer


498


)


17


1 18301


!


18301


!


3


1


T130


6.


Sorsogon


308


lo


! 1019


!


1019


!


10


1


230


7.


Sulu


3115


103


!


E.


Surigso


260n


112


1 7070


!


7070


1


16


111085


Terlac


1015


39


1 1042


!


1042


1


22


!


775


G.


Zambales


35


!


1 214


1


22


1


4


1


654





ZAmboanga


2l


T ot a1s 1


7,839


Tinal


TANE.


Le,ter


!


90


Laon


PROMOTION IN ADOLT EDUCATION CLASSES
Number of Certificates of Promotion Issued from
july to December, 1949



—Dirtsions
1 July


¡August


1 S0r
Itember


T
I


Otornl Novanber ! ber






DOnOr. 1
—
—bar


T O T A Ll.


1. Abra


29


19


!


48


2. Agusan


!


1


!


3. Albay


!


120 1


!


120


4. Antique


.1


4


S. Bataan


!


5. Patanes


1


33 1


33


!
7. Batangas


1


65


51


!


116


8. Bohol


!


9. Bukidnon


!


1


1


10. Bulacan


16


1


16


11. Cagayan



16


1


23


:


24


1


63


12. Camarines Borte


13. Camarines Sur


1


!


14. Capiz


1


34


34.


15. Catanduanes!


!


92


1


92


16. Cavite


1


17. Cebu


138


!


15


153


18. Cotabato 1


4


37


9


46


19. Davao


1


lo


lo


20. Ilocos N. !


1


14


1


13


!


24


21. Ilocos Sur 1


:


22. Iloilo


!


56


!


21


!


77


23. Isabela



22


1


8


1


17


1


54


24. Laguna
!


25


!


1


25


1
25. Lanao


1


1


26. La Union !


l0


25


!


!


35


27. Leyte


1


80


!


lo !


32


1


122


28. Manila
1


!


29. Marinduque 1


!


19


!


t


!


19


30. Masbate
!


!


!


!





20


!


20


31. Mindoro



1


33. Misamis Occ.


29


1


29


33. Misamis Or.!


34. Mountain !


16


1


1


565


1





559


!


66


1


1,206


35. Negros Occ.!


23


!


23


36, Negros Or.


!


63


53


!


116


37. Nueva Ecija!


1


1


27 1


23


50


38. Nueva Vizcaya


!


!


19 !


6


25


39. Palawan 1


1


1


66 1


12


!


78


40. Pampanga


1


12


!


139 1


44


1


195


21. Pangasinan !


!


23


1


!


23


42. Quezon


1


43. Rizal.


1





135 1


39


!


174


4. Romblon


1


26


! 80 !


lo6


1
15. Samar





1,988


1


!


1


1,988


46. Sorsogon !


1


23


1


23


27. Sulu


1


48. Surigao


1


lo3 1


56


1


159


9. Tarlao


1


84


!


!


42


!


126


50. Zambales !


4


1


1


28


!


32


Sl. Bumboangnl Y


1


1


1


O


I


15


T ota k


15


2.8


1I


L.OEE


1.505


485


5.2


NOL. VILO
ACAR
4950
EOO.



ANOLNI - 7O. 3 MAN MgsO
l
PORN
CONIENIS
Paga
ADULT EDUCATION, EN INVESTMENT FOR PEACE
FEA SOCIAL NELFARE  1
A BEGIRNING OF THE AUDIO-VISUAL PROGREM ..................... 3
REPORT OF VISIT TO SANTA BARBARA AND OTON COMMUNITY
SGHOCLS, ILOILO..... 7
By Vicente Garcia
ADULT EDUCATION AT THE ILCILO SCHOOL OF ARTS AND TRADES..... 14
By Mr. Jase S. Roldan
ADULT EDUCATION AND THE COMMUNITY-CENTERED SOROOL ........... 19
By Geudencio E. Vega
AGRICULTURAL SCHOOLS AND THE RURAL COMMUNITIES .............. 23
By Arcadio G. Matela
PROMOTION OF ADULT EDUCATION PROJECTS IN TARLAC............. 26
By Roman L. Santos
VACATION CAMPAIGN AGAINST ILLITERACY IN ABRA ................ 28
Py Santiago Dumlao
COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS AS ADULT EDUCATION AGENCIES ......... 29
TRENDS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD ............................ 31
DR. BODET'S REVEALING EXPERIENCE NITH AN ILLITERATE
GOUNTRY MUMAN.. 36
THE VIANI ASSOCIATED PROJECT ................................ 37
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES.................. 40
ENROLMENT IN ADULT EDUCATION ................................ 48
PROMOTION IN ADULT EDUCATION .................... 49
SMRN STATEMENT .. 50


ADULT EDUCATION, AN INVESTMENT FOR PEAGE
A SOCIAL MELFARE
Figures from verious sources reveal that the Carnegie Corporation has set aside $5,928,685.12 during the last ten years for
the promotion of adult education in the United States; that 23,383
adult sehools in China in 1932 have been maintained at a cost of
$1,538,000; that the Masoryk Institute for Adult Education has once
sppropriated four million Czech orowns for adult education projects
in Czechoslovokia; thet the Mexicen government has provided millions
of pesos to stamp out illiteracy in that country; and that the state
of Denmork hos contributed generously for the maintenance of the folk
sehool movement. These foots and figures are proofs that many countries today are heavy investors in adult education. Indeed, educators and government leaders are agreed on the proposition that
adult education is a profitable investmentin secial welfare; hence,
liberal provisions for the education of the masses are being made
by pregressive countries.
In the Philiprines, where adult eduestion is a national undertoking, the government provides about P126,000 a yeor to finance
the mevement. This amount represents hardly three centavos for
the education of each adult illiterate in this country shere there
are no less than four and a half million adult illiterates, aside
from those who, although partly literate and possessing the rudiments of fundamental education, are stillin dire need of the enlightenment processes of education that vill remove the handicaps
of social, cultural and politicalilliteracy.


2 -


Recent social developments in the Philippines point to the need
of an intensive and extensive program of adult education. To meet
the problem of peace and order, the vital conoern of our people today, ne have been taking such expeditious measures as military operation and extension of material relief, which are undoubtedly the immediate antidote and pallintive for the present emergency. However,
it is believed that the human factor of this problem of peace and order should be given a new lease. A more liberel investment should be
provided for the development of human resources through education of
the submerged elasses. Adult education that is geored to the promotion of literacy, citizenship, economio productivity, and community
health work, vill yield rewarda for the individuals and the masses
in the forms of self-confidence, civic swareness and faith in our
democratic institutions. A vell directed and adequetely subaidized
adult education program vill contribute to the building up of pesceful life and insure the bringing of a high quality of citisenship and
general contentment among the people of our communities.


A BEGINNING OF THE AUDIO-VISUAL PROGRAM
The Bureau of Public Schools has started the use of audio-visual
films for its community education program. Three series of film
showa vere conducted, tuo in Rizal and one in Bulacan, during the
months of January, February and March, 1950. In the absence of local
films depicting conditions of Philippine life, the folloving scenes
from the USIS, all of American origin, were used:
S. Nursing
1. Infant Care
6. Transmission of Diseases
2. Hinged Scourge
7. Irrigation Farming
3. Cleanliness Brings Health
8. Good Neighbors Get Together
4. Hookworm
9. Rural Cooperctive
These films presented vivid pictures of conditions, such as
how drinking water gets polluted by the percolation and sipbing of
surface stream laden vith minute disease germs. The dongers from
uncolleoted garbage, improperly constructed toilets, unproteoted
vells, ond breeding places for worms, flies and typhoid-mosquitoes,
were illustrated in actual and active forms. The educational information from the pictures of nurses at mork, irrigated fields,
and neighborhood cooverction, made strong impression with the people
of the berrios. Sound scripts accompanving the scenes stressed
the meaning and value of the pictures.
The programs were vell received in all communities where the
films were shonn. There was record attendance especially in the
barrio communities. In one rural distriot in the town of San Juon,
Rizal, about 1,400 people attended, and in a barrio of Pasig, Rizal,


-A
no less than 1,600 people came. In one toun in Bulacan some 1,200
vitnessed the film on Transmission of Diseases. The aggregate attendance at the film shows held in 28 plaoes was 20,050 - on average of
about 700 for each showing.
The reactions of the people to these community sssemblies vith
the use of educational sound filna vere varied but were on the whole
favorable and encouraging. The cronds stayed as late as midnight, absorbed in watching the development of esch picture-story which opened
for them new vision and nes light. They shoved some interest in the
short talka given at intervala during the program, but they displayed
keener interest in the vievs of germs, percolation of water, nursing
of the sick, shd other visual representations of man's sctivities and
of his environment. They expressed a desire to see more, but they
clamored for Philippine scenes that would suggest improvements in
Filipino homes, in their methods of irrigating their rice fields, in
their breeds of native stooks, and in the other phases of their economic and social life.
The sudio-visual programs are superior to the ordinary conmunity assemblies for stimulating interest and action. They are more appealing and more effective in promoting health ideas, civic concepts,
and incentives to desirable and economio life strugcles. Both men
and women, old and young, react or respond spontaneously to the lifelike presentations in these progroms. Onoe they understand and become
convinced of the merit and usefulness of the messago and the devices
suggested on the spot by the pictures, they will no doubt formulate
the desire to try them out or to put them into practice inmediately.


--
In one of the barrios of Rizal, the film on hookworms was displayed. Vith concentrated attention and much concern, the crond
watched the processes by rhich the germs of thase worms make their
entry into the body through the akin of the feet, and hos once in
the aystem, these germs eat into the vitality of the man's health. The
film suggested that the feet should be protected against unrecessary
contact with damp and wet ground. The next day there was much demand
for wooden shoes from the stores. An ordinary lecture on the deadly
work of hookworma vould not produce such a deep impression.
Incidentally, a valuable sicelight of the program is the revelation of social and civie troits of the masses who gather around
the film shows. In one of the barrios of Bulacan, the staff that
condueted the program was impressed hy the unusual manifestation of
courteay and conmunity discipline on the part of the erowd. The hearty
welcome of the people and their frank and simple expressions of oppreciation vere pleasing and encouraging. During the program s slight
hitch ooourred when the current failed for a while, but the big audience
from this small community did not fail to observe their ethical obligation. They waited patiently for the resumption ef the show vithout
noting in any way that could embarrass the supervisors and teachers in
charge of the function. Such scenes reflecting benutiful citizenship
quelities aro truly choracteristic of our peoceful and orderly rural
folke. These scenes are worth filming for audio-visual work and are
valuable materials for community school education.
The community school idea, which is now gripping the minds of
school administrators and teachers, ond which seeks the improvement
of the standarda of home conditions, community sanitation, occupations


6


for livelihood, farming and animal raising, con be brought home effectively, especially to the people in our rural areas, vith the use
of sudio-visual films. Nhat is needed is the supply of local educational
films suitable for this kind of school service in the Philippine communities. Mr. Jose V. Aguilor, Division Suporintendent of Schools
for Iloilo, has suggested that this program be carried out in the
meantime with the use of projector and simple film strips nocompanied
by verbal commentaries of the teacher or secial worker in chorge. Dr.
Paul Hanna of Stanford University demonstrated such device when he was
here last year as a member of the Unesco Consultative Educational
Mission. By all means, let the audio-visual mass medium be given
trial in our schools in connection with the implementation of the
community school ides.


-7
REPORT OF VISIT TO SANTA BARBARA AND OTON
COMMUNITI SCHOOLS, ILOILO
Vicente Gorcia, Chief Adult Education
Division
SANTA BARBARA
In Santa Barbara the vorking out of the community school idea
may be readily noted by a casual observer. The general cleanliness
of the town, the extension of vegetable gardening to the homes from
the school, o toilet for every home, the floser gardens, the inside
arrangement of the houses and the up-keep of the yords and surroundings and other features, which the public schools for years hove
been trying to carry over to the homes and community, are evidences
that the community sahool ides is a reality in this town.
My interest, however, was not selely in the apparent physical
imerovements of the place, for much has been vritten up and heard abeut
Santa Berbera. I wae particularly desirous, first of all, to find
out hon the community sehool idea hes asserted itself and hov the
progrem of implementation is maintoined without a let-up. This
background must be looked into by visiting tenchers and supervisors in
order to profit from the Santa Barbera project. The Division Superintendent and his supervisors took me on a random tour of the town. As
ve visited the homes the cordiality of the owners in recciving us
attrected mr attention. The men and women, both young and eld, were
glad to show us around to see kitchen arrongement, waste disposal,
stoves that are made locally, and simple wall decorations vith materials whose counterports are found in the school. They shored us
their toilets, the flover and vegetable gerdena, the pigs and the
chiokens, which are kept in the yards and not astray. I think it


8-
is largely the attitude of the ditisens thet furnished the key to oven
Santa Barbare to the comrunity school iden. These simple and common
pecple, many of them vith little or no fermal seheoling, seem to
fully underatand the desiroble conditions of lifo, ene should choose
to live in, and they toke pride in their mrticipation in the Santa
Borboro community improvement propren. Indced, with this prenaration
of the people, their receptive mind and nholehearted willingnoss to
edopt naw and bettar wova of home and cormunity lifa, the comunity
school idea cannot feil to moke further strides. The groundvork of
keen understanding; cooperation and reediness to aecent a ner vision
has definitely been lcid out in tha minds of the inhabitanta before
and during the processes of the Santa Barbara enterprise.
Hon the community school iden is penetrating and being woven up
into the life of the comunity, was the insight I got from observing
some lessons in the classrooms. Before coming to Santa Barbere, I
was somewhat skeptical that the usual school work might be, neglected
because the extre attention entsiled in promoting comrunity sanitation,
extension of agriculturel and industrial cotivities and the like, might
take considerable time ond efforts of the pupils and tenchers. Superintendent Aguilor in a previous communication stated the assurenos
agsinst such situation. Precisely, I found from my observations
that the primery, intermediate and secondery closses constitute the
soul of the program, and that instend of disruptine regular sahool
vork, the plan is vitalising instruction and is goins into real-life
situations beyond the traditionel school curriculum and book learming.


9


One or tuo instences vill illustrate this point. In a olass
where the lesson plan was on fomily heredity, the teacher aftor cresting
the proper mind-set of the children lad them into a free discussion of
o certain family tree in Santa Barbara, which they had been previously
assigned to study. Members of the class did diligent research work
by making personal contacts and digging uo the versonel records of
the fomily. The troits of charocter of the different members, the
life history of each as a child, as a puril, as a resident and citizen of the toun, his veried adult life activities and his contribution to the relfare of the town and community at large, vere disoussed
in a menrier true to life and full of vitol informations, so interesting
and so gentine that a formal and old-style recitation canmot bring.out.
In ancther social science class, the dignity and worth of different prefessions and occupationa was the theme. All kinds of occupations and vocations. in social, econemic and political life, vere
presented by the children, and one of the impressive portrayals of
life work taken un vas that of a hard-norking fermer. This gave me
the notion that, Santa Barbora being a farming community, the example
of an ideal farmer wvas purposely brought ue to be the climar of the
presentation.
QTON
Oton is another town in Iloilo where the community sehaol ides
is fast taking root. And like Santa Barbera, the school is the nerve
center that vives life to the project. Sehool activities are branching
out and are being geared to the program of community imorovement. The


-10--


teachers and the schoel children are esch a publie relstion officer
and a lisison bfidging the gapa between the school and the secial
life ef the comupity. As in Santa Barbara, I found that the people
had caught the stimulation, the foundation had been laid well and the
teachers and pupila are doing their part of the job. In these tuo
towns, I met prominent eltizens and public officials, who like the
masses in Senta Barbara, are sold to the program of community imorovement and reforms.
Features of Special Interest
In Oton, a amall beginning of a community reading center is loosta near the intersection of two streets. There were not very many
magasines and papers, and enly old copies mostly of English editions
vere aveilable st the time. The place is s shack net even comparable
to a barong-barong. It is provided vith improvised benches, a reading
table and a shelf. The ideas behind, hovever, ere laudable and charnoteristie of a real community project. The reading materials are, donated
by the citizena, who feel there is this porticulor need in the community. The people of the neighborhood are beginning to form the habit
of going early in the morning and in the afternoon to the oenter in
order to read. The sponsor of this little project informed me that
it is attracting the attention of civio-minded citizens and that someone in the place plans to improve the building in the interest of the
little community oround.
In Santa Barbara, I met in the school a grouo of farmers,
together rith the district supervisor and principal of the school, attending e conference given by a provincial agriculturol inspegtor.


-11-
There wes an enthusiastic disoussion obont the use of fertilizers,
ceed selection, cere of seedlinss and methods of cultivation. The
old fermers, most of whon are unschooled but osn their ferma, shoxed
keen interest, giving their personal idens and exreriences. I noted,
hovever, that they inveriably gave way to the logic of the ingpector.
I underatend that similar sroup conferences and meetines of citizens
and farmers are being conduetad with the school teachers behind
the olan.
In Santo Barbara, I listened to the recitations in National Language. I hava been under the impression that the teaching of the national langunge in non-Tagolog provinoes is a disappointment, if not
altogether n dismal failure. I have been so impressed by the pessimistio
revorts an comments of many school officials on the teachino of this
subject in our schools. After hearing the recitation in the first national langunge period, I requested to be taken to ancther eloss. In
both elosses, I found the pupils expressing their thoughts cleorly,
their narration of facts ves coherent, and I understood from heginning
to ond o story which I purpasely asked to be narrated by a puvil on
the spot. If the teaching of the national language in the Ilocos
and Bicol recions is giving the same result as obtained in the schools
of Iloilo, it is my personel opinion thet tho public schools are vell
on the vay meeting the purpose of making the natianal langunge at least
e common mediun of communication in all islands of the Philirpines. It
may be stated in this cannection that even the meterials and subjestmatters talked about in the national langunge classes are tied uo as
much as possible to the program of the community school idea.


-12 -
An interesting discovery of a 'side-line' of the exvorimental (vernacular) elasses in Oton vas reported by the tecohers who revealed
that a number of varents criginally illiterate have learned ta read and
write as a result of their centect and exposure to the inflvenoe of
their children attending Grade I and Grode I vernacular elasses.
This is a discavery according to Mr. Agulor, sinee there has bean no
elan made to tench reodina and writing to the perents of those chil"ren. I met a aroun of these parents, sho exnlained that they began
leorning rendine and writing from the time their children started
their sehool vork in the experimental classes and that all the leerning they got was of their ewn accord and from their onn children. The
Suberintencent suggested that this is probably one way af ampraseh
to the vroblen of literaoy, os there seems to be ne irvediment to the
old parents setting their literacy instruction from their oun ebildren.
I suagested thot possibly other porents have also learned to ren" and
vrite from their children attending the regular elssses. We agreed
that the two souross should be exerned and exrlored further.
COMMENTS
It seems that the conmunity sohool ifea hes made a more intensive
headasy in the Iloilo schools than in ether divisions. As the pragress
it hes made in that province offors a gorkina plan that hes alrendy
gone throurh a period experiment, school suvervisors and admiristretors wha desire to curry out the community sehoel idea in their schools
vill be benefited by visiting the Senta Berbura and Oton system.


- 13 2.
I was made to understand that schools of the type of Santa Berbara
and Oton are few even in Iloilo. Some teachera and supervisors are
just beginning to grasp the real idea and working of the Gommunity
school sccording to the Superintendent. I feel that the groun for
ranid expansion of this pregram in the division has been vell prepared
end thot it vill be essy to extendit to more schools, if nat in all.
I tried to gauge the pregrom and eccomolishment of the commurty
school in Iloilo end, in a casual way, evaluete them against the
standards and objectives set by the Adult Eduention Seminar for Community Action held in India. Undoubtedly the Iloilo program is outstanding in vorking out the baakground of community education, and is
nou getting positive results as for as the health, economic and, to some
extent, social and cultural ohases of community life, but literacy,
an important aspect of adult educstion or cormunity improvement vrogram still remains a challenge in the division. Of gourse this is
also a challenge for all other divisions as vell as for the General
Office. Superintendent Aguilar anoreciates the situation.
May 9, 1930
NO2


-IADULT EDUCATION AT THE ILOILO SCHOOL OF
ARTS AMD THADES
By Mr. Jose S. Roldon
Superintendent, Iloilo School of Arta and Trodes
Long before there vas an officisl suthority to offer vocstional
adult education in the Iloilo School of Arte and Trades, this sahool
had already started giving a unique type of adult eduestion on s practical basis of "earn while you learn".
Student-contractors who are employed in the fobriestion of school
furniture for the different schools in the Division of Iloilo have been
allowved to bring their relatives to help them in their contrect jobs.
At first, these relatives act merely as helpers. They ere trained step
by step through the apprentioe method. They are trained to plane pieces
of boards, saw lumber vith angles and curves, assemble the parts of the
furniture, and so on. He also learns the mamipulations and uses of
different kinds of tools proficiently. Under this ovorentice method, ve
have found out that even boys from the farm who have not had previous
experience are not hard to teach in carpentry work. The fact that they
share with the earnings ef their younger relatives whom they help.
encourages then to learn faster. In due time, as soon as they learn the
techniques of the job and have learned to interpret the plans, they
toke controct jobs of their own.
Meny of them ere nos working independently in the Iloilo School
of Arts and Trades factory section, and others ore working as carpenters in private shops and building construction sorks.


-15
I think one of the most attractive phases of adult educstion in this country is that along vocstional line. Although
this has boen authorired to be offered, only lately in the schools
of arts and trades, people are more interested in vocational eduestion than in merely learning the three Ris, because they could
essily make a living out of their six montha' training.
In the Iloilo Sehool of Arts and Trades, the offering of
adult eduestion was formally started during the first semester
of the sahool year 1949-1950. Tuo moderate-allovance tenobere were
appointed. Seventy-five adulta vere enrolled without discrimination ss to their cultural baakground. There vere two classes of
all taking the sutomechanics
37 and 38 studenta,
course. Classes vere held three times a week of two hours esch
after the reguler elass hours. Instruction lasted for three
months, after rbibh certificates of proficiency were issued to
those who attained the required standard.
About one-third of those who enrolled had already acquired
prectical manipulative akills through experience but only lacked
the technicol knouledge of their jobs. For this reason, they
could not get good promotion in vages er eccupy more responsible
nositions. The rest of the students were on the primary and intermediate levels.
In vies of the uneven cultural background of the students,
instruction hed to be given in English and in the vernacular.
Difficulties vere engountered in giving instruction. For instance,


- 16
technical terms which have no equivalents in the vernaculer had to
be expleined in English only, to the disadvantoge of those shose
knovledge of the langunge is very limited. Another handicap ene-untere' by the teachers nas the limited time of tenching. Tro
hours of instruction a day in the shop every other day for a duration of three months were not sufficient for adults with varying
degrees of education to assimilate what vere taught them. Those
who had higher ecademic beckground and those who hod practical experience in the line of job fared better.
At the end of the three-month period, only 21 of the 75 adults
vere considered by the teachers really quelified to receive certificates of proficieney. A few had stopped before the end of the
period for foilure to keep pace with the others in assimilating
instruction.
Basing my observetion upon the first batch of adults who had
undergone vocational instruction, I believe a big cless is not advisable. A olass of not more than 15 is believed ideal for shop instruction, and e period of at least six months is recommended. Even
nith this length of time, intermittent laboratory work of tvo hours
every other day does not produce good results. It has been observed that a six-hour continuous lecture and laboratory work, even if
given only ones a reek brings better result.
For these reasons, permission has been secured from the Burenu
to extend the period of instruetion to six months and the school
progrem to be one-"ay-e-reek-six-bours of continuous lecture and
shopwork for the next batch of adult enrollees.


-17
For the second semester, enrolment has been limited to 36
adults, at least 21 yeers of age, and with higher educational
baokground.
The teachers have observed that these second batch of adult
students have better assimileting ability than those of the first
batoh, because of their better academic and cultural preparation,
which enables them to learn faster. Besing upon this observation,
it may be safe to conclude that for adult vocational instruction to
be effective, only those vho have finished at least the elementary
grades should be considered. Those who do not possess the necessary educational background to enable them to cope with shop instruction but possess manipulative skills in native handicrafts
should be encouraged and given fecilities to pursue local craft
and common occupational courses.
This job is being done by the Iloilo School of Arts and Trades
personnel through the so-called "extension service method of adult
education". By this method each teacher is given an assignment
to cover a certain extent of territory of neighboring communities.
He is made to survey the economic and living conditions of the
people, with a vier to finding out their problems and the kind
of industry or industries best suited to the locality. Other phases
of adult education work are promoted. The inhabitants are encouraged
to have home gardens or raise poultry and svine. They ere also
made to realize the importance of sanitation and communal service.


18 -


Localities which are best adopted to certain industries ere given
encouragement to develop such industries under the guidance of the
vecational teschers. Handicrafts such as basketry, rattan er
bamboo furniture making, mat weaving, abaca crafts, shell
crafts and hortigulture, are also included in the promotional progrom. The people ere encouraged to visit the Iloilo School of
Arta and Trades shopefor observation although they are not regulerly enrolled.
Tangible results have been noted by this indirect method of
edult education.


19-
ADULT EDUCATION AND THE COMMUNITI-CENTERED SCHOOL
By Gaudencio L. Vega
Aetg. Division Superintendent of Schools, Cotabato
One of this year's important supervisory objectives of the division
is the extension of sehoel activities inte the community — the bringing
of the sehool closer into the very heart of every home. Preliminary reports from the field shon that there has already been s subatantial progress along this line in some places. Hovever, there seens to have been
some misunderstanding somewhere regarding the fundamental sims of community education and adult education in particular. Teachers are wont to
say that adults are not interested to learn hor to read and vrite, and
that they are too busy eking out a living to bother with the fads and
frills of the literate mind.
In medern educational parlanoo, adult eduestion does not necessarily mean the teaching of literacy alone, except in the sense that the
teaching of adults to read and write fits into the pattern for realising the fundamental objectives of community living. Adult educetion should give way to a broader and more encompassing idea of which
literacy is only a part.
Recent trends in the world point to the necesaity of broadening the
conespt of adult education to include the social, economio, cultural and
recreational aspects. When we say adult aducation, ve do not necessarily
limit ourselves to the teeching of literaoy alone. Neither do ne have
the illiterate majority selely in our mind. Ne have in mind, on the ether
hand, the whele people - the sotive participants in the great drama of
life. Nhen we shall have taught people to live better, earn a living
better, and enjoy life better, we shall have truly realized the fundamental objectives of adult educstion, or as we say, community education.


20-


Nos, hon does the school come in, in this new ides? Tho sahcol hes


lost its isolstion. It has become s potent fector in the dissonination
of useful informetion es vell as in furnishing lecdership in the sociel,
cultural, economic end recrestional life of the community. The following
tre exomples of the veried cotivities that mey be undertaken by the sahool.
Note thet these sotivities ere not lirited to eny one sapect of the com

nunity life!


A. The Vocctionel Aspects -
Tesching peoplo how -
(1) To roise poultry end hogs
2) To reise garden vegetebles
13) To control plant pests and diseases
y4) To moke the most use of used materitls
To selact seeds for the ferm
To repsir lecking roofs or repeir s foucet
15
To etrn extro money in household industries
B. The Socisl Aspecte -
Teaching peopla how -
(1) To behave when in a group
(2) To help esch other in times of need
(3) To pool their energies in improving and
becutifying the comunity
(4) To help form a desirable public opinion
(5) To keheve in the disquasion end considerction of
vitel issues
C. The Cultural Aspects -
Tecahing people how -
To reed and write
(2) To read hesdlines in the nevepapers, srmouncements, notices,
billbocrds and advertisements
(3) To listen to the radio
(4) To select books and megasines
(5) To get useful inforaction from veriod sources
D. The Recrectionol Aspecta
Tecahing people hon -
(1) To make use of leisure hours by -
6. Beving e hobby such as
(e) Gerdening
(bl Stenp collecting
(c) Collecting curios, antiques, relios, etc.
b. Reeding stories
c. Attending ahows, lectures, concerts, etc.
d. Fishing or hunting


How can the school noke its influence felt in the cormunity? Hon


cen it lesd end furniah guidonce while its handa ere full vith the octuel
tesks of imperting knovledge? In the first plece, the school mey invite


21


the perents to ettend specielly prepered lessons in vocstional cetivities.
For exemple, in gerdening, perenta mey be shown how to epply fertilizers,
how to mulch, hon to serate the soil, end hon to recognize end control
plant pesta end disesses. In the Home Economios clesses, mothers may bo
invited to see hon their deughters ccok vegetobles to preserve vitamins,
hoy to dern or meke infent layettes, hon te take osre of the sick, etc.
In the shop fethera may be invited to see hou their boys reprir broken
furniture, hon to repeir a lesking faucet, or hon to hone s rasor, etc.
During achool progrems, porents may be invited to perticipcte in the school
effoir. They ean furnish a number or tvo and certeinly, they vould only be
too nilling to cooperste if there has been established e close relationship
between the school end the conmunity. In the second plece, the sehool con
perticipete in the sociel end civic sctivities of the cormunity. Teechers
should look upon this participctien as golden opportunities to cerry over
the work of the schoel into the cormunity. The teccher's service is not
necesserily confined to the school. Neither does his school time end with
the ringing of the school bell. By its nature, his pork is s tuenty-fourhour-day affeir. He is equelly in service both while he is within the
schcol walla and outside of then, and sa long as he is port and percel of
the system. By his actions, his speech, his manner of thinking, his dealing with others - in short by the strength of his personclity he influences
the life of those sround him and moulds them cocording to his oen may of
doing, feeling ond thinking.
The success of this underteking does not necesarrily hinge upon the
sbility of the school to furnish every type of lesdership. Rather it
hinges upon the ability of the school to utilise such leedership. By getting the cooperstion of the leaders of the cormunity end by utilizing their


22


services to the greatest advantage, there will be established a common bond, a realization of a conmon responsibility of the school and
tha community for a common enterprise - the improvement of the school
and community.


- 43 -
¿GRICULTURAL SCHOOLS AND THE RURIL COMMUNITIES
By
areedio G. Metele
Acting Superintendent
Centrel Luzon agriculturel School
The Centrel Luzon Agriculturel Sehool has been underteking en extension
service for formers in the vicinity of the school and in other places of the
Philippines. This service consists of disseminating up-to-date information
on precticel ferming and holding demonstrations in mechenized ferming, handiorafts, plant propagation, animal breeding, caponizing, incubstion end bresding of chicka, control of plant and onimal pests and disesses, and the like.
There are no ectual formal classes st daytime or at night nhere fermers
enrol end earn their Model Citisen's diploms or proficieney certifiecte in
vocstional pursuits. Nor are there fired dates fer holding demonstretions
and lectures. The undersigned believes in the efficscy of so-called "model
ferms" for demonstreting farm principles and prectices. Generally, the ordinory fermer is not receptive to assimilating theoreticel knomledge; he is
usually skeptical sbout any change in his entiquated ferming weya inherited
from his forebeara; he should see with his own eyes that a nen trend or iden
in sgriculture can be spplied. Once he sees the practiccbility of an innovetion in farming he readily imbibes it for spplication on his form.
The Central Luzon agricultural School is a model fermstead of 658 heeteres. It has o number of projecta such as growing rice, corn, and other
field erops, rsising smine, poultry, gosta cattle, and carabaos, vegetable
gerdening, fruit groving, and landacape gardening. Out of a totel eres of
the school reservetion, 375 Hs, ere planted to rice, 14 Hs. to field crops,
76.85 Ha, to enimal projects, 5 Hs, te poultry, 16 Ha. to horticulture projects (including vegetable gardening, fruit groning, and landscape gardening).
These projecte ere models for outside fermers. Besides the projects, the
school has machinery, carpentry, and bleckamith shops which farmers also see
in connection nith their sork on their farms.


24


One problem of fermers is whet to plant or hon to utilise the fields
sfter the rice hervest. In this sehool, inmedistaly efter horvest the
fields are prepared for plenting such erops ss corn, mongo, gebi, eggplont,
ccbbage, pechay, empslaya, stringbeons, cowpesa, tomato, onions, and others.
The sehool elso demonstrates "palagad" ries production to show fermers the
fetsitility of a second rice crop during the year.
Whether invited or not, outside fermers come to the school to visit
the sehool projecta ond ahops. Nhenever they come, the projeot teschers
conoerned teke them tround, explain hou their projecta sre maneged, and
telk on the importent jobs being done. They also demonstrete the manipulative akills involved. Fermers, school children, tesahers end othera visit
the sahool individuelly or in groups. Tho knowladge end the experience they
get out of their visit enable then to improve their forms. In osse they
encounter problems regording their clubvork or projeote, they vrite or
come to the projeet teachera for the nocesecry enlightenment, holp, remedies and solutions.
Among the things thot our projecta de for the fermers in the vicinity
ores giving susy er selling plenting materials such es rico seeda, vegetable end fruit-tree seedlinga, end cuttings of ornemental plenta; selling
of breeding stock of suine, deiry gosta, and poultry, including breeding
egga; conducting c boer sarvice for outsiders; demonstrating caponiging,
cestrstion, veccinetion of livestook, spplicetion of fertilizers and insecticides; delivering lectures on reising animels and producing crops;
end helping in solving fermera' probloms.
Fermers often request the projeet teschers of this school to help
then in starting and making improvements in their ferm or home projects.
Sonetimes the teschers are called upon by the fermers to treet enimol
dinones and to help them exterminste plent pests. They cre also invited
to talk on egricultural topics et meetinga of fermers, peronb-ieacher


essocistions, end other community essemblies. Tesahers render this kind of
servica during off-duty hours, especially on Seturdeys and Sundays.
During the emnual Liberstion Dey celetration in this sehool, which
tekes plece on Februery 7, demonstretion in farm mechaniastion end an open
house in ell the sehool projects end shops ere held for the benefit of all
visitors. This annuel nffoir affords all outsiders, fermers end non-fermera
elike, to see the chenges made every yesr. But, sside fron this annuel offeir, fermers and othera con come te the school eny time of the year.
tnother mediun through which extension vork is done is the "C.L.A.S.
Bulletin in Precticel Ferning", s monthly publiestion dedicatod to precticel
ferming mothods tried and practised in this school. The Bulletin reaches
quite a numter of people uho cre interested in farming. Requests for this
publiestion have been received from outside fermers, sehcol teschers, and
newspapermen from different plooes in the country.
as e result of the ferm extension service of the Centrel Iuson agricultural Sehool, outside fermers have improved their ferming methoda, opened
new projeota, sterted raising livestock, end intensified food production.
They have kept abresst with the modern trends in agriculture as cpplied in
the schcol.
The Centrel Luson Agricultural School is undertaking its fern extension
service, not to compete with the vork of the field persorel of the Burecus
of Plent Industry and Animel Industry, but to cooperste and lend s holping
hend so that the outside farmers vill eern s livelihood fron ferming, enhenoe their civio responsibility ond cormunity pride, and be cble to moke adjustments in s changed end rapidly changing agriculturel world.


PROMOTION OF ADULT-EDUUATION FROJECTS IN TARLAC
By Roman L. Sentos
Division Superintendent of Schoola, Tarlac
It has baen noted that the prosotion of Adult Education in the division of Terlas is very far fros satisfastory. Te bring about mere fruitful results in the different phases of Adult Eduestion, the following suggestive measures may be adopted:
Prganisation of Classes: The Diciriot Supervisors and Principals through
their leadership, inspirstion, and influenoe may essily erganise or causa
to be organised adult elasses. In the same way they may easily cnlist volunteer publie-school teachers from among their teachers to take chargo of
adult-eduestion elssses. Three te six classes may be eperated st a tine for
three mentha, the period necessary to liberate the adultsafrom illiteraoy.
Bowever, it is desirabla to maintain s yeor-reund operstion to popularise
adult education.
The formula of "esch-one-teach-one": In the spirit of service, publioschool teachers and employees not designated in charge of adult elasses,
Grado VI pupils, and secondary school students may be encouraged to engage in adult-education work. Bach should look for an illiterate who may
be his servant, tenant, a member or a friend of his family to teach his
ABC.
AED Perms: To fecilitate the work, AED Forms Nos. 6, 7, 11 and 18
should be sccompliahed inmediately. After a period of 3 months of tesehing one hour a day trioe s veek, the adultr are ready for promotion. The
deserving students should be listed on Form 7, to be subnitted with the
samples of their handuriting for spproval. If approved, a Gertificato of
Proficieney will be given esch candidate. Loter, eppropriate elosing exercisos
may be held in connection with the distribution of certificates.


- 27


Gommunity Assamblias: In the past, public-school teschers took the initistive of conducting community sesembly lectures with good liberelising and
socielising effecta to the generel publio. They vere not only enlightened
on the prevailing issues of the day but elso they enjoyed the programs as
show by the faot that all assemblies were well ettended. Let us revive the
practice end schedule sasemblies as often ss precticable. The Division Office hes elreody sent to different districtsor municipelities copies of
community sasembly lectures. tfter each meeting Form 11 should be submitted
to the Division Office.
The Division Office should be advised from time to time regerding the
progresa of the different phases of sdult educstion in tha different districte or mumicipalities. General Memorende Nos. 22 and 41, s. 1948 should
be freely consulted for further informstion end guidance regerding this phese
of achool work.
The Division Office should be furnished with the lists of adult enrollses, the names of members of the Local ¿dult-Education Cormittees, the
nemes of publie school teschers designated in cherge of tesohing, and the
sohedules of Community Assemblies by municipelities in duplicates.


28


VACATION CAMPAIGN AGAINST ILLITERACI IN ABRA
By Santiage Dumlao
Division Superintendent of Sehools, Abra
Vsestion days are undoubtedly the most propitious time for intensifying our drive againat illiterscy. Teschers and students can render
valueble servica to the common mass if they kpply part of their lsisure
hours in this novel work. It may be impractical to conduct adult olasses in certsin places if the adult pupils are not very much interested
to attend such classes regularly. But by adopting tha "Esch-One-TeachOne" plan whereby cosching may be dene in the house of the teacher or
in the house of the illiterste at any suitable time, the inconvenienoe
of grouping the adulte together to form a elass is avoided.
EACH TEACHER of this division is earnestly requested again to lend
a halping hand in this movement by tesobing at lesst ONE ADULT beginner
hon to read and write in the lecal dialeot during the coming vacation
period. Secondary students should also be encouraged if not required
to continve taking uo thia projest in line with their lessons in sosial
studies. The pregress of this work should be cheoked up by the principal of each school at the beginning of the folloving ecademio year requiring the adults to submit their semple vritings to shon that they are
entitled to be recommended for certificates of proficienoy.
Prompt submission of AED-Form No. 22(Revised) together mith the
regular querterly reports on adult education setivities is very necessary. For future reference and record purposes, a separate list of the
names of testhers who de not take part in this drive or in any other
phese of adult education movement stating the reason or reasons for
non-participation should be reported.


-29-
COMMUNITI ORGANIZATIONS AS ADULT EDUCATION AGENCIES


A recent survey has been made to determine the different community
organisationsengaged in the promotion of adult education activities in
the provinces. Of the 51 school divisiors, 19 have sent their reports
to the General office on the conditions obtaining in the field. In
those 19 divisions there are listed 354 community organisations actively


undertaking adult eduestion projects during the school yesr 1949-1950.
Belon is a list of the divisions which reported the number of
organisstions!


PAfisisn


No. of Organizationa


L. ABrA----------------------
3
2. Batangas -------------------- 10
3. Bulacan -------------------- 30
L. Catanduanss ------------------
5. Capig -------------------
5. Cotabato ------------------ 2A
7. Ilocos Norte ---------------- 34
8. Iloilo -------------------
9. Leyte ------------------ 68
10. Marinduque ------------- 2
11. Misamis Occidental ---------- 45
12. Negros Cccidental ---------- 21
13. Negros Otiental ----------- 45
14. Nueva Fella --------------- 28
15. Pelswan ----------------- 7
16. Pomoanga ------------------ 18
17. Sorsogon ----------------
18. Surigao
------------------
19. Zamboanga -------- 8


Of the different cormunity organisstions promoting adult educa

tion activities in 19 provinces, the parent-teacher associations sppear
to be the most popular form while the vecatienal elubs and civio asso

sistions such as, mutual sid secieties, social imorovement olubs, litercoy orgonisations, eto., follov in the number of adult education agencies. The conmunity orgenizations as reported are distributed as follons:


30


Numbar
Organtantion
1. Parent-Teacher Asseciations ------- 176
2. Vooctional glubs ---------- 42
3. Civio asseciations --------- 43
------------- 19
4. Laber Uniens
5. Women's Clubs ----------------- 18
6. Religious Orgenisations ----------- 15
7. Elementary School Tenchers Clubs - ------- 13
-----------
R. Athletio Clubs - -
9. High Sehool Organisotions ---
2
------------- 17
10, Miscellansous -


ldteracy instruction tops the list of projests undertaken by the
commundty organisetions. There are 151 agencies engaged in literacy campaigns and 105 erganisetions conduct citizenship education through comsugity essemblies, publie foruns and discussion groups. The different
projeots undertaken by the corresponding edult eduestion egencies are
listed belon:


PROJECT


No, of Drganisations


LAteraoy Instruction ------- 161
Citizenship Eduestion ------- 105
-------------- 3i
Perent Education
General Voestional Education --------- 31
Agrioultural Education ------ 16
Religious Inatruction --------- 14
------------- 19
Reereation
Household Industries -------- 10
------------- 8
Miscelleneous


- 31-
TRENDS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD
Acarigan Snirit of Volunteer Servisa
There is strong devotion to adult eduestion in Ansgida. In one instence neerly 200 persons in different positions pledged themselves to
render volunteer service for the promotion of the education of the
edults. The American Associetion for Adult Edhestion vos responsible in
srousing this spirit of volunteer service. It ves recorded that about
85 persons vho were engaged sa lecturer, discussion leaders or consultents in adult educstion offered to denate s portion of their fees to the
Associstion. Neerly 75 parsons volunteered to serve in s special cormittee of the Associotion to investigate the scope and nature of its sdult
eduettion progrem. a similar number of persons offered to work volunterily on the different projects and field services of the Assecistion.
More than e hundred members of the Associstion pledged to exert speciel
efforts to campaign and secure new members. The responses end enthusiten
of the eapoble group of individuals can only meon one thing - Nan active
desire to porticipate in developing its cbility to serve adult eduestion
in the United Stctes more odequetely.” (¿dult Educstion Journal, Jen. 1950)
Adult Schcol for Laborera and Managara
Experimentel courses siming to develop o harmonious relation between
laborers end monugers of industries tre being offered by the new York
Strte School of Industrisl end Labor Relstions. The main object is to
bring together to s cormon understending the representatives of lebor and
menagement by a thorough study of their common problems. “The method
employed is to hold tuo simultaneous hour and s half sessions, one for
top level supervisors end executives of the companies and for officials


32


end chief stevards of the uniona, the other for foremen and shop stevards.
During en additional helf hour the tvo groups meet together to compare
corments end conclusions. Union end managenent representotives come
from the seme compenies." (Ldult Eduestion Journal, Jen. 1950)
Nhot Thoy Taagh to aqulig in Latin amariaan Countrias
Litersoy campaign which sims primarily st making the population literste is considered the most videspresd end unique festure of adult eduestion in Lstin America. In many of these countries, eside from litersoy
campaigns, hovaver, elementery educstion is also provided for adults in
connection with their elementery sehools. Cuba has 900 elementery schools
where odult evening schoola or elesses are sttached to them. In some
such edult olasses, English, cormercial courses, home-making and other
short courses sre offerad.
Adult tenchers in Chile, give instruction in oorpentry, cosmetology,
home equipment repeir, radio repsir, sening, shee repeiring, sosp making,
teiloring, and other phases of shop equipment.
Of the 2,000 elementery schools in El Selvedor, 300 provide elenentery educetion for adults. In Costs Rica, all-day elementery schools are
practicelly open st night and offer courses for edults. In Honduras an
edult is given on elementory diplome nfter satisfactory completion of
courses offered in s condensed evening curriculum. In Gustemale, informal
courses besed on the needs of sdults are offered in some of their elementary schools. (¿dult Eduestion Journal, Jen. 1950.)
Iha Mexigen Cultural Missiona
A culturel mission is a life-improvement projeot in Mexico designed
to bring sbout s speedy rehcbilitation of the baoknerd, culturally isolated


33


end primitive ereas through the efforts of eduestion. It is effective
in slum sress nhere norkers possess lon economic and culturol status.
4 culturel mission is composed of from two to six specislists on
egriculture, building construction, heslth and senitstion, homemaking,
nutrition, recrestion, end rural industry. The group usually morka in
s village centrelly located shere ten or more villages may receive the
influence of the service. House-to-house campsigns are made to determine the needs and problems of the community. Formel eduestion including
literaoy instruction is subordinste to improvement of the conmunity. The
program of servioe usually begins in the "erection of bada, keeping enimals out of the house, boiling nater, building of senitary privies, improvement of cooking methods and other nays of lightening the work of nomen."
Demonstretions ore given on methods of grefting, poultry reising, seed
selection and other pheses of farm life. (adult Eduestion Journal, Jen. 1950)
The Nuclear Sghopla of Gustemala
A nucleer school is s special school - community project in Gustemale including perts of Feru and Bolivia. The plan makes s central
schcol, a nueleg or e service center for a number of surrounding "seotional" school communities. It conducts a progran of adult educstion
which includes oll members of the community. The method utilizes the
service of the centrel school teacher sssisted by s supervisor of agriculture and a supervisor of health and homelife. The nuclear school
maintsina s clinio on prenatel cere and child health. Compaigns to promote
veccinstion service ere conducted through pictures, lectures and other
mass medio. Group meetings ere organised by teachers for the purpose
of improving community informetion on "intestinal peresites, nater sup

- 34-
ply, construction of sanitery facilities, home hygiene, tad other problens of the home”. Fermers ere given demonstrstions en improved agriculturel prectioas. (¿dult Eduestion Jburnel, Jen, 1950)
¿pariaan Superintendanta Faxar publie Sghool saula Eduastion
Opinions of nearly 2,500 Americen School Superintendents have been
surveyed reeently by Homer Kempfer of the U.S. Offioe of Eduection on
their attitude tovard adult eduestion. "Only one-tenth of the superintendents feel that adult eduestion should not be a responsibility of the
publie schools". Majority of the sehool superintendents believe in maintsining adult eduestion progrems entirely frea or free except for s nominalregistration fee. The phases of adult eduestion nhich they favor
for sueh free elasses ere "literaoy inatruction, (mericaniastion, voostional and eduestional guidance services, nev-voter preperction programs,
high school subjecta and child study.” A few superintendenta favor the
inclusion of sdult eduection program of "eduestion for merriage groups,
open forums on civie effeirs, eduestional consultation services to alub
lesders, public affaira radio listening and discussion groups, community
band instruetion and erta and orefts groupa." (adult Edu. Journel, Jen. 1950)
Tan Yeer Adult Sghool Plan in India
The United Provinces gevernment in Indis has recently drom up s
progrem of mess eduestion. The esmpaign expecte to enroll 25 million
Indian edulte in school. Esch adult is required to sttend elesses one
hour a dey for six montha. Literecy instruction vill be stressed in
the adult achoola but such subjecta es agriculture, hygiene and civica
are also plenned to be teught to members of the sdult elasses. (¿dult
Eduestion Journal, Jen. 1950)


35


old Chauteuquas Revived in lona
¿ modern revivel of old chsutsuques nas undertaken in lowa. For
five days, free music, films, discussions and lectures vere conducted
in Gulf Point Stete Perk Lodge st Lake Okoboji. Tha main object ves to
demonstrate the use of instructional and documentery films as background for discussion of publie affeirs. The procedure combined recrestion and educstion to meintein the interest of adults. (¿dult
Eduestion Journal, Jen. 1950)
Amazon Valley Projegt
a comprehensive demonstration-experimental health campaign was
conducted in the Amason Valley. The Ministry of Education and Health
of the Brasilian government undertook the campaign. To realise the sin,
several medis and methods were used, such as "the radio, mobile units,
movies, leoflets, bulletina, folders, telks, health elubs, health councils, home hospitals, end training of primery teachers." The illiterates were given orol explanstions.(adult Edu. Journal, Jen. 1950)
Tha Role of Librariss in adult Edusstion
4 Seminer on the role of libreries in adult education vill be held
from July 24 to fugust 19, 1950 in Melmo, Sweden to study end discuss library adult educction techniques, methods, policies and progremmes, with
s vien to stimulating the development of librery educational services in
all Member States. (Unesco News)
Methoda and Taghnigues of adult Edusstion
The Unesco has invited member nations to send participants, including
the Philippines, to snother Seminer on Methods and Techniques of Adult
Educstion to be held in Selaburg, Austria from June 18 to July 29, 1950.
(Direct correspondence)


 36 -
DR. BODET'S REVEALING KIPERIENCE NITH AN ILLITERITE
COUNTRI ROMAN
Dr. Joine Torres Bodet, Director-General of the Unesco deseribed one
of his cetuel experienoes in connection with the pert he had played in e
nstional literaoy campaign in Mexico. During the exominetion period, he
visited a rural cormunity which the inspectors deseribod to him ss one
of their best projecta. Dr. Bodet observedi
"In a strewthatehed hut, s girl volunteer wos teaching reading snd
vriting to a group of peasant vomen. For blsckboard she had e yard or
two of shabby derk oiloloth. After the learnera had read me a few pessages, I askad ono of them, the oldest, to write out two or three sentences
which I pioked from the primer the teocher was using. Vithout hesitstion
she wrote out the worda I dictated.
“But I ves disturbed, less by her spalling mistekas than by a sertsin
machine-like awiftnesa which suggested the motions of en sutomaton. I
eskad hor to write her own nome, end san st once that this vas en untried
tesk for hand end mind alike.
nghe took the chalk hesitently, ond very slouly, letter by letter, begen to trace her name. When she had finished ahe reed it out several
times under her bresth. Then suddenly, to everybody's surprise, she burst
into teors. There was certainly no bitterness in thet weeping, ita real
couse nas surely the surprise of finding her real self, suddenly, after so
meny years of ignorence, during which that self had been ebaent in exile.
PIn those few shaky, ill-formed strokas, she sew herself more cleorly
then in a mirror-humble and obedient, boned down by her poor past. "nd
were not those triumphent tears s lesson to us all, and an immense forgivenes?"


37


THE VIANI ASSOCIATION PROJECT
(Reprint fros Uhesco Courier)
Viani, in Colombis, is typical of the conmunities to be found in the
Andes mountains. Covering sbout 7,500 hecteros, it ie losated in the upper limits of the coffes belt st an elevstien of 1,600 maters. On ita
steap and rugged landscape the slopes sverage bateen 35 and 50 degrees and
reach down to deep narron velleys shere level sress large enough to ellon
the building of s normal house ere difficult to find.
There are no rosds in Viani except the mein street that goes through
the village, and the 6,000 inhebitents of the community have to use en intricate netuork of trails up end donn the slepes to reach their widely
sesttered homes. For trensport, they use horses end mules, and all ferming operations to raise the principal erops - coffee, corn, yuess, eniseed,
banenes and sugor cene sre performed by hand.
after centuries of veer end teer, the soil of Vieni is nerring com-¬
plete exhsustion and as tha vesring-out process continues, the helpless
farmera feel more and more insecure ss they find no means of preventing
their soil from heing eroded snay.
The selvetion of the people of Visni, ss is indeed the selvation of
most of the people of Colombio end other perts of South Ameries along the
Andes mountsins, is soil conservation end porticulerly the affeotive
control and prevention of soil erosion.
It was beesuse Viani ves considered ss a typical rural eres of Colombis that the Colombisn Government chose it ss the site for s fundemental
eduection project, which it celled "Model Rurel Conmunity".


- 38 -
A EODEL CONMUNITI
The Ministers of Eduestion, Economy and Agrioulture agreed on s
joint setion to develop on an experimental besis s model conmunity, end
for this purpose they established s centre of Social anthropology under
the sponsorship of the school locsted at Vieni. The nan institution, which
was named the Civie Centre, nes supplied with adequete buildings and staff
end its director beceme the ex-officie director of the Vieni project.
Finally, the Civie Centre asked thet Unesco establish an Associsted Project in Vieni end lost March, on the request of the Colombien Government,
Unesco sent to Vieni Mr. Petricio Senches, a young and energetio soil conservationist, of the U.S. Depertment of Agriculture.
After studying the sommunity end its people for severel weeka, Mr.
Sanches, in co-operstion with Mr. Gabriel Ospine, head of the Viani Civio
Centre began to take positive sotion.
First of all, he conducted e series of group disoussions with the fermers of Vieni, so os to bring home to them the magnitude end seriousness
of the soil erosion problem in their community and to plen with them the
prectical steps which they themselves could take to stop it.
Then, Mr. Senches tolked to the sehool tesehers of Vieni so ss to show
them hon education was olosely linked with the problen end to urge them to
associate the question of soil conservstion with the schcol curriculum in
ell gredes.
Finally, he orgenized the rural youth of Vieni - those aged betmeen 12
ond 15 who had completed their "alfabstismo" and for whom there vould normally have been nothing in store but to revert baok to their treditional existence. He exploined to them thst their future mould be of their oun making
end that they could be a feotor in meking their cormunity a better plece
in which to live. To do this, he told them, they must toka on the respen

39
sibility of helping to prevent the further necring out of their lends.
Beginning to Reslize
After four months, Mr. Senchez reports that the people of Vioni are beginning to realize that they can conserve their soil end that they alone can
prevent soil erosion through the immediste, united and consistent application
of effort and intelligence.
His plens, however, do not end with soil conservation for he feels that
the lorger problem is human conservation through educstion, of which soil conservetion is only one of the major means.
Nhat Vieni non needs, he considers sre the services of a practical agriculturist who would help the fermers to rsise more and better orops per heetare of lond. There is also en urgent need for a domestic economist to visit
the homes to shon the nomen and girls how to plan better meals for the family,
hon to core for children, the aged and the sick end generelly how to make
their homes more comfortable places in vhich to live.
Finelly, Viani needs a health specialist to show the pecple how disease
cen be prevented and en eduestionist to help in the reorientstion of the educational systen and the modificstion of the school curriculun so es to meke
educstion the key to improved living conditions.
As fer ss possible it is hoped to recruit these experts locally or from
Centrel end South americon countries. One of the sims of the project is to
develop local leadership for its further implementation, and later, its extension to the other Colombisn cormunities and other perts of Lstin Cmerica.


- AO -
ADULT EDUCATION ECTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES
Encouraging reports have been received from different school divisions on the progress of adult educstion cotivities in the provinces.
Division Superintendents, sehool principals, district supervisors and
classroom teschers extend their cooperation and support for the enlightenment of the masses in their respective communities.
BULACAN
Mr. Deogracias Flores, Principal of Bulacan Trade School, has informad us that a phase of adult education is beinz undertaken in his
school by authorising the trade school students to invite friends and
relatives, both men and women, who are unskilled laborers, to come to
the achool shop for observation and practical demonstration. They sre
weloome to the sehool "in erder to learn the trade by which they can
make an honest living after soquiring the necessary vocational efficiency".
Aecording to the Principal of the Halili High School in Santa Maria, Bulacan, several important results have been accomplished by his
school in the form of community service.
Through the efforts of the Halili High School the toun people are
nov interested in the school. They help the schoel liberelly in the
form of contributions, labor, ete. The people are beginning to practice scientifio agriculture, and the planting of Bermuda onion is becoming populer.
LEITE
Superintendent Isabelo Manalo informed us that Parent-Teacher Asso

ciations in Leyte are actively engaged in community velfare rork. In
order to maintain the continuity of service of adult elasses the PTA
hire and pay adult eduestion teachers. In some places, the PTA pay
teachers in kind, sither in rice or corn to msintain their interest in
adult teaching.
"In some localities, " Mr. Manalo reported, "the PTA purchased
radio sets. Every Sunday efternoon, the tonn people assemble in the
publio plaze wbure they listen to lectures on informetional topios,
musio and current ners. In this way, the people are taught the wise
use of leisure. Their minds are relaxed, yet they gain important information. They ere taught also to become good members of the community
beosuse they are given instruction, regarding prompt payment of tanes
and provisions of ordinences sporoved by the municipal council, etc.
They heer lectures on topies pertaining to agriculture, home industries, home sanitation, thrift, eto."
In rural places, where people have no chance of listening to radio
broadeasts, the PTAs according to Mr. Manalo, have built temporary secial
holls, using local materiala for entertainment. There they meet from time
to time for social sotivities, like literary progrems and other worthwhile forms of popular recreation.
CAPIZ
Division Superintendent Glicerio Tayco reported that adult education
elasses in Numancia District vere resumed vith grest enthusiasm. In the
following alaces, school teachers have been sotually extending help to
adult-education classes: Laguingbanua, Numancia, Albasan, Dongon, Mantiguib, Makate, Calimbajan, Cajilo, Tamolagom, Tangalan, Tagas and Pa

noyakan. Home visits by the teachers are encouraged. The follosing figures ahos the extent of the teschers' work on home visitation.


-




Muania!


Makata


Tangalan
¡Total


!
1. No. of homes visited


139
1


112 * 36


1 307


2. No. of homes visited



with vegetable gardens


54


51


14


1 119


3, Aress of vegetable gardens 12700 sa. M.!1483 a0.m 11002 sd.n.


17,186 eu


4. No. of homes with toilets


114


18


239


S. No. of homes w/flover garden


1
29


55 1


18


1 122


Sa NOl of Iruit treea MEDXingI


AAXCOL


—A1


128


 4.662


A letter was vritten ty the Division Superintendent to the Distriat Supervisor to encourage teachers to exert their influence in the


campaign for the censtruction of family toileta and cultivating vegetable gardens.
CEBU


The Daenbantayan Provincial High School under the supervisien
of its principal Mr. Marcos D. Bacel has launched an intensive campaign for the eradication of illiteracy in Cebu. The literaoy project
is undertaken by the senior class under the guidance of the elass
adviser. Neekly lesson plans for the adult class are prepared for
the use of student-tubors who vill conduct instruction on the method
of “each-one-teach-one".
ALBAY
The Tabaco High School is ecoperating with the campaign against
illiterooy in Albay, according to infermation received from the principal, Mr. Teodoro Peglinawan. Tha teachers and high school students


- 33 -
are conducting instruction of the adults under the "each-one-teachone" plan. Members of the high school faculty are actively engaged
in teaching illiterates. Twenty tuo student leaders have been
selected in order to intensify the campaign for volunteer servica
among the high school students. Of the forty adults sttending the
litersoy olass 21 are housekeepers, 5 laudrywomen, 5 laborars,
4 housemsids, 1 jenitor, 1 farmer, l vendor, 1 mat weaver, and 1
cake maker.
MISAMIS OCCIDENTAL
Division Superintendent Rafael Sarmiento desires to institute
in his division functional education for adults in order to help
them inorease their porers fer earning liveliheod. He observed
that "litersoy classes merely for the purpose of learning to read
and vrite do not appeal to the adult pupils." He further stated:
"Due to the inherent interest of the people in eduestion, the work
in organizing adult-education projecta was not hard. The main handicap was the absence of s fulladime organizer-supervisor for this
division. The district supervisors have hardly enough time for
this phase of work. But in places where there was a number of civicspirited citizens, local committees vere organized through the rork
of the distriet supervisor and the teachers, for the purpose of
having a definite agenoy to look after the velfare of adult education.
Conseguently, there vere committees organized in the municipalities
of Tangud and Orequieta. These conmittees helped the teachers in organising and keeping the elasses functioning throughout the year."


--
PAMPANGA
The Rural Progressive Administration, a sort of labor organisstion in Pampanga, according to a report of Mr. Bartolome Evangelista, Adult Eduestion Supervisor, "has signified its villingness to
pay tenchers whe vill undertake literaay instruction for its members
at Bahay Pare, Candaba. It was considered risky to go to that place
Jue to its nearness to the Candaba Sramps but ve dered it for duty
called us there. Ne met the people including the barrio leaders who
vere not only villing but interested in adult educstion. The teschers
there signified their villingness to undertake the job whether they
vere paid or not since it was community servica.".
Religious organisations ere reported actively cooperating in promoting adult education in Pampanga. One of the most suecessful projects is a Sunday school for adults which is undertaken by the Methodist
Church under the leadership of Rev. Domingo Cunanon of Poreo, PampangaMANILA
City Superintendent Antonio A. Meceda has adopted a way in promoting
adult education in Manila. He seid: "In order to attract the adults
to the schools and to foster closer relationship between the school end
the community, "balagtasan", musical literary programs and field day
festivals vere held in both the elementary and secondary schools".
To encourage the promotion of "leorning by visiting", exhibits of
handiwork and other educational features were held from time to time in
many schools of Manila. Hundreds of adults mho visited the Menila publio
schools during the Educstion and Family Neek enjoyed the erts exhibits,


- L5 -
demonstrations, dramatic presentations, pageants, stunts, games, and
folk dances.
The Arellano High School Health Council which is composed of representatives from the different subject departments, the Srudent Councils, the P.T.A., the school health service, and the jenitorial staff
has done much towards coordinating the health work. It includes promotion of health activities and health situations which are found
in the living conditions of the students, thus bridging the gap betweenthe school health program and the community health.
BOHOL
Many interesting reports camefrom Bohel. Mr. Carlos B. Olano,
Adult Education Suvervisor informed us of the success of community asy
semblies in Bohol. He said tht many officials of the different branches
of the municipal and provincial governmentachave participated in the
adult education program by giving suitable talks. Prominent among the
lecturers were Mr. Diosdado Bongato, Provincial Supervisor of the Buresu
of Plant Industry; Miss Luey Areneta; Provincial Food Demonstrator; Dr.
Rosalio Mandin, Provinciel Chief of the Bureau of Animal Husbandry and
several presidents of sanitary divisions. Municipal agricultural inspectors, senitary inspectors, municipal nurses, municipal mayors and
treasurers vere also active participants in community assemblies.
Mr. Martin S. Ayaay, Principal of Balilihan Elementory School
renorted that many of the adult illiterates who have been instructed
in that school are now able to read and write. Many of them vere ables
to vote during the last election. Mr. Ayaay observed: “Consequently,
criminality and other infractions of the laws have been reduced to the
minimum. The people have begun to vien the good effect of living a


pesceful life. Mutual understanding among neighbors has been enhanoed
to the highest level. These are all due to the effortsof the administration in reducing illitersoy to the bottoa."
The Bugang Primary School conduets an adult eduestion class which
meets once a veek. Many illiterates have been successfully taught after
the first quarter of instructien. Mr. Dionisio Jamisola, Principel,
stated that the adults in addition te reading and rriting were taught
sanitation, the reading of periodicals and raising of vegetables. The
community sasemblies held last October, November, and December vere vell
attended by the barrio people. The people took much interest in poultry
rsising, and as a result, one can see chickens in every home in the community.
Mr. Francisco Lastimosa of Borja Elementary School reported that
many conmunity assemblies have been senducted in the barrio schools of
Canmaya, Canmaya Biot, Mantalongon, San antonio, San Isidro and Sen
Ramon, Borja, Bohol. Mr. Lastimosa observed: “These assemblies greatly
affeoted the eduestion of the populace. 4s 957 of the people in the town
sre farmers, emphasis was given to agriculture followed by instruction
in sanitation. Barrio beoutifiention wes the msin sim of the movement
last December. People cooperated in the drive as shown by the improvements of their homes and surroundings.
NEGROS OCCIDENTAL
A conference of students in the graduating class of all secondary
schools of Negros Occidental was held in Bacolod on April 14, 1950. The
conferenoe has a special attraction to the division of adult education


47


because the purpose was to gear the activities and efforts of high
school gradustes to community improvement in their respective communities. It is in line vith the community school idea that is fast
gaining ground in the publie sehools. The Bacolod project was vell
takon and vell received by the teachere, publie officials and the
Provincial Governor, the latter having contributed transpertation
facilities to all perticipating students. Suparintendent Fuentes
briefed the graduating class on the general program of community
imprevement, which he enjoined everyone to help carry out. He expects
he will bave a big asset from whibh to dran his forees for community work next yesr.
Mr. Fuentes has established s preoegont for being the first
Division Superintendent who suceseded in creating a position for
adult eduestion supervisor payable from the provincial fund of
Negros Occidental.


-ABENROLMENT IN ADULT EDUCATION
The following table showe the report of attendanoe in organized adult
schoola, "Each-One-Teach-One" and conmunity assemblies, for the Third Quarter
(January, February, Maroh), 1949-1950:


Divisio n


rrtimirnang aRalE
AduBIOEganizediin OrganIschali Sonoois lized Sons


INO. NLONS
for t
E-O-T-ON


AbN


15


15


325


418 !


419


6


975


Agusan


!


Albay


1 221


22


1 378 1


1460 1


 1450 !


PA


1 6,858


Antique


Bataan


1 10 1


10


!


!
385


 328 1


228 !


1 1,650


Batanes


1!


42 1


61l


Batangas


13 1
!


13


!.


1,180 !


31


1 2,480


Bohol


9


96


1


1,358 1


 983 1


998 1


5


1 61,301


Bukidnon


18 1


18


!


575 1


218


218


755


Bulacan


190
1


120 I


 120 !


14. 


1 8,935


Cagayan


37 1


37


!


859
1


 425 1


 428 1


94 1 0,279


Camarines Norte


!


1


1


!


Camarines Sur


!


1


1


Catanduanes


!


!


1


Capiz


Cavite


1


Cebu


!


Cotabato


Davao


1


Ilocos Norte


!


Ilocos Sar


16 1


16


all !


 1372 1


 1574 ;


36


112,850


Iloilo


!


5


102 !


 738


906 


1


18 1 3,478


Isabela


3


85


267


267



1 36 1 3,953


Laguna


4


llo


1 375


396 !


 8


1
690


Lanao


22


684. !


188 1


 236 1


8


256


La Union


19


19


!


608


5001


! 500 1


4l 112,919


Leyte


2





1


1 3,300


Marinduqus


51


5


160 !


S I


1 45


1 7,053


Masbato


1


1


215


216 !


4 112,506


Mindoro


4
1


1


120


78




8 "


43 1 8,781


Misamis Oco.


2 1


24


!


208 !


 405 1


 405 1


30 1 2,505


Misamis Oriental


! 51


91 1


 423


1 433


10


1 2,760


Mt. Province


1 351


S


1


1367


t


!


33


1 5,366


Manila


t


! 19 R


29


8


1 1,105


Negros Oce.


51


30


1


896


1 1491


1
1500


 43 1 5,142


Negros Oriental


7


7.


1


96


1 217


! 217 1


1 328


1 63,234


Nueva Ecija


111


11


!


322


1 A30


430 1


1


170


Nueva Vizcaya


!


238


258 R


 36


1 3,953


Palavan


1 84 1


84


1


1241


37


41 


! 35


1 2,856


Pampanga


2l


21


1


551


1 125


125


1 3,484


Pangasinan


52


59


!


2lan


1 5,631


Quezon


l0 1


lo


1


351


90


80


Rizal


7 1


7


1


244


272
!


!
272


8


1  5,700


Romblon


1


Samar


1


Sorsogon


5


!


160


! 848 


1 848


1 27


1 7,307


Sulu


9 1


9


!


212


1 68 1


 88 *


1
18


3, 650
1


Surigao


1


1


1 4,100


Tarlac


i


1


1


!


Za-bales


11


!


62


1 386


 386 1


6


1 5,400


Zambagnga


1 29 1


al





SOl


1 


86



2l
I.


PA


Yotal--


1 502 1


638


117,e95


143,476 


E
11730 


ILn


1255,933


INGANaUICSIGRmARity Aacamlic
ITaugat by! and roruns Held
"E-O-T-O"INO. TimeslAttndancs



PROMOTION IN ADULT EDUCATION
Number of Certificates of Proficiency Issued So Far During the School Iear
1949-1950


Di via 1 e n.
—


TNron Suly, 19l5l Iron lpail T1
!to May 1, 19501 T o t 21—
ITo Mgtaha 12-
O


1. Abrs


48


24


72


2, Agusan


3. Albay


1 150


84


!
234


4. Antique


1


5. Bataan


99


99
!


6. Batanes


64


*


1
118


7. Batangas


1 116


!
116


8. Bohol


1
7A8


!
748


9. Bukidnon


1


10. Bulacan


64


LA


1 208


11. Cagayan


1 217


1
974


!1,191


12. Camarines Norte


!


13. Camerines Sur


14. Capis


159


19


178
I


15. Catanduanes


92


92


16. Cavite


P
40


I
40


80


17. Cebu


206


299


1a. Cotabsto


46
!


1
198


1
SA4


19. Davao


10


!


10
!


R0. Ilocos Norte


1 132


62


!
194


21. Ilocos Sur


1


198
1


198
1


22. Iloilo


!
103


1
243


346
!


23. Isabela


!
84


196
!


280
1


2A. Laguna


60


60


25. Lanso


!
90


90
1


26. La Union


131


86



217


27. Layte


11,616


1 3,165


!
5,061


28, Manila


!


29. Masbate


"20


!
20


30. Marinduque


19


77
1


1
96


31. Mindoro


24


34


38


32. Misomis Ocoidental


114


!
114


33. Misamis Oriental


8


48


M4. Mountain Province


1 5,168


1 2,149


1
7,617


35. Negros Occidental


23


752


775
!


36. Negros Driental


446


220


1 666


37. Nueve Ecija


70


61


!
131


38. Nueva Vizcaya


!
129


50


179


39. Talawan


160


60


220
!


40. Pempanga


195


125


320


Al. Pangasinan


186


1
943


1 1,129


42. Queson


35


32


67


13. Rizal


 17


182


356
!


A. Romblon


325


94


1
419


45. Samar


12,143


!
454


1 2,897


46. Sorsogon


58


i
29


!
87


47. Sulu


53


!
53


48. Surigoo


159


E
1,451


! 1,610


49. Tarlac


1 167


77
!


!
244


50. Zambales


1 62


1
62


Sl, Zarboanga
-


L


10





T OT A L


2221 13,320


A73


27.2


Republio of the Philippines
Depertment of Publie Norks and Communications
BUREAU OF POSTS
Manila
STORN STATEMENT
(Required by Act No. 2580)
The undersigned BENITO PANGILINAN, Editor of THE   published once in every tyo months in ENCLISH LANGUAGE, st Risal Memorial Stadiumn, Manils, after having been duly
sworn in secording to lan, hereby subadts the following statement
of ounerahip, management, circulation, ste., which is required by
Aot. No. 2580, as amended by Componvealth Act No. 261,
Post Offige Addrean
Ya
BENIIO PANCILINAN
ofo Buresu of Publie Schools
Editor!
Risal Memorial Stadiun, Marila
Managing Editor: YICENTE GARCIA
Business Manager:
N o n.g
"
¬
n
n
Orner!

n
n
Publisher:
UBLAC SUHC
GHE
Printer;
al Dl FIELIA SUDO
E
n
Offioo of Publication: BUREAD OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS
If publication is owned by a corporstion, stockholders owaing one
per cent or more of the total amount of steoks:
NONE
NONE
Bondholders, mortgagees, er other security holders onning one per
oent or more of the total amount of stooks:
NONE
NO NE
In sase of daily publicstion, average number of copies printed and
ciroulated of esch issue during the precading month of .......
19 .....


1. Sent to paid subacribers ---------- Non e
2. Sent to others than paid subsoribers -------- Non e
Total ---------- Nons


In case of publication other then daily, total number of copies
printed and circulated of the last issue dated March, 1950:
1. Sent to paid subseribers -------------- Non e
2. Sent to others than peid subseribers --------
2.900
T otaI----------
2,000


(SGD.) BENITO PANGILINAN
Editor
Subsoribed and awern to before me this 24th dey of April, 1950, at
Manila, Philippines, the affiant exhibiting his Residence Certificate
No. #-922 issued at Manila en January 12, 1950.


NO2


(SaD.) VENANCIO TRINIDAD
Assistant Director
Buresu of Public Sehools


A


C



E
MDA
GON OrE.
Oe PUSL,.
O
A
NEZ
HEa
utd
A
CA

Ed
 D
Ar Eanyay 19
E
SDUCATIO'
Y

Aa
)
-
-T
S
 a aa

2
A
A


2




 



"8 MUIN.

Vang 
 
M
PA

VE 

V
IAIG
W

a
VN

-
N


V
"
LI
Y
EA
—D

I--
EE

-
P
P
-
MUN

d.
 L

M
T
—-
LP
.


—
S
AA
K
E
—-—
-
MA
LgL
1-

A


E
—

m
—
4



W


-



OUO wEt
USO
(o). Al



JULY AS5O


SAVOLNIRE TOA
NO"
CONIENIS
EDUCATION IN RURAL AREAS FOR BETTER LIVING


REMARKS BY THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS AT THE PLENARY SESSION OF THE AIST ANNUAL CONVENTION OF DIVISION SUPERINTENDENTS. 2


THE SANTA BARBARA COMMUNITY SCHOOL
By Jose V. Aguilar


 8


THE MALABO COMMUNITY CENTER ..........13
Py Edith Carson
THE RADA READING CENTER ....17
By Angustia Sevilla
ADULT EDUCATION, A PTA PROJECT EY JIMALALUD ....................19
By Frencisco C. Alcantara
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES OF THE LA UNION HIGH SCHOOL .........23
By Belen S. Arguelles
A PRE-WAR COURSE IN PRACTICAL FARMING IN ILOILO................26
By Policarpo Padlan
THE TAMBOLILID COCONUT ..29
By Melanio R. Calinisan
CO-OPERATIVES AND FUNDAMENTAL EDUCATION ............34
TRENDS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD .....................38
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES ....................Al
PROMOTION IN ADULT EDUCATION ...........49


EDUCATION IN RURAL AREAS FOR
BETTER LIVING


The theme of the Alat Annual Gonvention of Division Superintendants held in Baguio in 1950 deals on Edue atien in Rural
Areas for Better Living. The remarka of the Director of Publio
Schools at the first plenary session contains the salient objeotives which served as the basis of all discussions on the theme
during the Gonvention. It outlines a broad background of what
the schools and the teachers should endeavor to do in order to
bring about richer and better life conditions in rural areas. It
pointe out that the role of educational leodership in the community is one of stimuloting setive interest of the people in
promoting their omn welfere. The desire should be crested and
instilled in their minds, becouse real improvement of community
living especially in underdeveloped pleces is only possible
when the people themselves realise the need for it and aotually
work together for its attainment.
As the message contained in the Director's remarka baars
realistically upon the community-improvement projeots of edult
education workers, it is reproduced in this isaue of Adult Education in Action.


-2-
BRIEF REMARXS OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIO SCHOOLS
AT THE PLENARY SESSION OF TRE AIST ANNUAL
CONVENTION OF DIVISION SUPERINTENDENTS
BAGUIO, MAY 15, 1950
Mr. Secretery, Members of the Conventiont
I consider it a privilege es well as an honor to open this
Alst annuel Convention ef Division Superintendents of Schools. If
only for the fact that this convention, with a total of more thon
100 superintendents and other sahool officials in attendonce, is the
largest we have ever held, I expect that it vill yield fruitful
results both to the system and to the profession to which it is our
pride and distinction to belong.
As hos previously been announced to you, the theme of this
year's convention is: Education in Rural kreas for Better Laving.
Of course, this is not a new theme. Ve have heretofore sought to
effeot a elose relationahip between the school end the community on
mony aspects of achoolwork and on some pheses of community life, and
for the sucoess which we have so far achieved in this regard I wish
earnestly to congratulate the field and the people and local officials
who have so generously given of their support and cooperstion. In
vien, however, of the over-all progrem of the government to improve
the lot of our masses and otherwise lift the tone of their lives, ve
have decided to generalize this coming school year the community-school
service project which, under the inspired and energetic leadership of
certain superintendenta, has had auspicious beginnings in many sehool
divisions.


3
Our study of the community centered sohool and the
experience we have had with it point to at least three major
services for this projest: (1) Service to all the people of the
community, and not only to school children: (2) Marshalling and
coordination of all community resources and agencies as an integral
part of the school in its program of community improvement; (3) Revision
ond enrichment of the curricula on the basis of community needs and
problems, while at the same time taking into account the needs and
problems of the nation and the worla as a whole.
It must not be supposed, honever, that the three nforementioned services operate as distinct and separate functions from
esch other. Nothing can be farther from the truth. Service to all
the people vith the resouroes of the community means the immediste
revision or enrichment of the entire school curriculum and the removal
of every obstanle to its integration. You must agree with me that the
school program should be less tradition-bound and more community-centered.
Educational leodership, which ordinerily concerns itself only with the
froming of a school progrom, should now take further steps toward helping all the people vith nhatever materials or resources there are available in the community, for everything of significance which heppens in
the community is important to the school and everything of significonce
taking place in the school should be reflected in community life.
Since education is the joint concern of the school and the
community, and draws its materials and problems from the life of the
pebple, I wish to call your attention to the following principles which
I believe should be recognized or further implementeda


(1) The community-scheol service pregram is for the peopla.
Progressive educationel leaderahip requires that the peopla be led to
understond the necessity and feel the need for this service.
(2) Community living cannot be improved vithout the indorsement and participation of the people in the community.
(3) The best possible way of helping the people understand
the function of the sehool is to meke the peopla participate in that
function.
(4) The impact of community needs and problems, including
those of the netion and the norld, should penetrate the curriculum
or otheruise reorient its content.
(5) The line-end-staff orgenisation ahould yield to the demoeratic principle of group processes. The traditional ene-way
traffio, so to speak, in official reletionahip is not compatible with
this principle. The trend toward decentralization should ancourage
teachers, supervisors and schoel executives on all levele to assume
the cerresponding responsibility and edue ational leadership.
By nay of appresch to or as an implementation of this program,
I suggest tha folloving measures. In all my travels throughout
the Philippines, es vell as in the regulations which the Generol
Offige has issued, I have called attantion to these measures, but
I believe they can beor repetition.
1. Making the school the community center by throwing open
ita doors and grounds for the holding of legitimate ectivities under
the nuspices of responsible and organized groups. Rhere there are
no organised groups or associstiona, the some should be organised


- 5-
under the leadership of the school to stimulate group consciousness
and bring about social action. In some schools, a local boord of
loymen and teachers may co-ordinote and manage these activities.
2. Making the people participate in school affeirs or
programs like the planning of extra-curricular activities, out-door
trips, commencement exercises, lunch-counter service, field days,
and community assemblies. This collaboration possesses the double
purpose of moking the people equal partners of the teachers in the
educational process, and of supplying them sith a form of civic and
cultural education. It is in this phase of community-school relationship thot educotion for citizenship as outlined in the handbook,
"Teaching the Ways of Democracy", can be carried out in its natural
setting for both the children and the adult citizens. Under the same
circumstances ve can find the best opportunity to promote peace and
order, national and internetional understanding, and vorld solidority
ond progress.
3. Provision for an over-all administrative machinery or
organisation to carry out the purposes of the community centered
school. I suggest that the possibilities of the Community School
Council plan of orgonization, either on the provincial, tonn or
neighborhood level, be carefully explored. The kind of setup to be
adopted and the relationship of its various units sill depend upon
the degree of edueational leadership aveilable and the social maturity
of the people of the community. At the beginning the leadership and
the function of coordinating all local agencies, including non-school
services of the government for community improvements, should reside


6


in the school. However, as fast as the people gain experience in
school and cormunity relotions, I believe that the school should relinquish cormunity leadership to lay porticipation.
4. The reorientation of classroom orgamisation and proctices
along democratic principles should be studied and explored more fully.
In progressive schools abroad, the traditionel recitation is a thing
of the past. The elassroom work hes come to include real life needs
and problems studied in the community setting. Subject-motter organization folloss the integrated life pattern, and the evaluction of
instruction is made in terms of life adjustments and their social values.
Ladies and Oentlemen, I believe I have kindled enough sparks
to make the theme of this convention live and pulasting. It is well
to remember, hovever, that our concern for improving community life
should not in the least obscure us from the original function of the
school to teach the tools of learning and knonledge. The fundemental
subjects, including the social and vocational studies and the sciences,
nilf ever commend a dominant position in the qurriculum. Lkevise, in
the interest of effeotive learning, certain forms of drill must ever
be given. Furthermore, ethical cheracter which constitutes the end
product of all studies should ever receive its right and proper emphosis.
However, it is imperotive that the content in all these subjects and
the methods or processes utilized to impart them ahall dras richly from
rural life and its environment.
The conmunity school program that ve are undertaking is on
the exploratory stage. It is precisely for this reason that me connot
leave it to any chance development, or hurry up its suecess by highpressured direatives from a central office. Careful planning, interest,


--
vision, initiative, educationel statasmanship, and continuous group
action on your pert and on the part of your teachers should be brought
to bear upon the program. Indeed whet we have achieved so far along
this line should not be alloved to die out for lack or because of a
change of leadership. Today's achievements should form the basis of
a greater and more comprehensive community-school pregram of tomorrow.
I thank you.


-8-


THE SANTA BARBARA GOMMUNITI SCHOOL
By Jose V. Aguilar
Division Superintendent of Schools, Iloilo
Santa Barbara is a product of trial and error in group dynamios, the
exercise of phich detes back to 1938. In essence, it is the resultant, as
experience has proceeded, of one discovery after another of secrets inherent in working together. It involves utilisation to the maximum of the
common desire to do better, of the principle of growing up sith an enterprise, of the conviction that the common man holda the line of departure
for progress. Besically, therefore, observable material festures that
make Santa Barbara different from other communities are the product of
the group mind embrsoing the teacher, the pupil, and the adult leyman.
Back in 1938, 1200 teachers in Capis essayed to make Ami (second
rice erop), discovered by an enterprising citizen to be workable, a suecess in the province. It was a sucoess by 1940. It nas the result mainly of teacher-group effort directed from the capital. It partook of the
neture of a “drive" or "campaign", vith little use of local initiative.
The drive was authoritatian, akin in pattern to olean-up-week ond similer national efforts that are so ineffectual, the drive was suecessful
anly because it exploited the profit motive. This was followed, on the
same principle of "drive" and on the same manner of centralized organisation, by another province-vide program of community sanitation, home
besutification, and food production. Then mar intervened.
Late in 1946, a similar program vas broached to tenohers of Iloilo.
Through 1947 and 1948 the principle en shich the ney educational effort was
based received general teacher approval, but ita practice did not. Reason:
the work was in eddition to the already heavy teaching load. It soon became evident that the first battles of the community school must be won


in the minds of the teachers by resolving the problem of teaching load.
It also became clear about the middle of 1948 that the continued general approach on a province-vide basis was not offering solutions to
this problem. Some progress was being made in scattered areas, but it
was painfully slon, and teachers in those aress undertook community work
grudgingly. The work was, in fact, in addition to the regular teaching
load.
Through trial and error, three faots stood out by the middle of 1948:
(1) a conmunity school cannot be established by teacher-group effort alone
(2) it cannot be established as long as teachers viex their classroom work
as entirely apart from, and vithout meaning to, community labors; and (3)
it cannot be established by suthoritarian administration, geared to having all schools in a vide area goose-step upon dictation, or even upon
persuasion.
To solve these large problems, it was necessary that a school lead
the may. In the first place, to make certain of suecess, there must be
a cooperative spirit where the school was located. In the second place,
the key school man in the locality must have vision and the ability to
make teachers see that vision. Santa Barbara met these requirements.
Henceslao Sison, Principal of the Santa Barbara High School, was to be
the key school man.
The high school borroved a feature of the agricultural-high-school
type of program which, previously, vas adopted by the abellana High
Sohool, that is, in general, academic classes in the morning, vocational
and physical education classes in the afternoon, or vice versa. It was
thought this progrom might lend itself to effective school-community


-10 -


work, teochers and students having more time to visit or work in, homes.
The school undertook a community survey dealing vith the conditions
of disposal of human waste, cleonliness of surroundinga, use to whioh
yards vere put, ond housekeeping proctices. That survey revealed in
October, 1943 thet only 353 of the 650 homes in the poblacion hed sanitory toilets, that yards vere none too olean, often exhibiting standing
black water under the kitchens, that too many yards nere non-productive,
thot the inside walls of homes vere often plastered with old calendors or
vith magazine pictures or vith Manila paper full of photographa, that many homes lacked partitions for privoay, that in most cases they lacked
the little feminine touches that should make them attroctive.
The notural offshoot was for the vocetional and home economios departments of the school to make a vigorous tie-up betreen alassroom tenching and home practice. Teachers of social-acience elasses, and the olasses themselves, undertook school extension work with adults on the construction of sanitory toilets.
Sometime after this community work started, severol homes made appreciable progress in making improvements. A poor home, one belonging
to o sweepstakes-ticket seller mhose doughter went to high school, made
an unusually rapid progress in robbing poverty of its depressing sight.
Students visited that home, and with them vere some of their parents.
That wes one secret of group dynamios thet turned the triok for Santo
Borbara. Time and again, in other sommunities and in varied forms,
this technique has been used as a leverage for infont community effort,
end it has not yet been known to foil.
is home after home begon to fallin line, the high school tenchers
advanced in social attitude. Answers to a questionnaire were overwhelm

-11 -
ing in fovor of the continuonce of the community effort. In general, individual weights of teachers had incrensed, and the testimony was, "He
enjoy ourselves visiting vith parents." Tests administered to five high
schools of about the same size, Santa Barbara included, ranked the latter second place. Its acedemio work was not impoired;
By Januery, 1949 an attempt wos made to induce the elementary school
to join the high school in the work. Like a ghost, the fear of tencher
overload rose to confront everyone and sundry. The plan was not pressed,
but it was never given up. At this time there wos one heartening development: Local municipel officials were beginning to rally bahind the movement.
By February, 1949 o resurvey shomed that 252 more homes had construated sanitary toileta. Vegetable and flover gardens were making
their appearonce. Fomilies took pride in shoming their homes to sohool
supervisors, who, themselves, did not disguise surprise at the rapid
trensformotion being srought. One division supervisor exclaimed, referring to toilet construction, "Even thet alone!"
Tomord the close of the school year 1948-1949, the ghost of teocher
overlood began to bhrink before the ayes of the elementary sghool teacha
ers. The effort of 32 high school teachers was producing stupendous resulta, and all this time they had held out. They made attempts to join
in the community labor. Other government service agencies took notioe,
too, and prominent citizens, some of vhom were formerly lakewarm, took
a positive attitude in fevor of community uplift.
Santa Barbora is a leader-community in Iloilo. It achieved that
distinction through a series of school-community cooperative aots deli

- 12


berately plonned to get it moving on its own porer. Its achievements
in senitation, home beautification, and food production are resultants
of developed human resources, compounded in growth through the exercise
of group effort. Viexed from this standpoint, it may be expected that
Santa Barbera will apply the fulerum of conmunity uplift successively
to greater and greoter educational ventures. It may remain a leadercommunity, what nith its head start. But there are other schools that
are now collaborating with municipal officials and service agencies,
each vith its resources in humon and meterial gifts; they, too, ore beginning to move on their omn power. Since they are profiting from the
mistakes of Santa Barbara, their rote of progress, ofter a fair start,
may even be faster.


- 13 -
THE MALABO COMMUNITY CENTER
By Edith Carson
Siliman University, Dumaguete, Negros Orfantal
Sterted as a relief project after the wer, the Malabo Community Center, or Centro sa Ka-us-magan (Center of Progress), has developed until
it hes become s community center with an experimental school. There have
been many interesting changes in the two and one-half years the center
has been in operation.
Our interest in Malabo detes back to the beginning war days of 1941-42
vhen we vere looking for s mountain community to nhich the recorda and personnel of the university could be transferred. Malabo was chosen as one
such evacuation spot and became a center during the war, not onl as the
hesdquarters for university work carried on throughout the island and
neighboring Mindanso, but still later as sest for the civil government
and guerrilla forces of the area.
During the early part of 1942, four citizens from Malabo asked the two
American ladies, who had moved into the barrio, to fulfill a long-cherished
dream of the community by starting a school for the mountain children.Aocordingly, -elasses were begun by Miss Arnaldy Ramos and Miss Modesta Hughes,—
two Siliman students who were not eble to return to their homes n MindansoA school building was later erected by the people in the locality and-upon
the organization of a civil government for the resistance area, this sehool
was recognized as one of the first schools under the goverrmentof "Free
Negros."
In following up the history of the school ve found thet-only one of
the four original petitioners in 1942- survived-the-mar. She is-e widouwith eleven—children and three grand-children.


-IA -
After the barrio had begun to recuperste a little from the ravages
of war, two women from Malabo came to Dumaguete to ask that we again open
s school. It was decided that a meeting of the entire community should
be called on March 1, 1947. At that time the parents unanimously expressed their desire to have a school similar to the one they had during
the war. They volunteered to furnish all tha materials for the building
and to be responsible for its construction and repair.
The program for the Community Center has been based on the needs of
the community as a whole. It follows the educational philosophy that
school, home, and community should be integrated into one program toward
eccepted goals of enlightenment and improvement. Young and old have equal
opportunities. The curriculum is broad and elastic. In order to secure
time for community activities, it has been necessary to sacrific some
elements of formal instruction for children. The name "Community Center"
is used, therefore, rather than "school", although the project is essentially one of education. We have attempted to work along the following lines:
I. Eduestion
a. Classes in the tool subjects
b. Literacy classes
II. Health
a. First-aid dispensary and hospitalization
for needy cases
b. Health instruction
III. Home-making
a. Foods
b. Sewing
o. Home improvement
gata a
IV. Economics
s. Agriculture
b. Home industries
c.. Cooperstive organizstions
V. Cheracter Building
s. Citizenship
b. Recreation
o. Religion


- 15 -
Among the interesting groups of the center are the young men and
adults who attend evening classes. The young men were the older boys
of the community who have left the day school because they have matured
enoughtto be responsible for the family plowing and planting. Since
these young men and adults want more educ ation, they are anxious to
continue their studies at might.
The literacy class for adults has attracted considerable interest
and many adults of the community have learned to read and write. The
first year the center was opened, we were preud of the eleven members of
the neighborhood sho were sble to pass the literacy requirementa and who
registered for voting. Last year thirty-eight were able to caat their
votes. Since thare are only fifty-tmo homes in the berrio, this record
meent that Malabo was well represented in the presidential election of
1919.
The community is much interested in the Credit Union organized by
the people. Moncy is loaned by the Union at a reasonable interest, thus
saving these folko from paying an exhorbitant monthly interest formerly
charged-by a "loan shark" in a neighboring barrio.
There are many changes for the better in the neighborhood besides
the interest shoun by young and old in education. Young people get
together at leas: ence a veek and play games instead of going to the
gambling booths of the Sunday market. The whole community gathers one
night a month for a social evening in addition to the monthly maetings
of the Credit Uaion and the Center of Progress. The adults are spending more time in contivating the fields or improving their homes and


l


less in idleness. A very significant change is that the members of
the community have become more milling to cooperate with individual
vembers or families in the neighborhood who are in need of assistance.
Malabo has become a neighborhood sharing mutual interests where all
might nork together for the good of the whole community.


-17


THE RADA READING CENTER
By Angustis Seville
Zone Chairman, Oton High School
Oton, Iloilo
The establishment of the Rade Reeding Center is on integral pert
of the community velfere work in this municipality. During the early
days of the campaign, the opinion of the people was sought on the feasibility of establishing a reading center. Indifference not only from
the mell-to-do but also from the poor mho constitute the mein bulk of
the peopla in this sono mat the proposal. There were a fen, hovever,
who sam in the project a means to distract the attention of most of them
from their reguler pastime, drinking, gambling and gossiping. There
is a gambling center in this zone, s temporary shack where the people
gether morning and afternoon. The most lamentable part is that many
children are now addicted to gambling through the influence of their
elders.
With those few who were interested in putting up the reading center
the project was started. Just across the gambling shack is a small
hut which was formerly o tuba store. When it wes known that the
owner mas planning to remove it to be made into a toilet, the Zone
Council asked him to donste it to the community. He is merely a tuba
gatherer but realizing the value of the project, he readily agreed to
donate it as his contribution to the improvement of the community.
Materials mere donated and. the people including the students made
the necessary repair. Then donstions of magazines and newspapers
in English and in the vernacular, comic magazines, clips, a magazine
stand and a small table, etc., were received. Nith these reading


- 18 -


materials, the reading center was suspiciously opened. The resction of
the leading citizens was commendable. When they saw many people, young
end old, in the center morning and efternoon, many gave their baok issues
of magazines, newspapers and other reading matter.
Today, instead of the crond gathering in the gambling center, gospiping, gambling and drinking tuba as they used to do before, we find
ner neople browsing over the meager reading materials. Undoubtedly, the
center has opened the eyes of the people to a new vision; it has made
them realize the value of the printed matter in their daily life. It
is believed that the center will inspire the illiterates to learn how
to read and write in order to enjoy the companionshap of the printed
materials.
As it is, there is nothing in the size, appearance or equirment
of the center to be proud of. However, we see in it a beginning of s
growing community consciousness, an individuel awareness for selfimprovement and dynamic group activity so essential in the democratic
way of life. The mental relaxation it provides to all classes of people and the interest it has aroused among the well-to-do class to promote the literacy aspect of community education are worthwhile achievements of the center.
The Zone Cofncil has a plan to enlarge the Center and soquire more
equipment through voluntary contribution or donation. There are people
who have signified their intention to donate materials for a better
building. From the spirit which the project has crested in the hearts
of the people, the Rada Reading Center of Oton has a bright future.


- 19
ADULT EDUCATION, A PTA PROUECT IN JIMALALUD


By Francisco C. Alcantata
District Supervisor, Jimalalud, Negros Oriental
Among the adult educ ation projects undertaken in the distriot
through the cooperation of the P.T.A, organizations are the following!
1. Literacy instruction
2. Citizenship eduostion
3. Community sanitation
4. Recrestional activities
5. Vocational training and guidance


The first step takan prior to the organization of adult education
elasses nas the formation of local adult education committees. Esch
committee was composed of a chairman who is either the P.T.A. president
or the barrio teniente, s secretery, and five other members who are mostly officers of the P.T.A. organizstions. Esch of the five other members
is at the same time a chairman of one of the following five committees:
Committse on Literacy Instruction, Committee on Citizenship Education,
Committee on Community Sanitation, Committee on Recreational Activities,
and Committee on Vocational Treining and Guidance. Every sub-committee
chairman shares the responsibility in the carrying out of that phase of
the adult educstion program assigned to his committee. The chairman of
the sub-committee on Community Sanitation, for instance, gives lectures
on topics that concern health and sanitation. The chairman of the subcommittee on Recreational Activities looks after the preperation of musical numbers in community singing during community assembly programs,
while the chairman of the sub-committee on Citizenship Edusation gives
lectures on subjects that have to do with citizenship educstion.
Literacy instruction is the dominant sim of adult education. This
phase-of adult education is handled solaly by school teachers. Early in


20 -


August, 1949, many classes in literacy instruction were organized in
the schools of the district including the two central schools.
Finanging
In view of the faot that st the start of the school yeer the PTA's
were faced with many financial problems like the construction and repair of school buildings, the making or repairing of seats for pupils,
the construction of fences and playground apparatus, etc., the P.T.A.
organizations were not in a position to sppropriate any amount from its
funds for saleries of adult education teachers and for the purchase of
supplies and materials that were needed in adult educstion classes. Fortunately for Jimalalud, we have a group of teachers who are ever willing
to carry extra load for the welfare of the less fortunate citizens.
Through the request of the central school principals in the district, the
teachers willingly consented to hendle the adult classes in literacy instruction and citizenship education outside .of their regular school periods. To reduce the burden of these teachers each teacher teaches only
one adult education subject or course during the week. A class in literacy
instruction, for instance, recites reading and writing on Monday under
one teacher, arithmetic on Wednesday under another teacher, and social
studies on Friday under another teacher. In schools where classes are
held at night some teachers are philanthropic enough to provide their
own classes vith light instead of bothering the adult pupils with contributions for kerosene.
Supervision of Adult Education Classes
The writer, who usually slept in the barrios in the course of his visits to the barrio school, hed all the opportunities of observing the


- 21 -


adult educstion classes at work. His presence inspired the teachers to
teach and the adult pupils to attend regularly. In Bagtio Berrio School,
Ls Libertad, he mas impressed by the enthusiasm displayed by the adult
educ ation teacher, Miss Aurora Garces, and by the interest of the adult
pupils while the class was in session. He had eccasion to observe even
the National Language used in their conversation. In Jimalalud Central,
he was impressed by the "Good Night" greetings in English by the adult
pupils after their classes in the evening.
Achievements
Among the notenorthy achievements of the P.T.A. adult education program are the following
1. The improvement of community living through!
a. improved home sanitation and home beautification.
b. greater interest shown by the people in the promotion of community health and child care.
c. grester production of vegetables, poultry, pigs,
gosts, fruits, and other food products.
2. Better realization by the people not only of their rights but
elso of their duties to the community as shown by!
a. their prompt payment of taxes.
b. their willingness to obey municipal ordinances, laws, executivesorders, regulations, etc.
o. the decrease in the number of persons violating the law
prohibiting the use of dynamite in fishing.
3. The promotion of many adult pupils in literacy instruction.


Problema
With the willingness of the teachers to handle adult education olasses outside of the regular school hours, the problem of raising funds for
selaries of adult education teschers was pertly solved. There were, nevertheless, other problems that the adult education classes had to encounter, namely, the problem of enrolment, the problem of securing adult
education tesching materials, and the problem of providing the adult elas

- 22 -


ses with the needed facilities such as light, etc. The illiterates were
reluctant to attend the adult education classes for various reasoss.
Some of the reasons advanced are that they are too busy on their farms
or at home doing household work, or that nobody would be left in their
homes if they attend adult educstion classes especially if they are
held in the evening. Many of those who reluctantly enrolled early in
August, 1949, left classes before the end of the querter. So difficult was the problem of attendance that even the help of the municipal officials was of no avail.
Being unvilling to attend adult education classes, they mill be
doubly unwilling if they are to be bothered with the purchase of
adult education teaching materials and other things to facilitate their
learning.
Recommendationg
1. Lams and ordinances should be passed making it a requirement
for all illiterate adults to attend adult education classes and
imposing penalties for violators.
2. The laws prohibiting gambling should be strictly enforced becsuse many people prefer to stay in gambling dens or in "tabos" where
"hantak" is tolerated instead of attending adult education classes.
3. More adult education teaching materials should be issued to the
field to lighten the work of the adult education teachers and to facilitate the learning of the adults.


ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES OF THE
LA UNION HIGH SCHOOL
From the Report of Mrs. Belen S. Arguelles
Principal, La Union High School
The adult education program in the high school started with s
series of community assemblies in the different barrios of San Fernando last year. To esch barrio nas assigned e group of teachers
coming from the verious departments of the school: Science, English,
History, Home Economica, Vocational, etc., to give informational
lectures of interest to the people of the community. Among other things,
the value of having an enlightened citizenry in a democracy was emphasized.
The faculty was, divided into five groups, each with a chsirman, in
order to conduct this extra-curricular activity most effectively.
Assigned as cheirren were Mr. Mariano Pocsidio, for Lingsat; Mr.
Simeon Flores, Tanquigan; Mr. Anscleto Lsudencia, Memeltac; Mr.
Raymundo Sabad. Poro; and Mr. Antonio Ancheta, Pagudpud.
The teachers conducted lectures which aim to broaden the knowledge of the rural folk. Mr. Ancheta's group dwelt on food production stressing the importance of poultry, hog-raising, irrigation, and fishing in the community. They talked on cleanliness
and orderliness in school which should be carried over to the
home, and on the relation of parent-teacher associations to the
adult education program in the somnunities and the country at large.
Mr. Pocsidio and his group discussed the mays and means of improving
life in a rural community, the importance of literacy, and current


24
events. The rest stressed on the advantages of knowing how to read
and write in either English or Tagalog, and on how the schools are
helping the people of rural communities to improve their lot.
Some men in the barrios participated in the discussion by unfolding their most important problems. They are discontented with
the behavior of the youths of today for some have soquired vicious
habits of drinking liquor, smoking, and gambling, all of which result in undesirable conduct, discourtesy and disobedience. Some
brought out also the need of good irrigation systems. The remark
on the problem of perents finding no time for study was answered
by s suggestion that instead of chatting with neighbors at night
or during leisure hours they should read books and magazines or
listen to the adult educstion teachers.
Some adult classes were held every Sunday afternoon by publio
school teachers. This method was not very productive of results.
The adult students mithout constant guidance of their teachers
did not always try to practice what they had learned in Sunday
classes. Sometimes they were not interested to attend their classes
because they preferred going to the cockpits or "tupaan" (hitting
coconuts).
Hence there is need for a method which would enable the teacher and the adults to be together at a period when the latter are
not busy. The solution is the "Esch-One-Teach-One” method. This
method necessitated the cooperation of all teacher-advksers of the
various sections of the schools. They had to encourage their
students to locate illiterates and teach them the rudiments of


reading, writing and arithmetic as well as matter of general information. They cosched them on hon teaching adults should be done,
reminding them that they are just like first graders, although
they are more mature and experienced.
Not all students were sppointed teachers because there were
no illiteretes living around or near their homes. Sometimes the
number of student teachers is an index to the number of illiterates
in the neighborhood. T encourage the students to do their best
in tutoring the illiterate adults they were given certain school
credits. From time to time they were checked up on the progress
they have made nith their students. When the progress of the adults
was thought to be satisfactory, a test on the lessons taught mas
administered in the high school. Not many adults could come to
take the test because of the distance and the cost of transportation.
The old people also feored their being ridiculed. Another method
of administering the test was used later. The student teachers
administered the test themselves in the homes of the adults. For
this purpose a cheirman of the testing program was designated to
take charge of making the tests reliable and valid.
 --O---
Because of his social environment, the illiterate is usually a person of fixed habits, ignorant and intolerable of alternative ways, limited in experience, and hidebound in outlook.


- Ruth Kotinsky


- 26 -


A PRE-WAR COURSE IN PRACTICAL FARMING IN ILOILO
From the Report of Mr. Policarpo Padlan, Agricultural Supervisor, Iloilo
"I owe my present success in farming to the practical lessons I
have learned during my attendance in Practical Farming class", so revealed one of the members of the first groduating class of the course
in Practical Farming conducted in Nababas a barrio in Iloilo. This and
similar comments show how the rural folk in the farm districts of Iloilo value practical forming classes and how these classes have benefited the local fermers. To know more about this course, let us trace
the beginning of this undertaking.
In October, 1940 the Provincial Agricultural Extension Service
in Iloilo of the Bureau of Plant Industry opened classes in Prectical
Farming for farmers vithout regora to sex and educational qualifications.
To make the course functional and to bring the school close to the people who needed practical instruction, the Barrios of Igcocolo and Nahapay in Guimbal, and Tagpo-an and Nagba in Tubungan were made centers
for this agricultural project. First, the people were made to realize
the relation of improved farming to living standards of farmers. With
greater farm production, living conditions should improve. Men and
women rallied to the project, enrolled, organized themselves into clubs
and elected their club officials. They started and carried out the
project under the guidance and direction of Mr. Loredo C. Jamendre,
the local Agricultural Inspector. These four groupsof farmers had a
total membership of 125 ranging in ages from 18 to 45. They were
given individual parcels and common lots to cultivate and plant to


21 -


rice, corn, vegetables and fruit trees. The course was for four months,
each class meeting every other day during the week from 800 to 11:00 A.M.
The men and women farmers utilized all the time they could spare
from their regular occupations to learn new things including the correct uses of improved farm implements and tools especially the plow.
They slowly but surely acquired knowledge and experience in more scientifio farming methods. They were taught effective control of plant
pests and diseases, proper cultivation of verious plants, erop rotation,
fertilisstion and seed selection. They natmrally scquired greater
interest in and better attitude toward the new and scientific farming
prodedures.
These small farmers were taught in their centers not only the
Aimproved practical work but also cooperative and ecucational practices
in family and farm life. As they increased their production, they
were instructed in profitable marketing of their rice, vegetables and
fruits. Instruction was also given on hov they should help to propagate
their improved methods of farming among other farmers mho did not have
the opportunity to enroll in the prectical ferming course.
The following is another elucidating comment by the President of
Nahapey Farming Club on the substantial result of the prectical farming elass in the Nahapay Center established before the wer;
"In the course of my going around in the municipality of Guimbal,
Iloilo, during and after the war, I have noted a great change in the
method of farming of my classmstes in Practical Farming Class conducted


- 28 -


in Nahapay before the war. As s result of this training, my fellow farmers have increased their farm production, learned to diversify their crops, began to use fertilizers, practised seed selection,
crop rotation, soil conservation, and asexuel propagation of plants,
learned the benefits of cooperative planting and realized the
disadvantage of caingin system. They have come to recognize better their responsibilities to their community, and they expressed
apprecistion of the services of the personnel of the Provincial Agricultural Extension Service of the Buresu of Plant Industry in Iloilo.”
There are certainly in every farming community some enterprising
individuals who are interested in improving their old farming practices
and methods. They should be encouraged and given facility to olub together for a practical farming class in some convenient center, where
the Agricultural Inspector of the Buresu of Plant Industry and the
adult education supervisor or teacher may work together to open a
practical farming class similar to those conducted in Iloilo before
the war.


-- 00O - -


Workers' education is a division of adult
eduestion that exists in its oun right, sets
its own objectives, and develops its oun type
of leader.


- Harry A. Overstreet
Bonaro W. Overstreet


- 29 -


THE TAMBOLILID COCONUT
By Melanio R. Calinisan
Assistant Plant Pathologist
Bureau of Plant Industry, Manila
The term 'tambolilid" is a simplified local expression referring
to a certsin type of variety of coconut, Cocos Nucefera Maub., which
means dwarf, stock and robust. Its whereabouts came to light during
s survey of the Bicol region, where a good number of bearing Tambolilid trees, nay a plantation, was found in the barrio of Sugod, Municipality of Bacacay, Alboy, located near the seashore.
As far as the writer knows no work on this particular veriety of
coconut has hitherto been published. For this simple reason, the Tambolilid coconut is known only to a relatively few farmers. The present
preliminary study was undertaken with the object in view to popularizing
the Tembolilid by bringing it to the limelight omong the sociological
culture of the mellknown coconut varieties which have already gsined
fairly wide distribution throughout the Philippines.
History, Origin and Present Distribution
According to reliable information, the first Tambolilid coconut
plantation in the Province of Albay and probably the biggest now in the
entire Bicol region was ouned by the late Captein Marciano Penalosa of
the town of Bacacay. It consists of about 2,000 trees. Further inquiries
revealed that the owner obtained the first planting materials from San
Miguel Island, about one and a half to two miles across the ses. Realizing the grest commercial possibility of this type of coconut, the late
Captain Marciano (populerly known by that name) had the foresight of propagating it in s big scale. From Bacacay, the Tambolilid was introdused
to the neighboring tomns of Malilipot, Lbog, Tobaco and Guinobatan.


- 30 -
Probably it is also being grown in Albay municipalities not yet surveyed.
As a matter of fact, this particular variety of coconut has already crossed
the Albay-Sorsogon boundary. The first introduction of about 300 Tambolilid seedlings to Haciende Capiliha, Juban, Sorsogon, dated back as
early as 1934. The second shipment of 200 nuts was planted in Sisigon,
Mstnog, in 1942, and at present about 30 trees are in fullbearing. Lately, some 50 trees were observed well in Pangpang, Donsol, Sorsogon, but
they are intended chiefly for tuba-making purposes. In june, 1947, 10
well selected nuts mere sent to the Buresu of Plant Industry, Manila, for
analysis. In October, 1947, 30 nuts for planting purposes vere shipped
to San Pablo Coconut Experiment Station, Laguna, upon the request of the
Director of Plant Industry. Information was received that there are also
Tambolilid coconut trees in Gamarines Sur, which according to the informant
ere indigenous to that province. As the situetion stands now, the writer
is inclined to believe that the Tambolilid is planted not so much for
commercial but chiefly for ornamental purposes.
Description
Before venturing to describe the Tambolilid veriety of coconut it
seems necessary to mention in passing its probable origin. Judging from
the external sppearance of the tree, the habit of its growth, the shape
and formstion of the trunk, the size and color of the nuts, the characteristio intervals of the soars on the trunk, etc., there is sufficient
evidence that in all probability the Tambolilid is a natural hybrid betmeen the ordinary variety of coconut and the Coco Nino (The Coco Nino
in the Bicol regions is locally known as Pugai or Lincoranay.) It vill
be noted that the desirable qualities of both parents have been happily


- 31.
combined in the offspring or hybrid now known as the Tambolilid. The
dwarf nature of the Tambolilid has been in all likelihood inherited from
the Coco Nino. It is believed that the big size of the nuts has been
inherited from the ordinary variety. As to color of the nuts, three distinct types existi the green, the brown and the light brown or intermediary. As to form and size of the trunk, there are two types, the big
trunk with bulging base and the small trunk with proportionate non-bulging
base. The former is the characteristic of the ordinary coconut, while
the latter resembles that of the Coco Nino which seems to be the typical
Tombolilid variety. Itis important to note that in some of the coconut
plantations in the Bicol region it is not unusual to find one or two and
sometimes several Coco Nino trees growing side by side or under the tall
ordinary coconut. This condition obtaining in the field might offer satisfactory explanation for the alleged accidental or natural hybridization between the ordinery coconut as one parent and th. Goco Nino as the
other parent., The greater probability is that the ordinary coconut, because of its height, might have shedded its pollen grains to the receptive stigma of the dwarf Coco Nino, thus hybridization is sccomplished.
The second probability is that some insects agents might unknowingly
transfer the pollen greins of the Coco Nino flowers to the receptive
stigma of the ordinary coconut, thereby effecting cross-pollination. In
other words, there might have occured a natural reciprocal cross-pollination between the ordinary coconut and the Coce Nino variety. That would
explain perhaps the reason why the trunk of some of the hybrid Tambolilid is akin to the ordinary coconut while the trunk of the typical Tambolilid trees resembles that of the Coco Nino.


- 32


The Tambolilid veriety of coconut is an early bearer. It bears as
carly as four years when the tree is hardly half of a meter from the
ground. This is the characteristic also of the Coco Nino. The ordinery
coconut variety, on the other hand, bears fruit at an average of seven
years. The other important characteristic of the Tambolilid is its being
very productive. Actual counts reached as high as twenty-one big-sized
nuts in a bunch. A planter reported thirty-one nuts in a very extraordinary big bunch as his highest count.
Some pertinent data on the tambolilid coconut are given hereunder!
Average height of a e year old bearing Tambolilid ---—- 3.65 ft.
Average circumference of trunk 1 ft, above ground —----39.25 in.
Average circumference of trunk 5 ft, above ground —-—-30.25 in.
Difference in size between base and upper trunk --- 9.00in.
--——17.05 ft.
Average height of 14-year old Tambolilid
Average circumference of trunk 1 ft, above ground -—---41.25 in.
Average circumference of trunk 5 ft. above ground -—---30.75 in.
Difference in size between base and uppor trunk ----10,50 in.
--—--37.80 ft.
Average height of 30-year old Tambolilid
Average circumference of trunk 1 ft, above ground ———39.00 in.
Average circumference of trunk 5 ft, above ground —-—28.50 in.
Difference in size between base and upper trunk —-—-10.50 in.
——-—-43.00 ft.
Highest Tambolilid tree over 30 years old
Average circunference of 125 full-grown Tambolilid
————22.75 in.
nuts with husk
Advantage of Planting Tambolilid Coconuts
Among the advantages that may be mentioned in favor of the Tambolilid coconut are as follows!
1. It is an early bearing variety. The Tambolilid bears fruit as
early as four years, while the ordinery coconut on the average of seven
years.
2. It is a very productive tree. The Tambolilid variety has been
observed producing more nuts per bunch than the ordinary coconut under
the seme field conditions.


- 22


3. The tree is less susceptible to typhoon destruction. On aecounit
of its lon nature, the damage caused by the last typhoon "Jean" is
comporatively less on the Tambalilid than on the ordinary ceconut in
the same plantation.
4. The Tambolilid nuts for planting purposeg command a better
Prive than the ordinaxy coconut. Because of its Yarity, it commands a
higher price.
S. Horvesting is less laborious and less axpensive. The regaon
is obvious; the tree is lon, henca, less time is spent in gathering
the nuts.
6. The tree is casily treated when threatened with any serious
plont pests and disaoses.
7. Tambolilid serves a dual purpose; for ornamental and as a money
making orop.
8. Last but the most importont from tha standnoint of a plant
pathologist - the Tambolilid veriety of coconut has been observed reaistant to cadang-cadang disease.
- -OOo-
The aim of adult educetion should
be to maka life happier, simpler and
more active.


F. Wartenweiler


- 3k -
CO-OPERATIVES AND FUMDAMENTAL EDUCATION
(From Unesco Courier)
One among every dozen persons in the world is to-day being helped
to attain a better life through sharad learring in co-operstive organizations. In Indis alone there are some 175,000 co-operotives, with a
membership of well over 10,000,000, getting the elements of fundamental
education as pert of various forms of economic community. On all five
continents, from central Australia to Zululand, from Germany and Gary,
Indiana, to Papua and the Gold Coast, vest numbers of men and women ere
living out the intimate conneetion between "Co-operatives and Fundamental
Education."
Struggle Against Ignorance and Inertia
The Co-operative Society is formed to serve man's economio needs.
The problem of earning a living is common to all men and the message of
the co-operative movement is that men, by grouping themselves in a society, produce and sell more efficiently. Thus, when a co-operative movement is formed the members are striving to improve their economic conditions. This has a two-fold educational effect. First, working together
in a group is itself a most valuable form of adult education and second,
a rising standard of living means that batter educational facilities can
be provided for the rising generation.
The co-operative movement can be regorded as n firm ally in the
struggle agsinst ignorance and inertia. The earliest acts of co-opera

- 35


tors have always and everywhere been to procure for themselves and for
their children the means of education. Experience has shown that among
beckward populations, co-operatives simply through their working, and
independently of. their economic results, have contributed to the intellectual, moral and civic training of their members. To work, purchase,
sell and create together is to think together, and to think together
is to form communicable ideas, that is to day rational ideas.
In French West Africa and in the French Cameroons, for example,
school co-operatives are training children in handicrafts. Among the
3,000,000 Gonds, a tribe living primitively in the jungles of the Central Province of Indis, a co-operstive called the Gond Sewak Sangh
works mith the government to set up primary schools where children are
taught crafts and trades; to win over the consent of the adults - a
primary element in fundamental education - the ancient Karma songs
and Shails dances are used as part of the methods of group persuasion.
Keeping Community Spirit Alive
In underdeveloped regions and communities, the educetional methods of the co-operatives held establish new social tissues to replace
old, dying ones, and provide new bases in better living for the community spirit kept alive by ancient traditions. Many of the old groupings are used in the creation of new ones: the Timezgida of Berbers,
the Hoh-Hui of China, the Chittis of India, the secret societies of
Equetorial Africa, and the organizstions of the Braccianti of Italy,
to name only a few.


While the co-operatives are an economio movement that uses education as an instrument, they are at the same time an educstional movement that stresses the economio bases of learning, especially smong
primitive peoples. “The main aim is not to make money but to make men",
seid Father Bernhard Huss who was largely responsible for developing
credit co-operatives among the Bantus of South Africa. "Co-operation",
said C. F. Strickland, "is sdult eduestion in the business of life."
Eduestion Defeated Sugar Crisis
On the Ivory Coast, Africans have bettered their lives by learning how to use modern methods of preparing palm oil. In Kenye, eduestion
taught that cattle breeding could serve a better purpose than the traditional display of vealth. On the island of Mauritius, educstion defeated a sugar crisis by spreading knowledge of mixed farming. In Indis
and Indonesia, it tought the advantages of nen erop composts and chemical
fertilizers, and in the Punjob and Bengal regions of land reform and irrigation.
Dr. Spencer Hatoh, a veteran adult education leoder, is quoted as
summing up the problem of fundemental education in backward areos in the
formulo: spiritual, mental, physical, social and economio poverty form
a single whole which must be attacked from all sides at once.
In advanced areas, the great task of the co-operatives in the field
of education is the teaching of leaders and teachers. The extraordinary
work being done to this end is shown through descriptions of activities
of sueh institutions as the Extension Department of Social Education at


-


Lavel University, Quebec, the Bombay Provincial Co-operative Institute in India, and many ethers. Moreover, in at lgast tuenty-six
countries, for the mest part.in Eurepe and the americas, there ore
school co-operatives whose purpeses are directly educstional and
cultural.
Self-help in World's Backward Areas
But it is in the backward areas that effects of the co-cperative
movement sre closest ta the primury goal of fundamental education,
such as helplng the peesant co-operatives of the african Geld Cosst,
Nigeria, Tanganyika beceme practical professional schools for, small
fermers; hor improved living, working and thinking grow out of the
co-operative schooling among the sbores of millions of members of cooperatives in India, Ceylon, China, the Federatad Malay States,
Austrelis and the South Sea Islands.
Changing Foulty Living Habits
In such regions men are not only freed from usurera and profiteers but from themselves and their oen bad habits - from feulty habi
of living, lack of hygience, inefficient methods of ferming, competitive extrevagance of ceremanial exkpenditures. Instead of squandering
mealth on firework displays, alaborote festivals and tribal rituels;
primitive peoples learn erderliness, foresight, punctuality, and a
strict respect for engagement enteredinto. They send their children
to scheols,-veccinete then, improve the general health by sanitation
and hygiane.


38 -
TRENUS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD
Another Uneseo Seminar on Adult Eduontion
& Unesco Seminar on "Methods and Techniques of Adult Education
for International Understanding" vill be held in Austria this summer.
Delegates to the Seminar have been requested to prepare socounts of
experience relating to (1) methods of adult edusation for internetional
understanding and (2) materiala relating to the akills of international
conference and group study.
(Adult Eduestion Bulletin, Feb. 1950)
The Broadening Gonggnt of adult Education
Modern adult edueation has expanded beyond the might school
concept. The adult educator must become an educational statesman and
leader in his oun right. He must be oapabla of thinking and organising o comprehensive program of edusational anolysis and planning.
nadult education, as every adult leoder knows, is not the relatively
simple job of opening school doors to adults vishing standord course
offerings. It is a complex job calling for involvement of many individuals and groups in a task of eduentional diagnosis, fact finding,
planning, orgenizing, training and teaching." (Adult Education Bulletin, Feb. 1950)
Four Major Trenda of Adult Edugation
The growing importance of adult educstion as indicated in the
current literature on the subject shons four fundomental trends in its


33


3. The tree is less susceptible to typhoon destruction. Un aacount
of its low nature, the damage caused by the last typhoon "Jean" is
comparatively less on the Tambolilid than on the ordinary coconut in
the same plantation.
4. The Tambolilid nuts for planting purposes commend a better
price than the ordinary coconut. Because of its mgity, it commands a
higher price.
5. Horvesting is less laborious ond less expensive. The reeson
is obvious; the tree is low, hence, less time is spent in gathering
the nuts.
6. The tree is easily treated when threntened with any serious
plant pests and disenses.
7. Tambolilid serves a dual purpose; for ornamental and as a money
making orop.
8. Last but the most imnortant from tha standpoint of a plant
pathologist - the Tambolilid veriety of coconut has been observed resistant to cadang-cadang disease.
- -OUo-
The sim of adult education should
be to make life happier, simpler and
more active.


- F. Wartenweiler


CO-OPERATIVES AND FUNDAMENTAL EDUCATION
(From Unesco Courier)
One emong every dozen persons in the world is to-dey being helped
to attain s better life through shared learning in co-operstive organizations. In Indis alone there are some 175,000 co-operatives, with a
membership of well over 10,000,000, getting the elements of fundamental
educotion as pert of various forms of economic commurity. On all five
continents, from central Australia to Zululand, from Germany and Gary,
Indiona, to Papue and the Gold Coast, vast numbers of men end vomen are
living out the intimote connection between “Co-operatives and Fundamental
Eduestion."
Struggle Against Ignorance and Inertia
The Co-operative Society is formed to serve man's economic needs.
The problem of earning a living is common to all men and the message of
the co-operative movement is that men, by grouping themselves in a society, produce and sell more efficiently. Thus, when s co-operative movement is formed the members are striving to improve their economic conditions. This has a two-fold educational effect. First, working together
in a group is itself a most valuable form of adult education and second,
a rising standard of living mesns that better eduentional facilities con
be provided for the rising generation.
The co-operstive movement can be regarded as a firm ally in the
struggle against ignorance and inertia. The earliest acts of co-opera

35
tors have always and everywhere been to procure for themselves and for
their children the means of education. Experience has shown that among
beckward populations, co-operatives simply through their working, and
independently of, their economic results, have contributed to the intellectual, moral and civie training of their members. To work, purchase,
sell and create together is to think together, and to think together
is to form communicable idess, that is to day rational ideas.
In French Vest Africa and in the French Cameroons, for exemple,
school co-operatives ere training children in handicrafts. Among the
3,000,000 Gonds, a tribe living primitively in the jungles of the Central Province of India, a so-operstive called the Gond Sewak Sangh
works with the government to set up primary schools where children are
teught crafte and trades; to min over the consent of the adults - e
primary element in fundamental education - the ancient Karma songs
and Shails dances are used as part of the methods of group persuasion.
Keeping Community Spirit Alive
In underdeveloped regions and communities, the educational methods of the co-operatives held establish new social tissues to replace
old, dying ones, and provide new beses in better living for the community spirit kept alive by ancient traditions. Many of the old groupings are used in the crestion of new enes: the Timezgida of Berbers,
the Hoh-Hul of China, the Chittis of India, the secret societies of
Equatorial Africa, and the organizations of the Braccianti of Italy,
to name only a few.


While the co-operatives are an economic movement that uses education as an instrument, they are at the same time an educational movement that stresses the economic bases of learning, especially among
primitive peoples. “The msin sim is not to make money but to make men",
said Father Bernhard Huss who was largely responsible for developing
credit co-operstives among the Bantus of South frica. “Co-operation",
said C. F. Strickland, "is adult educstion in the business of life."
Education Defeated Sugar Crisis
On the Ivory Coast, Africans have bettered their lives by learning how to use modern methods of preparing palm oil. In Kenve, educstion
taught that cattle breading could serve a better purpose than the traditional display of wealth. On the island of Mauritius, education defeated a sugar crisis by spreading knowledge of mixed farming. In India
and Indonesia, it tought the advantages of new crop composts and chemical
fertilizers, and in the Punjab and Bengal regions of land reform and irrigation.
Dr. Spencer Hatoh, a veteran adult education leader, is quoted as
summing up the problem of fundamantal education in backuard areos in the
formula; spiritual, mental, physical, social and economic poverty form
a single whole which must be attacked from all sides at once.
In advenced areas, the great task of the co-operatives in the field
of education is the teaching of leaders and teachers. The extroordinary
work being done to this end is shown through descriptions of activities
of such institutions as the Extension Department of Social Education at


- 37


Laval University, Quebec, the Bombay Provincial Co-operative Institute in India, and many others. Moreover, in at least tventy-six
countries, for the most part in Europe and the Americas, there are
school co-operstives whose purposes are directly educational and
culturel.
Self-help in World's Backward Aress
But it is in the backmard areas that effects of the co-operative
movement ere closest to the primery goal of fundemental education,
such as helping the peasant co-operatives of the. African Gold Coast,
Nigeris, Tanganyika become practical professional schools for small
farmers; how improved living, working and thinking grow out of the
co-operative schooling among the scores of millions of members of cooperatives in India, Ceylon, China, the Federated Malay States,
Australis and the South Sea Islands.
Changing Faulty Living Habits
in such regions men are not only freed from usurers and profiteers but from themselves and their oun bad habits - from faulty habits
of living, lack of hygience, inefficient methods of farming, competitive extravagance of ceremonial expenditures. Instead of squandering
wealth on firework displays, elaborate festivals and tribal rituals,
primitive peoples learn orderliness, foresight, punctuelity, end a
strict respect for engagement entered into. They send their children
to schools, vaccinete them, improve the general health by sanitation
end hygiene.


- 38 -
TRENDS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD
Another Unesco Senfinar on Adult Education
A Unesco Seminor on "Methoda and Techniques of Adult Education
for International Understanding" will be held in Austria this summer.
Delegates to the Seminar have been requested to prepare cocounts of
experience relating to (1) methods of adult edpeation for internetional
understanding and (2) materials reloting to the akills of international
conference and group study.
(adult Education Bulletin, Feb. 1950)
The Broademing Concent of Adult Educotion
Modern adult eduention has expanded beyond the night school
concept. The adult educator must become an educational strtesman and
lender in his oun right. He must be oapable of thinking and organising a comprehensive progrom of educationel analysis and planning.
"adult eduestion, as every adult leader knows, is not the relatively
simple job of opening school doors to adults vishing standord course
offerings. It is a complex job calling for invelvement of many individuels and groups in a task of educational diagnosis, fact finding,
planning, organizing, training and teaching." (Adult Education Bulletin, Feb. 1950)
Four Major Trends of Adult Educetion
The groming importance of adult education as indicated in the
current literature on the subject shows four fundamental trends in its


- 39 -
development. They are as follows: (1) the emphasis on the videning
adult eduestion population; (2) the ridening of the number and variety
of agencies and groups concerned with adult education; () the developing concept of adult education as an integral part of community growth
and development, and (&) the nen ranges of knowledges, methods, and
skills needed by the adult educators. (Adult Educstion Bulletin, Feb.
1950)
The Nationel Umion For the Fight Against Illiteragy
The National Union for the Fight Against Illiteracy was an organization founded in Rome in December, 1947 to wage an uprising of the peo-le against ignorance. "Ignorance stands for filth, darkness, cold,
hunger, sickness, loneliness and fear. It means early death after a
miserable life, and the helpless waiting at the bedside of a stricken
child. Ignorance is everything that man hates - and its destruction
is not to be accomplished by a fen pen strokes in the cool twilight
of libraries."
The Union specialized in teaching people, and it is estimated
that more than 10,000 adults in Basilicata learned to read in the first
year of nork. At the beginning of the year, there were 185 ponular
courses in Basiliesta, and there ves pressure to reduce their number
for reasons of economy. After a year's mork, there were 291 courses.
(Unesco Courier, March, 1950)


-oUneaco Halps Educational Filma Over Frontier Barriars
The text of a nen agreement, approved by the Unesco General
Conference at Beirut in November, 1948, nas signed by lo6 nations,
and Norway was the first to ratify it. The agreement vill remove
customs duties, quotas, licenses and other obstacles to the exchange
not only of educational, scientifio or cultural films, but also
of film strips, micro-films, sound recordings, glass slides, models,
vall charts, maps and posters. (Unesco Courier, March, 1950)


— O0O —
"The tescher should not be like the merchant seeking
goodly pearls, but like the husbandman who waiteth for
the precious fruit of the earth and hath long patience for
it."


— Unesca Courier
Februery 1, 1950


-Al -
Nm
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES
Davoo Penal Colony
Mr. Juen Acenas, Acting Superintendent of the Davao Penal Colony,
hos informed the Buresu of Public Schools that he, had orened en
adult class for the inmates of the Colony. The adult class is condueted in the publio school building for one hour every evening. It
is the plon of the officials of the Colony to assign one paid tencher
this year to take charge of the adult education project.
BaLanaS
An encouraging report has been received from Mr. Jose Barona,
Acting Industrial arts Surervisor on the promotion of adult educstion
ectivities in Batanes. He said: “The interest of the peonle in every
community or barrio where adult education vus conducted is commendable.
The government officials from the Mayor to the Teniente del Barrio
often stayed long and late during the nights with the organizer contacting and enrolling the adult illiterates for the regular adult education classes. During the regulor classes, not only the regularly enrolled adult students attend the elasses, but also neighbors came to
listen to the discussions. The attendonce of the vhole community
or berrio people in the series of lectures or community assemblies
held in the different municipalities and barrios in connection with
the adult education closses during the yeor certainly shows the deep
interest of the people in adult educotion classes and sotivities."


- L2 -
Iloilo


The sutomechanies course in adult education conduoted in the
Iloilo School of arts and Trades had an enrolment of 36 adults in two
classes. Acoording to Mr. Jose S. Roldan, Acting Superintendent, some
of the adults enrolled came from the remote toxns of Iloilo and Capiz.
Mr. Roldan reported: "In order to give a more effective instruction,
the adults have been grouped according to their educstional attainment. This will greatly facilitate instruction to cover all phases of
the course."
Bulacan
The Halili High School in Santa Maria, Bulacan plans to intensify its adult education activities this school year. Last year more
than a hundred adults gradusted from the practical dressmaking course.
Vith the opening of the scademic year, according to Mr. Eustaquio F.
Evangelista, Editor of the Halili Courier, "pert-time adult education"
vill be undertaken in the different barrios. He seid: "Societies
ere at present being organized in the different barrios and the
members are being urged to put up a combination of reading room and
club house. Two times a month groups of teachers vill visit the
barrios assigned to them, and conduct community lectures and demonstrations. Vocational, civic and health education vill be emphasized.
These barrio societies vill be utilized by the school to spread the
ides of part-time adult education and intensive development and improvement of local industries."


A3 -


Palawan.
Superintendent Alfonso Villaflor reported that the teachers in
Palaman are villing to teach in the adult education classes during
their spare time. He plans to request the Provincial Governor of
Palawan "to direct every Municipal Council to spprove an ordinance
making it compulsory for illiterates to attend adult classes." In
order thet adults may be sttraoted, efforts mill be made "to give
them vocstional training and economic sufficienoy."
Bukidnon
Community meetings and assemblies have been held in meny barrios
and districts in Bukidnon, according to information received from
Acting Superintendent Vicente Lumibao. In most gatherings the barrio
lleutenant, the town mayor and the municipal treasurer have been present. The following points have been emphasized in the community
meetings:
1. The sehool belongs to the barrio people
and it exists, not only for their children but also
for the adults. It should be looked upon as a community center where the patrons meet to resolve their
problems for better living.
2. The school vill be as good as they are silling to cooperate with the teachers and the government
for the improvement of their school.


AA

3. The schoolsprovide leadership to better
ways of living.
A. Payment of the taxes and other obligations
to tha government nillingly and promptly so that the
government in turn can give them benefits multiplied
a hundred fold in educational and other forms of
services.
5. Adult oduestion for literacy, for increased
economic production, for information and community
beautification.
Cotabato
An intensified program of adult education activities has been
lsunched by the Division of Catabato in an effort to push the frontiers of mass enlightenment to the rural folk and mountain tribes of
Cotabato. According to reports received from Mr. Alfredo N. Vorgas,
Adult Education Supervisor, there sre organized 12 adult education
councils to undertake the promotion of adult eduostion projects in
Cotabato. Many volunteer workers have rendered important community
service. The most active volunteer leadera are the following:
1. Mr. Rasag,Kisante, Cotabato - teaching Manabos how to read
and write and method of crop rotation.
2. Miss Aida Clarke, St. Francis Mission, Upi, Cotabato - tesahing Tifuray women hox to read and vrite.
3. Miss Esperanza Sabulao, Kidpawan, Cotabato - literacy work.
4. Fr. John Murphy, Kidpawan, Cotabuto - litersoy work.
5. Mr. Froilan abad, Nuro, Cotabato - literaoy work.


- 15-
Capiz
Under the leadership of Principal Lorenzo E. Molino, the Capiz
High Schoel vill initiate the move to liquidate illiteracy in
Capiz with the opening of the school year 1950-1951. The high school
seniors vill lead the way. Enchstudentis required to tutor the illiterate members of his household. The plan vill be extended soon
to the Juniors and Sorhomores of the high school.
Misamis Oriental
Aware of the high percentage of illiteraay in Lourdes,
Lumbia, Claverip and Initso, Superintendent Juan S. Paguio's first
memorandum to the field upon reporting to his nes nssignment was to
enjoin all district supervisora, principals and teochers to undertake adult educction work intansively in order to reduce illiteraay
in Misamis Oriental. Besides literacy work, Mr. Paguio also emphasized the importance of community assemblies. Several community
lectures have already been conducted by distriat supervisors.
In order to foster better understanding between purents and
tecchers, school visitations by parents have been encouraged. One
such oocasion at the Talisayon Central Elementary School was deseribed
by Superintendent Paguio as follons: "The parents nere provided with
seats in the clasarooms so that they may be nble to see their ahildren and the teachers at their aotual work. They were encouraged by
the teachers to ask questions and express their opinions. Things
donated or contributed by them vere shown so that unnecessary doubts
as to where the money contributed went were sotisfactorily removed.


After that the parents vere observed to be more cordial to the
teachers ond were reedy to extend more help to meet the needs of
the school."
Surigng
The Surigao High School, under the leadership of its principal,
Mr. Antonio A. Romen is "resping fruitful resulte" from its "eachone-tesch-one" campaign to help reduce illiteraoy in Surigao.
Teachers and students in the Surigeo High School are engaged in the
movement. A special mention is accorded Mr. Meriano Caperas for his
very active participation in adult educetion work. According to Mr.
Roman's information, Mr. Caperas has organized a elass of 51 adults
in his home town where he goes home every Saturday afternoon to conduet classes on Saturday evenings and Sunday mornings.
Sorsogon
Superintendent Ricardo Castro has reported that adult edueation
work in his division is "progressing alonily but contimewaly" Teechers, students and even intermediate pupils who are capable are being
mobilised in the entire division in order to push the "ecch-one-tenchone" project in places where it is difficult to orgamize a reguler
class for adult illiterates.
The distriot supervisors are enjoined to encourage the opening of
more vocational courses, such as Hair Science, Dressmaking, Nooden end
Abaca Slipper Making, and such other courses which vill enrich the knovledge of adults in important vocations.


- 47


Superintendent Costro suggests that if the Director of Private
Schools vill help in carrying on the program of adult education in
the various private schools and colleges mueh can be aecomplished
in improving this phase of public service.
Albay
By using the “enghaone-teach-one" method, raports Mr. Jose Ramirez, Principal of Albay High School, the students have been able to
teach setisfactorily many adults in their barrios. The number of
adults tutored by the High Sohool students are as follows!


First year


students ----


- 107 adults


Second "


* -----


-113 n


Third n


"-----


- 150 n


Fourth "


-----
Tota1-


- 100
-70 n


Suln


The Sulu High School is onother institution engeged in litersoy
gempaign. Mr. Pacifico G. Allarde, Acting Principal, leads the student
population in the drive. Aocording to him the senior students are
making "considerable progress along this line." Eoch senior is
enjoined to make one illiterate parent litercte."
Lanag
A vell attended community assembly was held at Temperan on Januery
28, 1950. Government officials, prominent datus, teachers and students
vere present and many partioipated sotively in the open forum.


Superintendent Domingo Soriano in a brief report tabulated the


progress of his division in adult education.




por
—
INumber of!Number of! Community!Attend-I VE-O-T-ON
ghth1 alassga 1 adults faasemblieal ance ¡adult Studonts


August, 1949


1 1


2


1


O


! O


! O


Januery, 1950


1 22 1


128


!


6


1 62


 680


Merch, 1950




* 40 !



818



!



11



1 50



1 1,050


Ignorance is a great enemy of society
because of its retarding effects upon progress.
For this reason, every country in the world spares
no effort to reduce, if not eliminate, it altogether.


Dr. Cecilio Putong


- A9-
Number of Literacy Graduates during the Schoel Year 1949-1950 so far
Certified
(uly 31, 1950)


Di vialg.A

INOa JUNy, INAS INOn Loy I
fto Man
1240!to June 20.
Ya


19300
19501


T O t a 


1. Abra


72


40


132


2. Agusan
3. Albay


234


99


332


Z. antique
5. Batsan


99


279


478


6. Batanes


118





153


7. Batangas


116


130


!


246


8. Bohol


748


2,655


1


3,403


9. Bukidnon
10. Bulacan


208


139


!


347


11. Cagayan


1 1,191


156


1


1,340


12. Cemarines Norts
13. Camarines Sur
14. Capiz


178


391


!
!


369


15. Catanduanes


92


!


260


252


16. Ca vite


80


35


!


115


17. Cebu


239


496


735


18. Cotabato


544


539


I


1,083


19. Davao


10


10


20. Ilocos Norte


194


168


1


362


21. Ilocos Sur


198


198


22. Iloilo


346


!


1,004


1


1,350


23. Isabela


280


1


149


229


2A. Laguna


60


I


60


25. Lanao


90


90


26. Le Union


217


536


753


27. Leyts


5,081


!


1,650


!


9,731


28. Manila
29. Masbat


20


!


86


105


30. Marinduque


96


96


31. Mindoro


58


78


136


32. Misemis Occidental


114


37


1


151


33. Misamis Oriental


18


48


B4. Mountein Province


7,61


1


1,002


8,619


35. Negros Oocidental


775


645


1,420


36. Negros Oriental


666


565


1,231


37. Nueve Ecija


131


21


152


38. Nueva Viacaya


!
179


212


391


39. Palawan


220


158


178


40. Pampanga


120


78


398


41. Pangasinon


1
129


458


!


1,587


42. Quezon (Tayabas)


43


1


ll0


A3. Rizal


1


356


M. Romblon


(19


1,023


!


1,842


45. Samor


2,897


!


3,320


!


6,217


46. Sorsogon


87


!


180


267


47. Sulu


:3
2


48. Surigad


1 1,610


794


1


2,A0K


49. Torlac


244


139


383


50. Zambales


62


234


t


306


Sla Zamboanga


42


128


783


o tal


I ELTDO





2MTO2





—42.310


49SO


4
VOL. Vill - 220.5
SEPT J9SO
NTO
GONTENTS
Page
EDITORIAL . 1
EDUCATION WEEK  2


THE TEACHERS' REORIENTATION TO EDUCATION IN RURAL
AREAS FOR BETTER LIVING  A
By Venencio Trinidad
THE VILLAGE SCHOOLMASTER AS COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT LEADER .. 9
By I. S. Millard
FILMS IN INDIA SHON THE ROAD AHEAD ........................ 17
THE INFLUENCE OF THE MOTHER TONGUE AS MEDIUM OF
INSTRUCTION UPON ILLITERACY AMONG ADULTS ............... 21
By Jose V. Aguilar
RURAL QILTIRRE CENTER  25
From Educational Trends Abroad, by Pedro T. Orata
(Manila Daily Bulletin, Sept. 11, 1950)
MY EXPERIENGE IN TEACHING ADULTS...... 29
By Salvador Alojado
THE CONFERENCE IN SORSOGON ....... 31
THE 'ZONE' PLAN, A WAY OF COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM ... 33
By Artemio C. Visconde
RURAL ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT THROUGH COMMUNITY COOPERATIVES . 35
By Amado L. Agorrilla
TRENDS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD ......................... 39
  IN THE FROVINCES ................ 43
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES ........... 54
ENROLMENT IN ADULT EDUCATION .. 56
PROMOTION IN LITERACY CLASSES ..........................e. 37


The remarks made by the Assistant Director of Public Schools at
the closing session of the Alst Annual Convention of Division Superintendents of Schools in Baguio are reprinted in this issue of the Adult
Educstion in Action. They make patent the thought that the program
of the schools for community improvement can only succeed if the rank
and file of parents and common people of the communities, especially
those living in rural areas, are enlightened to understand the program
sell and to collaborate villingly vith the community and adult education workers.
A point is stressed which teachers vill be well to consider seriously. The Assistant Director states that while some people have
the notion that community improvement is not an inherent function of
the schools, yet teachers should realize that unless they play their
role properly in improving life conditions and help bring better living
in the homes and communities, sound and wholesome development of their
pupils cannot be insured. The teachers are enjoined to help in building up the communities and promote social and economic life, in order
to make the environmental conditions suitable for continuous growth
sfid development of the school children.


2-


EDUCATION NEEK
The theme of Educstion Neek, which falls from September 10 to
17, 1950, is "Better Schools Make Better Communities". This theme
focuses sttention to the need of improving conditions in our communities as a basis of the country's program for the amelioration of the
social life of the people. Our communities, including those in the
rural and agricultural areas, constitute the backbone of our national
existence. The underdeveloped and substandard state of affairs in
these communities is the handicap to the growth of democracy in the
Philippines. It should be given the greatest possible attention of
our government and civic leaders to remove every obstacle to our progress as a nation. To do this, we should rely more and more upon Education, which is one sure agency of promoting enlightenment among the
messes.
Our educational program should be positive and should be directed to improve the vital aspects of community life, which have
all these years remained little explored and meagerly developed. For
example, the widespreadilliteracy of the people in these communities exposes them essily to subversive influences, which have been
giving our government so much to counteract. The health and home life
in our rural districts requires concerted efforts, if we have to raise
the standard of general sanitation and to improve living conditions.
The common people in these communities live in poverty and find it hard
to provide for the basic necessities of life, not to mention the need
for the wholesome education of their children. These communities
are bereft of facilities for cultural development and aesthetic im

2


provement, a deficiency which adds to the monotony especially of rural life. With these submerged conditions of living in the small
towns and barrios, our masses cannot be inspired by the ideas of the
democratic way of life which we have been trying to establish all these
years for our people.
Hand in hand with the economic and social program of the government to improve living standards and promote social justice, Education shouldbe extended to raise the general level of intelligence and
culture of the masses, so after all the common men may appreciate better their civic responsibilities, maintain their faith in the government and live abundant life as members of a truly democratic society.
Such is the aim of this year's Education Week, "Better Schools Make
Better Communities."





Adults mho attend community schools or
take advantage of the offerings of other educational agencies are nide-aweke persons
"reedy and waiting ta ge places".


- E. L. Terman


4


THE TEACHERS' REORIENTATION TO EDUCATION
IN RURAL AREAS FOR BETTER LIVING
PY VENANCIO TRINIDAD
Assistant Director of Public Schools
The Alst annual Convention of School Superintendents which is
draving to a close is in many respects vithout parallel in the history of our Bureau. In the first place, you form the largest group
that has ever been assembled here for a similar purpose. In the
second place, this year's convention has been conducted virtually under your own motive pover, the Directorate having given the superintendents the right as well as the responsibility to organize and run
the convention in the most democratio manner possible. Finally, the
theme on which you chose to center your thinking and cooperative
efforts has a vitality and significance that transcend that of many a
past convention. It has therefore been a distinct honor and privilege
for me to witness the progress of your work, and a great pleasure to
be able to say at its close that this convention has been a great
success, the far-reaching influence of which will shov itself upon
the direction which Philippine education is bound to take in the
yeors to come.
Fellos norkers: Director Pangilinan struck the keynote of this
gathering in the brief opening remarks in your plenary session last
Monday. In broad but clear outline, he laid donn the gommunitrachool service program which we all envision for our people, and
suggested measures calculated to carry out this program most effectively. Your committees have admirably vorked out the details
in the implementation of this school-community service program, and
your deliberations upon their consolidated report have helped to give


- 5-


the assurance that our common hope and vision vill crystallize into
a happy reality for our country.
Before this convention draws to a olose, I wish to contribute
to the rich fund of thought that has been pooled on the vital theme
of your deliberations, by giving a fes remarks on the noture and
the urgency of the reorientetion of our teachers and other educational norkera to the philosophy and the progrom of school-community collaboratiena
The strategic position which teachers hold in our educational
system requires no spology or defense. To say that they hold the
key to the successful prosecution of the program which has been
envisioned, is to stete the obvious. Their reorientation to the
philosophy and program of our projected educational adventure is the
first and basic conditien of success. Their old concept of the
school ps a cloistered institution, insulated from the realities or
even the sordidness of present living, must give way te those attitudes
and points of view crystallized in the principles that the work of the
school is puerile andineffective in a social vacuum and that its duty
is not exclusively to children but complementerily to the rest of the
community as well. While, as some people claim, community improvement is not an inherent function of the school, teachers must be convinced that the improvement of community life is a condition highly indispensable to insuring sound and optimun growth and development of
children. The report of your Committee on Problems and Conditions of
Leorning in Rural Areas has vividly described the material, cultural,
even spiritual poverty of our rural communities. The facts therein


-6-


presented have clinched the argument that the grosth of the young is
hompered, if not perverted, by adverse conditions in the social environment in vhich, shether the school likes it or not, children move und
hove their being. Our teachers should acquire and nourish the conviction that the development of a sound mind and a sound body is a
voin hope and a futile dreom unless the community in which that mind
and body develops is equally cholesome and sound. Hence the obligotion of the school to help in improving the conditions of life in our
communities.
The school-community service program envisaged in our plans
should go further than the improvement of community living. Far from
being s one-say channel of efforts exerted by schoolmen only, the
errangements for schcol-community collaboration envision the optimum
utilization of the weulth of community resources for the vitalization
and enrichment of the curriculum. Greater interest omong tenchers
muet be stimulated in the local development of curriculum materials
consistent with our avoved educational objectives and the varying
needs and conditions in the different rural areas. Both the preservice and in-service education of teachers should make provision for
adequate training in discovering, selecting, and prepering materials
for instruction, esvecially in those techniques of group curriculum
development making the fullest and best possible use of local materials. At the some time, teachers should divest themselves of the
complex of subservience to and dependence upon the General Office
relative to the curriculum. Without being mentally closed to good
suggestions from that source, teachers need to develop the inclina

- 7-
tion and the ability to appraise General Office materials as to their
suitability to the local situation, and to modify or supplement them
with more sppropriate local materials.
With the desired changes in philosophy and outlook, there ought
to go a democratization of educational procedures, whether in administration, supervision, or actual teaching. An important implication of the democratic procedure is the presumption that every
member of the organization is capable of contributing something to
the common good. He should, therefore, be encouraged and given every
chance to make that contribution. This implies that teachers must be
given comparative freedom in the exercise of their legitimate functions in the nen educational arrangements. It is vain to expect
teachers to teach freedom and democracy unless they themselves enjoy
freedom and live democratically in equal measure. Ne should not
hope to produce free men and women in schools taught by teachers
enslaved by fear of superiors with arbitrary and totalitarian temperaments. The necessity for self-examination among administrators
and supervisors In this regard and for the necessary adjustments is
an implication with a ringing urgency for all.
Naturally, the limits of the freedom that can be safely
vouchsafed teachers will be compatible with their special abilities
and training. Teachers would be expected to develop and exercise
self-restraint and to observe the discipline of free men. For the
enjoyment and exercise of freedom should compel the recipients of
this privilege to accept a few self-imposed inhibitions so necessary


for group and individual happiness. The welfere of the group, the
protection of the rights and personalities of individuals, the good
nome and interests of the profession, the welfare of the school
children and of the school system - these and other considerations
should deter teachers from abusing the freedom that would come to
them under the new dispensation.



Todoy it seems plain that adults ore not
likely to continue satisfoctory growth as a result of a random bombardment of ideos. More and
more people are dissatisfied with their failure
to make any eduentional progress. Consequently
more and more attention is given to definite education for adults. That meons educational work
with a purpose.


Charles L. Robbins


- 9 -
THE VILLAGE SCHOOLMASTER AS COMMUMITI
DEVELOPMENT LEADER
Material supplied by I.S. Millerd, Heodmaster
Bull Savannoh School, Jamoica


 The following is a gripping account of a community project
undertaken by a village schoolmaster in Bull Savanneh, e district
in Jemaica. It hos a setting similar to situations met by teachers
in the barrio and rural schools of the Philippines. The teacher,
Mr. Blythe, started his tomato groving as a simple project, but with
the vision, courage, and sympathy of a community leoder, he made
it a going concern of for-reaching effect, that in the end brought
economic rehabilitation and enlightment to a people. This crticle
is reproduced from the June, 1950 issue of Mass Education Bulletin
of the University of London, Institute of Education.
The Story


In our last editorial se seid that Community Development had
been undertoken by all sorts and conditions of men. In many parts
of the world the village schoolmaster is the biggest influence for
progress in the village. He is the village "Mass Educator.” We do
not expect to find a Mr. Blythe or for that matter e Colonel Moxsy
in every district, but his remorkable story shows what can be achieved
where the schoolmaster is alive and ready to make the most of the
opportunities that come his way.
Bull Sovanhsh is a small district, two squere miles in extent,
tro miles from the sen, and 1,061 feet above sea level, in the southern
part of the island of Jamaica. The housesdo not lie clese together
as in most villages but scattered oven the whole area. The country
is rugged and hilly, there is only a limited area of flat land and
erosion has caused some parts to he unfit for cultivation. Unfortunately a mountsin barrier in the north of the island prevents the
rain-bearing vinda from the sea from reaching the southern coast,


-10 -
and so Bull Savannah is subjeot to long droughts. In 1929 there
was a period of nine mentha without ssin and usually there is very
little or no rain for six montha of the yeor. Most of the soil is
a fertile red, sandy loan, which responds readily to the application
of animal manure, and artificial fertilisers. The population amounts
to nearly 2,000 souls. Up to 1935 the eash erop of the people vas
tobaoco, but many other erops such as asise, cassava, fruit and vegetables are grown for home consumption. Many people keep goats, sheep
and some cattle. Almost every household hes its own donkey. Most of
the people are their oun masters. They either work on their own holdings or on those of their neighbours. The distriot is administered by
a Parochial Board, a kind of losal council, and one elected representative is sent from the district to the local Parish Board. The district
with several others, constitutes one of the 32 electoral divisions
which send one member each to the House of Representatives at Kingston,
the Jamaican espital.
The great depressing of the early nineteen-thirties hit Jomaico
badly. The lon prices paid for their tobaeco had upset the economy of
the people of Bull Savannah. They were knoun all over Jemaica for their
thrift which tided them over times of drought, but this depression had
gone on too long. Their savings vere exhausted, they had to be spent
on food, and even their precious animals had to be sold because there
was no food for then.
Mr. C. A. Blythe was the headmaster of the Bull Savannah school.
As the depression went on he became sore and more worried about the
condition of his people and he determined to do allin his pover to
help them. He decided that whot they needed most was a new cash crop.


-14.


He read in a magazine that Canada could take a great quantity of
Jamaican tomatoes if they could be shipped there. Mr. Blythe knen that
there was in Jamaica the Jamaican Agricultural Society which sims at
stimulating all kinda of agricultural development. Mr. Dlythe also
knes of the efforts of Lieutenant-Colonel A. R. MOXay, M. C., O.B.E.,
a progressive and philantrophic landowner, to gros and export tomatoes.
Mr. Blythe approached the Jamaican Agricultural Society and asked if
Colonel Moxsy could come and help the people of Bull Savannah to staert
tomsto growing. Colonel Moxsy had the same object in view as Mr. Blythe
he, too, wished to establish a market for Jamaican tomatoes in Canada. In fact he was already growing a nex veriety of tomatoes called
Marglobe which was very suitable for the export market. Colonel
Moxsy came and spoke to the people of Bull Savannah in 1935 about the
possibilities of groving tomatoes. He was ready to help and instruct
them and was even ready to provide them with seed. And now people
sere scentical. They were unvilling to sccept the seed. And now
comes in ono of the most important principles of Mass Education. Mr.
blythe nas a trusted local man and moreover he was e leader. Mass
Education cannot succeed without such leaders. Mr. Blythe went round
the people, one by one, to persuede them to sow the nos Marglobe seed.
22 people accented the seeds; some used them, some did not. Mhen the
time for harvesting the tomatoes came round, Colonel Moxsy reappeared
bringing some of his own tomatoes es an exhibit. He then showed the
people when to pick the fruit and hon to pack it. All the tomatoes
they brought to him he paid for at the rate of 1-1/2 d. per lb, and
later he gave them a bonus of another I d.


- 12


Nothing sueceeds like success. In 1936, 25 people decided to
start commercial tomato growing. Colonel Moxsy made a trial shipment
to Canada of a fen hundred erstes. This Merglobe variety of tomato
luckily gren well on the Bull Savannah soil and it was just the thing
for the Canadian market. The tomatoes vere packed under a tree on the
church premises and then Golenel Moxsy took charge of them. In 1937
the number had inoreased to 40 grovers and a Bull Savannah Tomato
Growers Association nas formed. As nearly one half of the people were
illiterote a great deal of educational work had to be done, no doubt
mainly by Mr. Blythe. Colonel Moxsy, too, had to ahon the people how
to cultivate tomatoes in the best way, what fertilisers to use and
hon to spray them and so protect them from disease. In 1937 there
was no doubt that the experiment was a sucoess, only new methods had
to be employed. The Jamaicon Government was approached for a loan of
money and Colonel Moxay also helped to finance the new developments.
Land was bought adjoining the school and church premises. On this
land in 1937-38 a paoking house and a pouer station nere erected,
tonks for supplying the power station vith water were constructed, and
o grading machine installed. Altogether the sum of 212,000 had been
invested in the plant. By 1938 the tomatoes were being packed in the
packing house after being graded by machine. Now Mr. Blythe's scheme
nas erreading like mild-fire. Membership was increasing by leaps and
bounas and tomato-groming associations vere springing up in the neighboring distriots of Ballards Valley and Pedro Plcins. But nes problems were arising. Some of the tomatoes mere not suitable for export
and so conming plant was erected to handle these and a larger power
plant installed. This waa made possible by a government grant and


- 13 -
loan of 23,560, which just covered the cost of the cannery and
power plant extensions. In 1939, 500,000 Ib., that is about 250 tons
of tomatoes, vere exported and the value of the manufactured products
canned tomatoes, etc. tmounted to $750. Besides tomatoes, the cannery
experimented sith other local products such as grapes, pineapples and
peas. By 1940 the amount of money invested in plant amounted to
#17,500 and 800,000 lbs. of tomatoes vere being shipped to Canada and
the value of the manufactured products smounted to #l,500.
So far the project has succeeded in a vonderful way economically,
but Colonel Moxsy and Mr. Blythe had wider oims in viev. They nos appealed to Jemsica Welfare to come and help the community develop in
other ways. In some later number we hope to tell you the history of
this remarkable organization, but it is enough to say here that Ja¬-
maica Nelfare Limited was en organization founded in the early nineteenthirties by some leading Jamaicans with the financial help of the American United Fruit Company to improve the conditions of the peorle of
Jemcica. Mri-M. N. Manley, the vell-known political leader and one of
the founders of Jamaica Melfure, visited Bull Savannah to find out what
people really needed. It wos decided that Jamaica Helfare limited should
grant a loan of money to the tomato-groving enterprise of Bull Savannah
and that this should be used for general and educational development. It
must be remembered that many of the tomato gromers are illiterute and
it nas essentiel to get them to understand how their tomato sssociation
worked so that they could run it themselves instead of having it run
from outside. The principles used sere those of the study groups, which
had been so successful among the fishermen of antigonish in Nova Scotio


in Canada. Jamaica Welfare sent their own Co-operative Officer to
train the tomato grovers in the principles of co-operation and the
development of study groups, and a new co-operative company was formed
and called Jamaica Vegetables Limited.
They also tried to establish credit unions but these were unsuecessful as the people were in the hobit of using the Government Loan
Banks. The Grower's Associstionswere taught, however, how to keep
their own accounts and hos to do their own collecting of products, packing and so on, so that they could become n thoroughly democratic organization. At the same time community centers were erected at Eull Savannah and later at Pedro Plains. An executive committee was formed
vith members from branches of each of the local organisations such
as the church, the school, the local Jomaica Agricultural Society,
the cricket club, Vegetable Grovers' Associations, and so on. These
considered the general needs of the district so that they could decide what were the most important objectives to concentrate on.
Various charitable endeavours were also undertaken. If an old woman had no house, the Community Associstion would decide to give her
one. Corpenters and masons would help and others would give materials,
and money.
Colonel Moxsy retired from active participation in the Association
in 1942 and sold out his interest to the Association. During this year
also Jamaica Nelfare loaned the Association 26,000. In 1943 the Association came upon hard times. The industry was badly hit by the
ver as no tomatoes could be exported. A loss of #2,500 was made in
1943 and another of 83,500 in 1944. This was in spite of the fact


- 15 -


that the value of the manufactured products had risen to #3,500.
It vas during this time that the gromers took up shares to the value
of $3,500 in amounts of 2s 6d, a share. Fortunately, in 1945 the war
ended and shipment of tomatoes sas resumed. This amounted to 700,000
lb. in 1945 and vould have been larger but for a severe drought. The
Associations vere non all registered as “daughter" Association of Jamaica Vegetables Limited, a limited liability company. By 1946 things
vere definitely on the mend. The record amount — 1,200,000 Ib. (500
tons) — of tomatoes was shipped, and the manufactured products were
valued at 6l0,000. The Company had had regular Managers ever since
Colonel Moxsy retired in 1942. In 1948 great strides vere made.
The profits were so large that all the money advanced by Jamaica
Welfare — 28,500 in all — was paid off. A new plot of 450 acres of
land called Spring Pastures was purchased. 3,000,000 lb. of tomatoes were exported to Canada and the manufactured products were
valued at #40,000. Dy 1949 there were 19 registered Associations
with a total membership of 5,000 groners. The capitalinvested in
Jamsica Vegetables Limited and owned co-operatively by the grovers
themselves was valued at 290,000 at the beginning of the year and
has no doubt increased since then. The total crop last year arounted
to 9,500,000 Ib. (nearly 5,000 tons). The tomato-growing erea non
covers 80,000 acres, that is, over 100 square miles. When we consider
how the scheme started with Mr. Blythe persuading 20 or more unwilling
villagers to plant a fen tomatoes in 1935 the subsequent development
of the project is really amazing. We are always stressing a few of
the essential points in Mass Educations


16


1. The need for local leaders. Had it not been for Mr.
Blythe, could the scheme have taken root at all? It is
extremely doubtful.
2. The great advantage of starting Mass Education or Community Development with some economic improvement. These
vonderful economio developments achieved by Colonel Moxay
and Mr. Blythe have led to a general raising of the
standard of living of the district. The people are building larger and better houses, and it is very satisfactory
to note as well-deserved reward for Mr. Blythe that the
the Bull Savannah school has increased in number from
an average of 103-200 to 450 and more on the roll; interest in education has increased remarkably. There is
no doubt that the general eduestional level of the people
has risen too, as they can now run their own Growers!
Associations.
Though ne cannot expect village headmaster in other parts of the
world to achieve quite such spectacular results as those achieved by
Mr. Blythe, ne do believe that this remarkable story vill encourage
them and show them that it lies within their pover to affect real improvements in the standard of living of their own peoples.





The treining that adults have received
in actuel job situations and in ordinary social activities may equal, or in many cases
even exceed, in value the troining gained
through the study of bosic subject matter
on the college level..


Tyrus Hillway


-17


FILMS IN INDIA SHON THE ROAD AHEAD
(From the Unesco Courier, June 1, 1950, p. 15)
When the new road came to Kurvandi, an old village in rural Indias
it brought more than merely a physical change in the landscape. It
brought also a thousand changes in habits of secial and personal life
that had remained almost the same in Kurvandi, as in countless other
Indian villages, for many hundreds of years. The people of Kurvandi
soon came to understand the value of the road. But those in other
willages did not.
To teach the millions of men and vomen in rural India the benefits of change is one of the major goals of the Government of India.
Few problems are greater and more urgent than the need to shon the
people the advantages of replacing old habits, custom and superstitions with modern methods of living. As an important means of coping
with this problem, the Government is using educational and documentary
films, simple in content, personal in approach, slower in tempo than
ordinary films, and made to fit the special needs and conditions of
people in rural areas.
One of these is - Kurvandi Road - made by the Paul Zil's documentary unit for the United Nations, and acquired by the Goverrment
of India for vide distribution by projectors on mobile vans in vil-¬
lages which lack electricity. The technique both of the presentation
of images and narrative is intended to influence and persuade simple
people of the value and urgency of co-operation for community betterment. The story of the benefits the road brought to Kurvandi is made
personal by the device of an intimate commentary spoken as if by the


- 18 -


villagers themselves.
The villagers did in fact have a part in the making of the film.
when Zils and his unit came te Kurvandi, he asked their co-operation,
and they suggested angles of thought and approach which vere stronger
and more effeotive than any he had planned in advance.
“Kurvandi Road" attracted considerable attention when it was
shown at the Third International Festival of Documentary Films at Edinburgh, Scotland.
Another film made by the Zils unit, which is being distributed by
the Government as part of its programme of intensive rural education
by films, is "A Tiny Thing Brings Death." Instead of the charts and
dravings urual in scientific documenteries, this uses a simple story
of village life to illustrate the cause and prevention of malaria.
Most of the films for rural use are being made for the Government
of India, by a nen organisation called Indian Documentary Films, part
of the Films Division or the Ministry of Information and Broadeasting,
under the direction of M. Bhavnoni, one of the best known personalities
in the Indian cinema. Prepared in four languages - Hindustani, Gujerati, Bengali, and Tamil, the films tackle a variety of present-day social and economic problems.
Food storage, for example, is treated in a film entitled "War on
Waste." The need for better food preservation is stressed so that
the present naste of more than tuo million tons of food grains a year
can be reduced, thus relieving the Government from the need to import
extra food. This film shows the modern methods used to store and preserve food — and also the simpler methods which ordinary persons can


put into practice.


“Cup That Cheers"
Fibres to Fabrics" shows India's textile industry from the
groming of cotton to the finished fabric. "India's Lifeline"
scqusints residents in areas remote from mechanical means of travel
with their country's vast railway system. “The Cup that Cheerartells
the story of the cultivation, menufacturing, merketing and export of
tea, an industry which gives employment to a million vorkers. "Planned Parenthood" informs the people of the crushing burden imposed upon
the national economy of a population inerease of more than 5,000,000
persons a year, and ergues that the sons and daughters of smaller families have a better chance for life ond education.
A knowledge of geography and customs of other parts of Asio is
brought by such films about Ceylon as “The Enchanted Islands" and
"The Lond of Buddah.” Similorly, "Ladakh Diary" takes the viewer
to the "roof of the world," the frontier outpost of Kashmir, ahowing
the people of the region, their culture and customs.
The renge of subject matter is unusually brond, from "Fright and
Prejudice" which seeks to arm rural villagers with scientific methods
of dealing with snakes, to "Our Constitution" which tells how the
Goverrment of India drew up the historic document which forms the
bosis of its national existence, and what the document means in humon
terms. "Dirty Habits" shows some of the personal habits of villagers
which spread disease.


Second Only to U.S.
"Blossoms Revived", a documentery about infontile parelysis


- 20-


directed by Krishma Copal, describes in simple human terms hos a mother's
courage saved her daughter's life, with the help of the skill and devotion of doctors and nurses. Other important films are "Rivers in
Harness" on the great hydro-electrio scheme of the Government, and "New
Pastures" on lond reclamation.
The Goverrment's Films Division, also mokes news reels, reviens,
and documenteries for use in ordinary film houses, while a fifth unit
specializes in films for exportin order to acqunint the rest of the
world with Indian life. The totol production is umuaually large.
Indeed, India is second only to the United States as a producer of
feature Films, although host of the Indian films are not designed for
the world morket.
There are at presentin India, 2,060 permanent theatres, 900
touring theatres and 30 temporory ones. The total deily ottendance is
estimated at 1,600,000, and the yoarly total well over 600,000,000.
About 300 features are produced yeorly by 60 studios using 138 stages
and 38 laboratories. A number of the provincial governments ere also
setting up film unita.
A


Adult education is to some extent both
a complementary and a compensatory process;
it is partly an apprenticeship and portly
a work of re-education.


- Unesco Courier


- 21 -
THE INFLUENCE OF THE MOTHER TONGUE AS MEDIUM
OF INSTRUCTION UPON ILLITERACY AMONG ADULTS
By Jose V. Aguilor
Division Superintendent of Schools, Iloilo
about the middle of March, 1950, Distriet Supervisor Cornelio Gargarita of Oton stumbled upon the discovery that some parents and relatives
of children in the experimental classes were learning to reod, to srite,
or to read and write. This was a most interesting development in the use
of the mother tongue as medium of instruction because it came naturolly,
vithout any plonned program to moke illiterate adults literate through
their children.
To shot extent did illiterate parents and relatives of schoel chil--
dr en who vere taught in the mother tongue learn to read print and script,
and to write? Data were secured, and this information is given in the
inclosure.
The experiment vith the vernacular was begun in July, 1948. The parents and relatives reperted in the inclosure vere illiterates or partilliterates at that time. A fes of them already knew how to read print,
but not seript; or script, but not print; or print and seript, but not
to write; or script and to vrite, but not to read print. A larger number
did not know how to read print and script, nor to vrite. Without planning
on the part of the experimental schools, adult effort to read and vrite
paralleled that of school children in a surprisingly large number of households. By April, 1950, about 1/4 learned to read print, about 1/4 to read
script, and about 1/5 to xrite. This, certainly was provocative of a possible nen approach to the difficult problem of adult illiteracy.
The comments of parents reveal the special motivations to learning
inherent in the perent-child relationship. For instance, Salvacion Rodrigo,


- 22 -
elreedy equipped with the ability to vrite but not to read, leerned to do
the latter when hor son, Benodicto, begen bringing resding matter to their
homo. She briofly describos her experionoe by saying, "when ho reeds, I
sit by him to reed also." Alreedy old, Bonedicte Recitedo, totally illitercto, begen lecrning to read print whon Moure brought her booklet to
their houso boginning Decombor, 1949. He soya, "By constantly listening
to Mauro read by syllobles, I elso leorned to distinguish and to reed thom.
Now I con read only big types because my eyes ore slresdy dim." Merio Cofreros con non write her nome (excluded from number that havo lesrned to
nrite) and describes how she lesrned to read print, "Hhen my son Menuel
hod learned to reed, he asked mo to read his kartilya. He tought me to
reed nhonever I had nothing to do.” Regins Gercis leernod to read print
beginning July, 1949. Sho seye, "At the time Desiderio brought his booklet homo, I was enthused. I lecrned to rerd - only I connot write yet bocouse I connot see very well now.” Tho modesty of the Filipino is exprossed
by Crismo Cenon os follows: "During vecstion lost December I leernod to
read a little because I enviod Cornolio, ny son, who could read Hiligaynon.
At present I en not yet equel to the task of roading seript, nor of writing."
Verification, however, showed thot Crisma had begun quite well in the scquisition of the writing skill. Hernonigildo Clovel leerned to read print end
seript as eorly os 1915, but did not loorn to write until "a fon months agon
from his son, Hermonigildo. In his own words ho hos leorned to vrite "a
little" in the following mennort "I joined the syllables until thoy bocamo
words."
Those conments typify the loerning paychology of tho Filipino adult who,
too ofton, in his own estinotion, is "too busy" or "too old" to loern to


23 -
read and write. He has another reason, perhaps the most potent one, for
not learning to read and write; he is "ashamed because of his age." Because of his feeling of shame, we find him coming to the literacy class
only once or tuice; so we find him avoiding the teacher in the "each-oneteach-one" plan. But, vithout urging, provided the one on the giving end
is his child, he approaches literacy to a point where he proudly uses nesly-found skills. Ve must also remember the convenience afforded when the
literate and the illiterate live in the same household.
If the school planned the litoracy instruction of adults, utilizing
the parent-child relationship as a basis, what might be the effect upon
the netional problem of adult illiteracy? This nes approach to this old
problem brings up enother question: Hon may this instruction be planned
since the mother tongue is not yet usedas a meditmof instruction in the
lower grodes?
The nes approach is open to all schools today. Ne know that from the
fourth grade up children can read and write in the mother tongue, although
not with facility. They can acquire that facility with o minimum of assistance from their teachers. The learning process from such children to illiterate parents or illiterate members of households would not be any different from the one previously described. Provided that the dual spproach
to education, that is, through the child and through the adult, is accepted,
it becomes only a matter of adjustment in school to put into effect a vital
program of literocy work which may turn out to be easy to administer and
may turn in immediste and enduring results.



4
2

5P
A
5
6)


A
2
aE
E
3
Co
a.
A.
 T
2






-ZA

62.


!


!


I.!


3¬


Y








 , F h
AR


 O
EA
---


—


-


.-


-


 





*.8y
*
:5
--
-.-


—


3
"9 5
g


3
8


N


Ot


E


8
ERE
------
G D'8 4


-


-





-


I.


822


P F





Em
-.-----


ON


N



-


O
 -


 
—


-


S


O B
3

E



GM
3
2S



R
Z R
--


-


E O.


G AOl
2


E—


N


P


P 





OJ


R
-----
3
0
-
S.


-


-.


-


—


O -

56
SE"

E
9 O
I
1aa
E

33
I*
2

O 6
da


S


OY


S


S


sl


2.


S
9


2.
E Edo
a om3..
--


P


co
"


s





P


a
T


Eal





Edl


*


a








 SI


25 -
RURAL CULTURE CENTER
From Educational Trends Abroad
by Pedro T. Orata
(Manila Daily Bulletin, Sept. 11,1950)
Impington, England. - "One of the most original and remarkable experiments in the field of education and social life in contemporary England is
the establishment, in an agricultural region in the County of Cambridge,
of four 'Village Colleges,' the success of which might open the way to a
veritable revolution in rural life, should their example be folloved videly". Thus said Mr. J. Fereng, an English Professor, writing in L'Information Pedagogique, of Paris.
The "village college" is a part of the movement under the term "county
colleges" in England, only it refers to a rural rather than to an urban or
semi-urban community. This movement is based on the hypothesis that the village "is also entitled to culture, and that it will find it in its midst,
adapted to its inhabitants of all ages, provided that it associates with
neighbouring villages to form a nex unit: the rural district, of which the
village college is both the school and the social center."
One of the colleges is located in Impington. It serves the ten villages surrounding it and their 7,500 inhabitants. The village college, or
"rural culture center" serves as a school for children, ages 11 to 15 - 150
of them, throughout the week, and as a cultural center for the adults of
the district of Impington three times a week. Tor the children, it serves
as a continuation school where they go throughout the year, starting at the
usual hour of nine o'clock in the morning. They eat their lunch at school
vhere they are served, at lon cost, a substantial meal including milk.


-25 -


They have the regular school subjects in the morning, and in the afternoon they have gmnastics, open-air games, gardening and various kinds of
manual vork. They come to school in big buses.
"Three times a veek, motor buses bring to Impington all the village
people of the neighbourhood who are enrolled at the center, and there the
whole social life of ten villages is concentrated. Clubs, dramatic and musical societies, choirs, Red Cross groups, study circles hold their meetings
or their rehearsals, and the Center Hall - which is a gymnasium in the daytime - becomes advance hall in the evening."
The activities of the adults include theoretical and practical lessons
in carpentry and odd jobs of all kinds, modern methods of agriculture, the
use of agricultural machines, market gardening, horticulture, home-making
lessons, stenography, bookkeeping and even a little French and German are
taught. Established only eleven years ago, the Impington college has proved
its vorth even during the war when it continued its work. The college is
maintained by taxes paid by the villages served and a certain amount of grant
by the ministry of education plus a number of endomments. The average reekly attendance is around 300 adults and, as already indicated, 150 children.
The programs are drawn up by the studenta' council, elected by all the members. Sub-committees are appointed to carry on the programs in which everybody participates. The students vary in age from 12 to 70 years.
Hith certein adaptations, this scheme may well be tried in the Philippines, in the thousands of barrios and villages. I can imagine one being
organized in any barrio, using the barrio school as the basis. Since the
director of public schools has ruled that achools may be used by adults as
well as children, the first step is an accomplished fact. Since the director


-21 -


has also inaugurated the scheme of education for improving home and community life, the philosophy of the scheme is consistent with the prevailing
philosophy of education in the Philippines. What is left nov is leadership
to establish a chain of "barrio colleges" patterned after the village colleges in England. Eno vill start such a scheme on an experimental basis?
I suggest the following stepsi
1. An enterprising district supervisor might select as an experimental
center one of the most progressive barrios in his district. He should sell
the idea first to the mayor and through him, to the municipal council.
2. The leaders of the barrio, headed by the councilor and barrio lieutenant, would get together vith the district supervisor and the mayor to
discuss the plan with a vien te creating interest.
3. The scheme might next be taken up with the parents at a meeting arranged by the local Parent-Teacher Association, vith a vien to shoming them
what can be done to provide them with opportunities for education, recreation, and vocational training.
4. The parents seeing the need for a cultural center for themselves
and their children, vould next be led to want to establish such a center
through voluntary contributions. Some might give material, some money,
some labor, in order to build an extra wing for the barrio school building
and to provide the needed equipment.
5. Committees of parents and older school enildren would then be appointed to plan activities, utilizing suggestions from all sources. The
sork should not be hurried and enough time should be given or taken in order
to provide the necessary motive to start and continue the scheme.
6. The programme should start vith simple activities which the barrio pgople can vell organize vithout difficulty. Native sarzuelas might


28


be staged and local gemes played. The women may wish to start cooking
projects to shos hos sertein recipes are prepared. Courges in seniaulture,
gerdening, hortisulture and animal husbandry may be organized on verr sim-¬
ple and prectical baris around problems that confront the ferrers, thenselves.
7, Films of veriova kinia - educatianal, recreational and cultural
may be shown, arrangeme's for the same being made with proper authorities,
agencies and er,enigationa. Tre United Nations and its specialized agencies

would be glad to send filas upon request to responsible individuals.
Fifteen million of our tuenty million population are living in rural
ereas where educational and cultural opportunities are limited or remote.
With our traditionel enthusiasm for education, a movement of this kind is
bound to vin immediate support and with proper Mahagement and leadership,
it has a good chance to succeed. If our people are willing to pay for any
kind of education that may be offered to them, some by money-mad individuals,
surely they would be villing to foot the bill for vorthy enterprises that
are organized solely for their welfare and happiness. They vould be slow
at first to support an idea of this kind, but they vill not be slos to appreciate its possibilities. It is a question of leadership.
 --0CO --
Adult education embraces whatever help in
living can be got from the recorded or conmunicated
expexience of others. It is education for everybody at al. times and in all conditions.


- Lyman Bryson


29


MY EXPERIENCE IN TEACHING ADULTS
By Salvador Alojado
Ayuquitan Elementary School, Negros Oriental
On August, 1949, I was one of the teachers assigned to help accelerate adult education activities in our school. Believing that
promotion of literacy in our community needs attention, I at once
made a thorough survey of the status of illiteracy in the locality. I
met disappointment at first for many of those found illiterate are
too old to learn; that they did not have time for that purpose; that
they did not have presentable clothes to vear, and many other reasons
given to avoid enroling.
Honever, after explaining to them the importance of going to
school, I was able to encourage a fen to enroll, so that by the end
of August there vere tuelve male adults and ten female ones whose
ages ranged from 33 to 54 years in a class. At first, these adult
students were enthusiastic and regular in their attendance, but after
s couple of months, they dropped one by one so that at the close of
the school year only fourteen of them were left.
The absence of necessary materials was my handicap. At first
I discussed with them topics of interest, such as duties of the
citizen, community health, balanced diet, and some methods of modern
agriculture. hhen I received the manual for Teaching Adults, I began
to teach them writing and reading. Since most of them were very
poor, I had to supply them with paper and pencils.
I also tried the "Each-One-Teach-One" method, assigning bright
intermediate pupils (Grade VI) to teach one adult each. This
method was not very successful as I anticipated, for the adults did
not like to be taught by mere children. Honever, the pupils did their
duties persistently to obtain the best result.


I have not accomplished much in my teaching, although my conselation is that ny adult pupils can write not only their names but
elso sentences in the vernaculor. They con read, too. In fact,
some of them began to buy copies of Visayon Magagine like the "Bisayo,
I wish to suggest, however, that in the future in order to accomplish better results full-time adult-education tecchers be employed
The public school teachers are hesvily londed already with their academic vork, thus employing them as adult-education teachers moy make
them less efficient. I further suggest that more teaching materials
ond supplies be furnished the field for this work.
P


For the development of a comprehensive
program of adult education, only a publicly
controlled institution should be made responsible. Only an institution concerned with
the whole of educational needs can be ex--
pected to perform this function. The conclusion is inescapable - the public school
must do the job.


- Ralph W. Cherry


- 31 -
THE CONFERENCE IN SORSGGON
(Report to the Director)
The Conference on citizenship-civio aspect of adult education held in Sersogon on August 17-18, 1950 was attended by district
supervisors, high school and elementary principals, members of the ParentToacher associations and government officials. I noted much enthusiasm
for the work not only of school teachers but also of provincial officials and citizens. The Gomernor, the Treasurer and other provincial
suthorities took part in the deliberations. One President of ParentTeacher Association forcefully presented, with sensible suggestions,
the problems of adult education among rural folks. The Superintendent
who has the situation vell in hand and the support of all entities in
the province, got the program well laid out. The plan enlists joint
efforts of the thres social agencies, the home, the school and the
community, to implement the adult education program.
The organization procedure in Sorsogon had the special merit of
including right from the beginning the active perticipation of the citizens of the communities and the officials of the local governments.
Even the labor union in Sorsegon has a part in the movement. The
success of adult educstion depends largely upon the villingness of
the people and their leaders to understand its objectives and upon
their cooperation to carry out its activities. For having done much
along this line, the Conference as conducted was well justified.
From the discussions, it appeared that no extensive implementation of the program yet is actually going on in the division, except


perhaps in the Gubat High Sahool, where Mr. Emiliano M. Vida, the
Principal, reported an adult class composed of women in the neighborhood who are enrolled in the seving course conducted by the home
economic teachers. Mr. Vido also reported the possibility of promoting
native pottery in the locality, where materials for this industry
ore available in sufficient quantity and several people are presently engaged in rather crude manufacture of the article. The making
of fine abaca slippers is another industry in Gubat, which may be
developed into o productive community enterprise through adult education. There are reports about other home crafts in the province
that can be promoted as gainful occupetions to increase family income.
The work in the town of Matnog by the "aone plan" is mentioned
in this issue.


A


The larger meaning of adult education
takes us back to the fundamental problem of
our democratic society. It has to do xith
our capacity as a people and the capacity
of any other nation as a people to understand, to be responsible for, and to conduet the affairs of the nation.


Nicholas Murray Butler


- 33 -


THE 'ZONE! PLAN, A WAY OF COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
By Artemio C. Vizconde
Section Chief, Adult Education Division
If children, youth and adults must learn to work, play and plan
their living together, they should be made conscious of the necessity
of meeting problems through the active partnership of the family, the
neighborhood, the school and the community. To localize and simplify
the activities for better results, the division of larger communities
into smaller districts or 'zones! has been tried out successfully in
a number of places. It is practised in many communities perticularly
in the provinces of Cagayan, Iloilo and Sorsogon.
The living conditions and activitdes of residents in each 'zone
are studied and analyzed with the purpose of improving or developing
them for the welfere of the people therein. The 'zone! defines its
community objectives and makes plans to accomplish them. Usuallythe
zone' leaders work by specific units of activities and start with
models and desirable samples.
For example, in Matnog, a remote town in Sorsogon, the Principal
chose to work on the project of improving home conditions. A demonstration center was established in sach of the 'zones' or blocks into
which the tomn was divided. One of the homes in the 'zone' was designated the center. (In other provinces the home economics buildings ar
made the centers.) Desirable ideas and practices about home besutification, food preparation and housekeeping, health and sanitation
and home gardening were worked out and shown in the centers for mother
and members living in the 'zonest ta enrulate-and introduce, into—their
own homes.


- 3 -


In Santa Barbera and Oton, Iloilo, the 'zones' ore actively engaged in improving methods of garbage disposal, home decorstion,
flower gardening and building up community reading centers. The gommunity spiritand group action of the families living in each 'zone!
are discerned from the apperent improvement of general sanitary and
health conditions and from the orderly internal arrangement of the
homes.
In Cagayan the 'zone' plan is more extensively used. Various
home and community projects and industries are included in the progrom of barrio and tomn improvement. Esch 'zone! has more or less
activities than cther 'zones'. Road building, street cleaning, tree
planting, animal breeding, cheese making, health work and other similar community undertakings are carried on in different 'zones'.
Plans for house construction ere distributed by Izone' leaders es a
means of improving the traditional type of dwellings in rural areas
of the province.
The 'zone' plan inspires cooperative effort, civic pride and
local leadership. It develops self consciousness and initiative among
the citizens to improve their own lot. Every 'zone' vies for the best
results in the imprevement program in which a whole town or berrio is
engaged. All the inhabitants, young and old, fathers and mothers, the
poor and the more prosperous are stimulated to participate in verious
improvement projects. The 'zone' plan would work vonders for the enrichment of living conditions in the Philippine communities if it could
only catch the imagination of civic leaders and people of these pleces.
But, it requires vision and leadership not only of the teachers but
especially of citizen-leaders to make the plan work.


35


RURAL ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT THROUGH
COMMUNITY COOPERATIVES
By Amado L. Agerrilla
Section Chief, Adult Educstion
Division
An important sim of cooperative is the improvement of the economic conditions of its members. It is a movement which sims to emancipate them from the grips of poverty, profiteers and high cost of
living. Faced by dvindling economy, the Philippines can find relief
in community and rural cooperatives of farmers, tenants, peasants and
common laborers.
The rural cooperstive criginated way back in 1846 when F. W.
Raiffeisen was burgomaster (magistrate) of Weyerbusch, a highland
rural community in Germany. His people lived in poverty and were st
the mercy of usurious money lenders. Their duellings were mortgaged,
and they suffered from undernourishment. In that year a winter of
famine occurred, increasing the difficulties of the inhabitants. Raiffeisen organized, with the help of some more prosperous citizens, a
consumers' cooperative on a non-profit basis. The cooperstive obtained cereals end potatoes at less cost, put up a bakery and sterted
selling bread at reduced price to the community. Seeds vere brought
in for planting, which the peasants could obtoin from the cooperstive
without going into debt. From that time the "Raiffeisen Principles"
of cooperstive have blazed the way of cooperative movement in other
perts of the world.
Cooperstives may be organized by rural folks to make savings on
their purcheses. They may club together and make group purchases,
thus eliminating profit, which goes to middlemen. Agricultural-purchasing-cooperatives, consumers' cooperatives, credit cooperatives and


- 36 -


buying clubs are agencies of farmers and peasants in Egypt, Japan,
China, Ceylon and India. These purchasing cooperatives and buying
clubs give the members an opportunity to learn cooperation and coopera-¬
tive methods, improve the quality of goods they buy, and build up
their capital from savings made by wholesale purchases.
The disposition of the products of labor of the working classes
generally brings unfair and detrimental consequences to them. In the
Morocan towns the woodcutters used to cut cedars from June to September,
requiring the men to leave food provisions for their families during
their long absence from home. This compelled them, of course, to get
advances from money lenders and place themselves at the mercy of profiteers. The result was poor income to the woodcutters, their continued indebtedness and inferior quality of planks sold to jointers.
With the guidance and help of a government officiol, the first
town cooperative was established in Tounfite, with 140 cedar cutters.
Other cutters' cooperatives were organized. The members of the
cooperatives increased their output and improved the quality of the
planks. A piece which had berely brought them 7.50 to 12 franos before
the organization of the cooperstives was disposed from 20 to 25 frencs.
Now moodcutters have found a haven in these Morocan cooperatives enabling
them to rise from poverty and lead more independent life. Woodcutters!
cooperatives are helping national economy in many European countries,
Germany, Poland, Switzerland, Bulgaris and Sweden, some among them.


37 -


Cooperatives among fishermen are also playing important role in
the economic life of peoples in Belgium, Brezil, Canada, Denmerk,
Japan and the United States. Some had been so well developed thet federations of fishermen cooperstives have been formed in Brezil, Canada,
Ceylon and Hongkong. The members of these cooperatives not only share
profits but also receive the benefits of gueranteed credits, subsidies,
market advantages and the fecility to obtain erticles and supplies at
reduced prices.
In several countries cooperatives of domestio producers, wesvers,
potters, blaoksmiths, tannery, boot makers and artisans engaged in
small-scale production group themselves into cooperstives and secure
advantageous terms in their deals with big business and large-scale
industries.
In the Philippines business and industrial cooperstives have been
functioning for years, but they have not established midespread and
permanent foothold among the small farmers, barrio fishermen, market
vendors, cloth weavers, hat makers and other eraftsmen in towns and
barrios. Even among the teachers cooperative for economic advantage is still in its infant stage. There is no doubt thet if
consumers' and producers' cooperatives are developed and established
in small communities, the poverty-strioken masses vill get relief.
The pioneering work of the Philippine National Cooperstives Administretion in this movement should be given the support of the country.
It has done a lot of educating provincial people to realize the value
and importance, of cooperatives in the economic life of the communities.


- 38 -
At least in the towns of Bulacan, Rizal, Cavite, Zamboanga and other
provincial communities, verious kinds of cooperatives have been established. But our people have not as yet fully realized the many
economio values of cooperatives, and they have not come to the elass
of the cooperative-minded peoples of the West.





The proper philosophy of education for adult
prisoners is to consider the prisoner as primarily
an adult in need of educstion and only secondarily
in need of reform. Its proper aim is to extend
to prisoners as individuals every type of educetional opportunity that experience or sound reasoning shows may be of benefit or of interest to them,
in the hope that they may thereby be fitted, to
live more competently, satisfyingly and cooperatively as members of society.


- Austin H. MeoCormiok


- 39 -
TRENDS IN ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD


The Rural Second Unit at Porto Rico
One of the outstanding events in the development of rural education in Porto Rico is the crestion of what they call the Rural Second
Unit. In the language of ex-governor Raxford G. Tugwell the rural second unit was "Porto Rico's finest contribution to the art of education".
The project was the result of the sim of Porto, Rican Education Department to provide the pupils attending the central schools
with a training equal in quentity and quality to that received by
the pupils of urban schools. It was considered a step forward
in the education of the countrymen. That objective led to the reorganization of the rural educational system of Porto Rico.
There were tvo separate administrative units set up in the country.
The rural first unit covered the first three grades and provided the
peesant pupils with the essential elements of primary education.
The rural second unit was devised to enable the pupils, after satisfactory completion of the first unit, to learn a trade to "increase
their earnings and live a fuller and pleasenter life". The rural seA
cond unit prepares the pupil for a full and happy life by edjusting
him to the conditions of Porto Rican community life.
E
‘The practical results chich the rural second unit aims to accomplish are! (1) Improvement of the productive capacity of Porto Rico;
(2) Completion of the secial and health programme planned in terms of
the circumstances of the rural population; (3) Improvement of the
home life and surroundings of the rural population.


One feature of the rural second unit is the social work. It is
an effective social instrument. The classrooms are a rendezvous for
perents, teachers, children, representatives of the community, the
authorities and civic bodies. They discuss their oun affairs on
matters affecting the whole community. The different departments
and offices of the goverrment, such as, Health, Labor, Agriculture,
Commerce and Education use the rural second unit as a means of bringing publle services and information to the country folks. Its true
worth is expressei by Dr. Juen J. Acuna: "The rural second unit
in Porto Rico rercesents our first successful attempt to bring education into relation with the needs of the community.” (From Fundamental
Educetion, Januery, 1950)
Jibrail Rural Fellonship Centre
Jibrailis a small village in the Lebanon Mounteins. It mas chosen as the place for the extension service of the American Ministry of
Beirut. The progran consisted of five projects; fundamental education
for teen-age boys, fundamental education for teen-age girls, extension
services, local leadership and public heolth services.
Their progran of fundemental education embraced ten essentials of
rural family economy: (1) occupational skills, such as, agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry, etc.; (2) academic skills - ability to use
Arabic and mathematics effectively; (3) socio-economic-geography;
(4) cottage industries; (5) simple building and repair of form and home
tools; (6) health; (7) gemes and recreation; (8) family relations;
(9) emphasis on indigenous rural culture, including history of Lebanon,
civics, etc.; (10) religion. (From Fundemental Educstion, Jen., 1950)


-Al

Adult Education in Indonesis
The greater part of the illiteretes in Indonesia are peasents who do
not have regular vorking hours. Special primers vere made for them, and.
the method is called "illiteracy doctoring system". The teacher imitates a doctor by having consulting hours. During these hours the
illiterates have to be present.
The literscy compaign in Indonesis consisted of the following phases: (1) Spelling period (Ist grede); (2) Local post-illiteracy (2nd grade)
(3) General post-illiterocy (rd grade); (4) Public service (Ath grade).
(From Fundemental Educetion, Jen., 1950)
Adult Education in Austria
In Austris, adult education tries to spproach the whole human being.
For this reason, the residential colleges have erranged courses of four
to tuelve weeks! duration, in mhich young farmers, ferm-morkers, fectorymorkers and clerks become a community of their ewn. Plays, excursions,
dancing, singing, music and sports are important perts of this system of
education. The teacher behaves as a friend. The lectures are follomed
by discussions. (From Unesco Courier, June, 1950)
Educetional Caravan in Delhi, Indiz
With a view to intensifying the programme of audio-visual educstion in
rural aress an "Educational Caraven" has been devised by Shri S. S.
Mathur, Director of Education, Delhi Province, Indis.
The Educstional Caravan comprises a flcet of four vans - Cinema
van, two Mobile Exhibition Vans, and a Mobile Stone. The Cinema Van is


-427


fully equipped with lo mm, projector, a film-strip projector, peepshow equipment, a radio set, amplifiers, microphone, etc. The Mobile
Stage has been built on a special type of trailer with collapsible curtains, amplifier, footlights, etc. The two exhibition vans contain models,
charts and demonstrative materials relating to Health, Anti-Malaria, Nutrition, Maternity, Child-Nelfore, agriculture, end Adult Literacy. A circulating library is also conteined in the vans. In addition, portable
merry-go-rounds, see-saw, giant-wave, strides, swings, volleyball sets,
football sets, musicel instruments, drama costumes, folding chairs, and tables, shamianas, kanats, etc., are also carried in the vans. All the four
vans have been fitted with electric generating planta. (From Social Education News Bulletin, July 1, 1950)

Adult educotion today must not ride behind.
It must be in the forefront of intelligent thinking.. To this end it must be manned and staffed
with leader minds.


- Harry A. Overstreet


—43-
  IN THE PROVINCES
The following information were gleaned from the reports of
superintendents and supervisors on adult education activities in
the field:
NUEVA VIZCAYA
One of the community projects conducted by the Bambang High
School last year was food production in the rural districts. Backyards and plots mere planted to peanut, camote and casava. This
high school also conducted literacy work by the method of "each-onetesch-one". 93 adults mere taught by third and fourth year students during the first querter of the year.
The Division Superintendent reported that 64 community assemblies, with a total attendance of 11,769 had been conducted
in the division during the year. 34l adults received the Certificate of Proficiency as against 47 only during the school yeer
1948-1949. He employed "each-one-teach-one” teachers, some volunteer teacher: and 93 moderate-allowance teachers.
Mr. Zenon L. Ygarao, Acting Division Academic Supervisor, reported as follows:
"Each-one-teach-one" method was extensively used and mas found
to be very effective especially in out-of-the-toun places where it
was difficult to get together the adult illiterates."
4
The essential aim of adult education should
be to create mature citizens of a world community.


J. A. F. Ennals


-AA

ILOILO
Mr. Pedro Robles, High School Principal of Leon, Iloilo, reports that the percentage of illiteracy in the toan among the adults
is 103. The local private high schools have helped to improve literacy among town people.
Mr. Ricardo P. Lazaro, Principal of the Oton High School, reports that he finds the method of "each-one-teach-one" practical
in teaching literacy to adults. He employs students for this purpose. He finds out, honever, that some samples of writing presented by students as work of their adult learnors have been written
by other people. He suggests that if students are employed to
teach adults their work must be supervised closely. This high school
is conducting food demonstrations, community ecsembly lectures and
campaigns for the improvement of hygiene and sanitation. Recrestional activities in the community in the form of athletic games as softball, volleyball and basketball for adults are encouraged.
A report on the Rada Reading Center in Oton was given in the
last issue of Adult Education in Action. In a subsequent report the
following enumerstion of its accomplishments is given:
a. It has provided the people vith a better way of
spending leisure hours.
b. It has considerably reduced gambling and other vices.
c. It has provided the adults who have just learned hos to
read an opportunity to improve their reading ability.
d. It has kept the people abreast with the time.
e. It has raised their cultural level and inspired in them a
love for books and other reading materials.
f. It is proving to be an effective means of combating illiteracy, ignorance and superstition.
g. It helps in the formulation of local public opinion on
local end netional issues.
h. It has developed civic-conscicusness among the people.


—45-


ILOILO TRADE SCHOOL
A six-month course in automechanics was opened with good sttendance of adult citizens from Iloilo City and the neighboring
communities.
LAGUNA
The following was quoted from the annual report of the Division
Superintendent on adult educationi
NThe only means by which adult illiterates can
be liberated and ushered into a new morld of progress
and achievements is to teach them to read and write."
The same report states that on October, 1949, 31 illiterates
had been taught by the "esch-one-teach-one” method and this number
was increased to 619 in March, 1950. Illiteracy problem is not
very serious in the poblacion, but it is in the rural areas where
there are no local reading materials and educational facilities.
NEGROS OCCIDENTAL
Superintendent Fernendo S. Fuentes furnished the General Office two resolutions, Nos. 163 and 14 of the municipalities of Victorias and La Carlota, Negros Occidental, respectively, esch appropriating P2,000 for municipal adult education teachers. Iwo adult-education teachers were employed by the Superintendent accordingly. This
province had previously created a provincial position for an adult
education supervisor.
NEGROS ORIENTAL
The Division Superintendent quoted from the Adult Education
in Action for March, 1950, the following informetion:


Of the five provinces in each group, Negros Oriental
conducted the second highest number of community assemblies,
gathered the highest number of sttendance in these assemblies
and rated fourth in the number of adults who received the
Bureau's Certificate of Proficiency.
SULU
The Division Superintendent of Sulu points out the fact that
this province has 81.52 illiteracy, the highest in the Philippines,
as of 1939 Census Report. He attributes this situation to the poverty of the people, the lack of facilities for education and the
condition of pesoe and order in the province. He states that the nomedic life of the people is largely responsible for their backwardness.
He is adopting the "zone" plan in promoting the adult education
program, whereby esch community or district is encouraged to improve social life. He is enlisting the cooperstion of the Provincial Governor in congregating people for community work.


CEBU
The folloming is quoted from the annual report of the Division Superintendent of Cebu:
"Fundamental and adult education is now the
concern of the Buresu of Public Schools. We are beginning to realize that besides the liquidation of illiteracy, fundamental adult education includes the continuation of the education of men and women who failed
to finish a vocational course while in school. If
given adequate financial support this program can be
pushed more effectively during the ensuing year."
The Avellana High School is promoting localindustries.
This school has for some time been developing home orafts in the
form of home projects.


-A7a
PAMPANGA
Adult education work especially during the school year 1949-
1950, nas affected by the disturbed conditions of peace and order
in the province. During the first part of the year only 10
adult education classes had been organized.
Later, as conditions improved, according to the Superintendent, 44 adult classes were organized with a total attendance of
1,080 and 286 adults given Certificate of Proficiency. Subsequently, another literacy report was received in the General Office.
THe Pampanga High School and the Pampanga Trade School have
led other schools in teaching adults by the "esch-one-teach-one"
method. Mr. Torres, Principal of the Pampanga High School, has
been giving attention to the evaluation of work done in these
classes. The Superintendent has urged the use of this method
of teaching adults by the intermediate pupils, high school students and teachers.
The Superintendent thinks that there should be a lam making
school attendance of adult illiterates compulsory until they receive the diploma of graduation from the adult education course.
SURIGAO
180 schools offered adult education classes which had an
enrolment of 1152. There were IIAA tutors who taught adults by
the "esch-one-teach-one" method. 2404 received the Certificate
of Proficiencyaccording to the report in the General Office.


-AB-.
CATANDUANES
The division had two objectives: (1) to continue the effort
in reducing illiteraoy; (2) to make adult education an important
factor in the improvement of community life. Many perent-teacher
associations were organized as the chief agencies of the program,
whose sctivities were carried into the homes by means of these organizations and by the school children. The Superintendent reports that papers and magazines in the vernacular are lacking in
the localities for the promotion of reading skill and generalinformation of the people.
PALAWAN
Last year community service consisted largely of campaigns for
toilet construction, improvement of sanitation and developing
leisure ectivities.
Palawan had parent-teacher associstions that paid honoraris
for adult education teachers.


ROMBLON
The perent-teacher associations gave the adult education program much financial assistance. 80 schools had PTas, which sppropriated in their budgets amounts ranging from ₱5.00 to-₱400.00,
and aggregsting in the amount of P5,040 in the whole division.
These PTAs also helped in keeping the adults in their classes.


CAGAYAN
The division of Cagayan has conducted at the beginning of this
year conferences and seminars to prepare the division for the visit


-9*


ef Superintendents from other divisions to Cagayan, mhich had been
designated as one of the project centers of adult education. In
these conferences the roles of elementary and secondary schools in
community schoel program have been planned.
Cagayan is conducting campaigns for establishing community
health centers for the training of unlicensed midwives and for better infant care. It has also initiated the making ef plans for house
construction suitable for families of lew and average income in
the rural communities.
The following taken from the report of the adult Eduostion
Supervisor, seems to indicate the objectives of the program of community improvement in Cagayan:
"The conventionists vere brought to the tomns of
Selane and Enrile for a visit, making observations on
some pheses of community life. Enrile is considered the
cleanest town in the province of Cagayan. The streets
and house surroundings were found very sanitary and
clean. Every home has some kind of food production projects. Every home has a home garden. Several poultry
projects and good veriety of hogs were found. Fruit
trees are propagated and groun in some home yards."
ILOCOS NORTE
An adult educstion council wes organized in the municipality
of Currimao, mith the Municipal Mayor as chairman and l0 members
in charge of the different aspects of adult education.
The recreational facilities of the people were improved-mith..
the reeent-oonstruction of a swimming pool-near Laoag, costing
P20,000 and halding 250,000-gallona-of water.


50-


A very encouraging movement nas undertaken by the salt producers in the municipality of Davila, who formed among themselves
an organization for cooperative production. Cooperatives are
emong the agencies of adult education being promoted by the UMESCO
According to the reports the program of adult education is
bringing the wholesome effect of reducing gambling, which is
giving say to Sunday adult classes. The adult education classes
are also helping in curteiling fishing by the use of dynamite, which
is practically discontinued in some barrios.
ILOCOS SUR
In order to strengthen adult educstion councils, the Adult Educotion Supervisor recommended to the Mayors that these councils be
senctioned by the action of the Municipal Councils.
Evaluation of literacy work of adult education classes showed
that the three-month course completed by adults in these classes
does not bring permenent result. The adults should be provided with
materials to read after receiving their Certificate of Proficiency.
The economic aspect of the program is being given considerable
attention. A survey was made to find out local industries and occupations which may be developed in the different communities. Blacksmithing, woodworking, jewelry and ornemental crafts ond making of
stone mortars were found to be productive sources of income in towns
and barrios of the province.


—51-


MASBATE
The Adult Education Supervisor campaigned during vacation for
increase of food production in rural communities. In Mobo he
stressed the need of planting bananas and root crops. He found
that in the barrio of Nabangag the people were producing enough
corn, varieties of root crops and vegetables to supply local needs.


SAMAR
Insistent suggestions to include actual vocational work in
the adult educetion progrem hove been received from the field.
The following portion of the report of the Adult Education Supervisor indicates a trend toward practical and productive adult education:


"as much as possible, adult education should include the teaching and improving of local occupations.
The courses should aim to develop local profitable
industries and improved methods of production of
these pccupational pursuits in which the people of
the communities are engaged to earn their livelihood. Cloth weaving, pottery, basketry, fishing,
tool making, and the like which are common occupations of the peorle of rural and barrio communities
should be encouraged, improved and expanded through
adult schools! This will result in making our
educational efforts productive and helpful to the
economic development of the country."
ZAMBOANGA
An important project of adult education, the survey of illiteracy, was undertaken in Zamboanga City by Mrs. Liceria B. Soriano,
Acting Superintendent of City Schools. This survey mhich was the
first ster in literacy campaign, revealed the folloving percentage of
illiteracy in four districts of Zamboange City:


- 52


Zamboangs District —-- 21.38
—— 23.14
Tetuen District
Manicahan District —- 38.02
Basilan Distriot ---- 42.08


MANILA


As a part of adult education conducted by the Wanila
City Schools, about three hundred school jenitors were given training in
their jobs in five Manila high schools, namely, Jose Abad Santos
High School, Torres High School, Mapa High School, Manuel Roxes
High School, and the Rodriguez Vocational High School.
The folloring program of training was followed:
(s) To familiarize the school janitors with the basio
health rules so that they can efficiently contribute
to the maintenance of clean and healthful environment
in the school system and in their community.
(b) To acquuint the janitors vith their duties to impress
upon them the importance of their role in the school
system and in their community.
(c) To give the jenitors knonledge and skillin the basic
operations and repair jobs in carpentry, electricity
and plumbing, to enable them to do minor repairs in
their respective schools.
The janitors were divided into two groups. While one group was
attending the in-service training, the other group attended to the
essential service in the school.
The subjects offered were! Citizenship and Community Service,
Health, Cerpentry, Plumbing and Electricity.


458-


ALBAY
Mr. Jose Ramirez, Principal of Guinobatan High School, reported
the following number of adults taught by the high school students:
First year —---—- 113
Second " ----- 113
Third " ------- 150
Fourth " ---- 100


MARI NDUQUE
The following is a part of the report of Superintendent Alarcont
NA typical one was the adult education class in Kawit
Elementary School which opened on February 1, 1950. The
enrolment consisted of 25 males and 12 females, with ages
ranging from lo to 70 years. Lessons consisted of reading
and writing. Lectures were given on food production, personal hygiene and sanitation, payment of taxes, and topics
relating to school and community."


BULACAN
Under the leadership of the Principal, Mr. Santiago Fabian,
this school is extending much help in the promotion of occupstional
undertakings of the people in the community. Oourses offered to
adults in dressmaking, tailoring, barbering, and poultry raising
are meeting local needs of the rural folks.


CENTRAL LUZON AGRICULTURLL SCHOOL
Farm extension service is undertaken with good results for
neighboring communities. Demonstration on soil cultivation, use of
modern farm equipment and proper raising of livestock have improved
local farm methods, opened new vocational projects and intensified
food production.


*54-


SOME OBSERVATIONS ON ADULT EDUCATION
ACTIVITIES
1. The various reports indicate that adult education workers
possess considerable background and knowledge of the objectives of
fundamental and adult education. While a great deal has been reported on the methods and ways of implementing the various practical
phases of the program, informations are lacking on the concrete
results of the undertaking. It would be valueble, for example, to
knoy the extent of food production, the actual improvement of community flewer gardening, or the number of reading centers established
by adult education workers.
2. The results reported on the use of the "each-one-teach-one”
method should enable the adults not only to read and write but to
understand what they read and write, and from this sbility to learn
good community living and useful citizenship.
3. In some divisions the parent-teacher associstion is becoming a potential agency for the promotion of adult education. There
are communities where these associations are financing the adult
education classes.
4. Itis noted in some reports that high school students engaged
in teaching adults by the "each-one-tesch-one" method have, presented
writing specimens of people other than the adult learners they have
tutored.
5. Encouraging reports are received on the formation of adult
educstion councils. These councils have great possibilities for the
program. They will be bringing home adult educstion to the hearts of


-5-


the communities. The Ilocos provinces-ere gvan getting municipal
councils—to sanchion the organization of adult education councils.
6. It takes time to establish the foothold of the adult education program in the communities. From the reports of adult education workers, there are observed veritable indications this year that
the foundation of this program is being laid steadily although gradually in almost all divisions by the preliminary panel discussions, conferences and seminars held by Superintendents among principals, supervisors and citizen leaders of the communities.


F


The sim of adult education is not so much
to provide instruction as to ensure a training; it
seeks to create an atmosphere of intellectual curiosity, social freedom and tolerence and to stimulate in each person the demand and the capacity
to take an active part in the development of the
cultural life of his day.


Elsinore Unesco Report.








ENROIMENT IN ADOLT EDUCATION
The following table shows the report of attendance in organized adult schools,
"Each-One-Teach-One", and community assemblies, for the School year 1949-1950


(July, 1949 to June.


INo.of!


1950), inc
ITchrs.in!


luding the Fourth Quarter(April,May & June 19501:..
Enrolment!No. Tutors!No.Adults! Gommunity Assemblies


DIVISION


tadult


¡Organized in Organo!


for


¡Taught by!


and


Forums Held


-


1Schg.!


 Schools!izod Schs


!"E-O-T-O"¡"E-O-T-O"


INo, TimestAttendance


Abra


1 47 1


4n


!


1,151


1,191


!


1,192


38


4,600


Agusan


Albay


1 60 !


 60


!


1,279


!


5,504


!


3,557


1


lo8


!


24,796


Antiquo


!


192


Bataan


!
1 An


 47


!


1,704


!


900


1


941


25


5,530.


Batanes


1 4


4


179


1


208


!


2l0


23


2,821


Batangas


! 25


25


1,555


!


42


2,727


Bohol


1 52 !


1 329


4,303





4,661


!


4,673


11,710


1182 ,786


Pukidnon


 56 1


1 56


!


1,605


!


998


1


1,004


!


20


2,684


Bulacan


1 31 !


31


!


1,055


1


418


!


418


28





12,925


Cagayan


1 46 !


46


.


1,049


!


1,455


1


1,490





222


!


18, 546


Cam. Norto


1 19


19


1


41l


!


604


1


604


1


13


2,940


Cam. Sur


1 23 1


23


!


577


!


364


!


564


1


17


4,380


Capiz


1255 1


1 280


!


1,845


1


521


!


635





28


5,768


Catanduanos


1 21 1


 21


417





1,470





1,470


1


12


2,820


Cavite


3


2


115


!


4


930


Cobu


t115 I


122


1


1,366


1


1,982





2,004


1


228


66,154


Cotabato


! 21 1


29


!


573


!


1,822


1


1,856


!


99


1o,906


Davao


1 79 t


79


!


1,708


:


511


!


632


I.


23


2,458


Ilocos Norto


1106 1


106


!


1,692


!


2,067





2,118


1


67


11,051


Ilocos Sur


 27 !


 28


!


790


!


1,771


!


1,73


!


42


!


15,350


Iloilo


1 31 !


 35


!


642


!


5,007


!


3,292





57


5,955


Isabela


5 !


 5


1


170


1


347





347


!


50


6,902


Laguna


7


255


1


396


!


427


!


7


1,040


Lanao


1 22


22


!


684


!


188





236





8


t


256


La Union


1 43


! 43


1


1,464


!


3,915


f

5,913


55


!


15,041


Leyte


1 65 1


1 65


!


6,482


!


32,115


1


32,113


!


51


25,404


Manila


!


19


!


29


1


8


1,105


Marinduque


1 26


26
!


!


861


5





5


!


89


!


10,972


tasbato


1 3



5


105


!"


1,646


1


1,646


102


!


21,324


Mindoro


1 23


1 27


!


913


1


164





164


!


67


1


10,638


Misamis Occ.


1252


1274


!


2,569


1


1,687


1


2,058


!


1o9


!


8,698


Misamis Or.


5


.6


91


!


423


!


455


1


66


!


5,394


Mountain


1272


1 272


!


11,590


152


*152


1


292


!


6, 961


Negros Occ.


1 22 *


 46


!


1,656


!


1,689


!


1,718


57


1


5,522


Negros Or.


1180


180


!


3,865


!


5,596


!


3,570





794


!


125,526


Nueva Ecija


1 66


F 66


!


2,020


!


2,260


!


2,268


!


6


665


Nueva Vizcayo


7


1 "


220


!


1,040


1


1,085


!


92


1 15,197


Palayan


1144


14


!


1,958


!


212


1


255


!


59


!


5,765


Pampanga


69


1 69


2,124


1


2,179


1


2,302


17


6,265


Pangasinan


1146


1 157


5,917


1


1,291


! 1,291





33


!


10,265


Quezon


110


1 10


i


551


1


90





90


Rizal


11


f II


359


!


390


1


590


!


15


!


6,549


Romblon


1257


1 271


!


2,383


!


1,578


1


1,556


!


1o2


1


1,237


Samar


35


r 55


1


1,541


!


22,243


 22,397


1


29


11,750


Sorsogon


!17


1 17


1


516


1 2,767


1 2,767


!


42


!


12,457


Sulu


1112


1 112


1 5,627





68


1


86


18


3,650


Surigao


1118


1118


!


2,818


!


7,070


1


",070


i


46


28,055


Tarlac


1 55


! 55


1


1,400


 1,253





1,282


!


35


!


 6,085


Zambalos


! 10


1 l0


511


!


790


!


 760


!


15


1


 5,244


Zamboonga


TG


222


2,859


 21821


I


 2,053





38


I


 3.01o


T OTAL



13.1751 3,682


 


82,483





1119,054


1121,086


I


5,088


2 1


761,088


-57
ROMOTION IN LETERACY CLASSES
Schbol Year 1949-50-
E A AL  L E


¡Organized!"E.O.T.O"IT o t a 1 1 Numbe:
Division
ag
Clasges!.


Abra


1,151


DISE


Y


235


1


.6


Agusan


1,816


Albay


1 1,279


T


3,57


1


33


Ant


Ba


1 1,704


!


941


I


2,615


P.


Batan


179


4


210


1


389


1.


Batangas


1 1,555


!


1,555


Bohol


L,303


!


L,673


!


8,976


Bukidnon


1,605


1


1,004


!


2,608


Bulacar


,035


!


413


!


1,453


Cagayan


,049


1,490


!


2,52


Cam. Norte


604


!


1,015


Cam. Sur


57


364


1


AL


Capiz


1,845


633


!


2,418


Catanduanes


417


!


1,470


1,887


Cavite


115


I1.


Cebu


, 266


!


2,004


!


3,270


Cotabsto


37


!


1,856


!


2,22


Davao


708


632


!


2,916


Ilocos Norte


1,692


!


2,118


!


3,810


Ilocos Sur


790


T
L,T


!


2,562


Iloilo


642


9,292


3,9


Isabela


170


347


517


Laguno


254


427


Lango


684


236


920


La Union


1,Aok


3,913


5,3


Leyte


6,182


32,113


50


Manila


29


20


Marinduque.


861


5


860


biasbate


105


1,616


1


1,75


Mindoro


2


164


1,0


Misamis Occ.


-, 560


2,058


L,621


Misamis Or.


1


433


524


4


Mountain


1,594


152


11,742


3,6


Negros Occ.


1,656


1,718


3,37L


Negros Or.


3,86


3,570


7,43


Nueva Ecija


2,020


2,268


4, 288


Nuevea Vizcaya


220


1,085


1,30


Palawan


1,958


238


,193


Pampanga


1 2,124


2,302


4,44


Pangasinan


5,91


1,2


208


587


Quezon


35


90


ZAl


llo


Rizal


720


35


8.t


Romblon


2,3


5t


L,AAa


Samar


54


2,3


219


.5


Sorsogon


516


76


3,.


8.13


Sulu


Surigao


Tarlac





82


Zambales


1


0


lo1


306


.7


Zamboanga





—


CA





—TO TA L.


ua
-g
LOS


1203,851


NON. NW ovomOoy
4950
NO. 6


VOLNI70.6 NOV. 4950


RO
gONTENIS


Paga


EDITORIAL; ADULT EDUCATION FROM THE BOSOM ................1
BASIG USES OF LITERACI . 3
Byy Juan C. Laya
mug
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR ON ADULT EDUCATION ............ 7
PAPAYA TURNS TO EGGS  9
HON FEDERICO BECAME A SHOPOMNER .......................... 13
By Juan B. Congaga
FISH CONSERVATION ....... 19
By D. V. Vi. ladolid
THE HALILI HIGH SCHOOL IN SANTA MARIA, BULACAN
A COMMUNIIY-CSWIRRED SCHCSL.......................... 17
ENI
WHY I OPENED AN ADULT EJUCATION CLASS IN DATAGON ......... 22
NORLD-NIDE HEALTH IMPROVEMENT
A KEY TO PEACE, SAYS THORP.......... 25
THE DISGUSSION METHOD . 27
By Artemio C. Vizconde
TRENDS AND PRACTICES OF ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD ........... 30
ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES .............. 34


ADULT EDUCATION FROM THE BOSOM


¿dult education should emerge from the mind and hearts of our adults.
It should largely begin with them and less from the mentors. Adult education cannot go far until our adults have caught the inspiration and seen
the need for it. To go to classes does take away a part of the adult's
time, and to many their time is precious and even a matter of life to
their families. Again, they are old and indifferent. They have passed
youth and adolescence and are fast leaving behind the age of adult, and
so they ask why change the ways of twenty to fifty years of complacent
life in the old setting and environments.
Adult education should approach its problems with means that vill
stimulate realization of its need and create interest among the adults to
want it over and above traditions and customary practices. It should
seek its way deep into the consciousness of these people, fighting its
battles on their omn ground. Let the adult learn how to read and write
not for the Bureau certificate award, but because he needs the knovledge
to enable him to get information from the newspaper and printed page or
to enable him to affix his name on documents, such as payroll end money
order claim. Let him come to an adult class or attend an assembly not to
hear the stereotyped lectures on social and civic education but to learn
from the barrio teacher why his children often get dysentery, malaria or
cold and to learn how to apply simple household remedies. Let the adult
education class be a practical source of happiness for the rural folks.
Mobilize the group to improve their local industries and homecrafts so


- 2-


they can make more sale of their products or to enlarge their vegetable
gerdens, poultry and piggery so they can have more and better food and
earn something for the rainy day.
With the level of culture and limited educational background of people in our communities, it is necessary that we adopt such plan as will
bring home to our unenlightened elements adult education that deals with
ectual human reelities and provides for the needs of economic and social
life. Only in that way will the desire for improvement spring from the
bosom of the unlettered masses and can we escape the rot of the purely
literacy programmes.


3-
BASIC USES OF LITERACY
Juan C. Laya, Aotg. Division Superintendent, Bataan
At this stage, the literacy campaign in the Division has not yet
made a good start. It has been noted thet literacy campaigns are often
handipapped by the fact thot they are conducted with no motive in mind
for prospective literates. Often, teachers and coaches making list-surveys of illiterates or teachers of illiterates already listed, but since
they can not specify any advontages resulting from literacy except general social prestige and possibly vague statements alsut their duties as
good citizens, prospective pupils are not induced to study. The result
is complete laok of contact betmeen cosch and pupil and inability to
begin any campaign whatsoever. It is easy to see that the campaigns
should be better motivated. People go through great inconvenience and
even great pains to make themselves literate only if they can see for
themselves definite personal advantages in literacy. They exert effort
only in proportion to the desirability of literacy which they see for
themselves. Teachers knon this as "motivation".
There sre a number ef specific acts of reading and writing which
should be borne in mind so that literacy workers may be able to name them
whenever they are confronted with the problem of motivating literacy work.
READING
The folloving are representative examples of common reading activities in the daily life of the people of Bataant
1. Reading our own notes or memorandums of important things we wish
to remember, like the list of our debtors, list of our laundry, list of
contributions or collections received or paid, etc.
2. Reading the signs on buses so ve may know which ones to take
without stopping the bus and inquiring where it is going.


4


3. Reading signs in streets, buildings, and other public places so
as to know where to go or which rooms to enter, or what to do, so that
ve can transact business vithout too many useless inquiries which annoy
people who mould tell us, "Can't you read the sign?n
4. Reading lobels on medicine bottles and other containers so that
we may take the right medicine and not make mistakes which may cause sickness or even death
5. Reading lobels of canned or packeged foods so that we may knon
ourselves the good or bad qualities of the things we are buying
6. Reading bulletin boords, notices, posters, etc. in order thot we
may not violate municipal ordinances, orders, etc. and in order that we
may take active port in community and national movements
7. Reading movie screens during the showing of films in order that
ve may understand those that are absolutely essential for the understanding and enjoyment of the story
8. Reading notices warning the public against possible denger or disaster, as when a building is about to collapse, a road or bridge is impassable, a detour is necessary, etc.
9. Reoding the names of candidates during election so that we may
vote properly
10. Reading pamphlets, lenflets, folders, announcements, etc. in order
that ve may be able to know the latest developments in the community
11. Reading pamphlets, articles, and other reading motters giving
useful information on hon to ccok tasty dishes, how to increase one's
catch in fisliing or increase one's harvest through methods found effective by others
12. Reading news, articles, stories, poems, etc. in newspopers and
magazines when ve are not busy working so that ve can get useful information or else pleasure out of our abillty to read.
13. Reading prayers and other religious materials from prayer books
end other religious publications in order that one may do one's spiritual
duties properly
14. Reading about other lands and other peoples in order that one may
knon places other than our omn home toun
15. Reading obout the inspiring lives of great and good men who did
great and benutiful deeds, like those of heroes and saints, in order that
ve may be inspired to lead better and more useful lives


5
16. Reading ordinancea, orders, and other materials issued by our
government so that ve may knos whatis exrected of us as good citizens
17. Reading nenspapers and magazines in order that ve may know the
developments in the Korean wer, in Congress, and follos other movements
and events that affect qur daily lives
18. Reading uhen ne are waiting at a bus station or other places
vhen we are not doing anything in order thot the time may pass more quiakly or profitably and pleasurably
19. Reoding tho books and materials being read by our own children
in arder that we may be able to help them in their studies or else see
for ourselves if what they are reoding is really useful and wholesome
20. Reading contrects or agreements before we sign them so that we
con not be cheated
21. Reading letters of friends or other members of the family
22. Reading the numbers on radio dials, on electric and nater metera
on houses
23. Reading the denominction of paper bills (money)
24. Reading the calendar, the clock, etc.
25. Reading to know the value of check or money order received
26. Reading to knos current prices of articles at fixed-price stores
27. Reading to enjoy and afrreciate humorous anecdotes or jokes
MLITING
The following ere typical vriting activities of adults:
1. Nriting doun thinas we vish to remember, like the names and addresses of our friends and acquaintances, things we should do at some
future time, like our collections when ve are assigned to do some collecting for an asseciation, etc.
2. Mriting down liat of accounts so that ve knon how much we ove
others or how much some other people should pay us
3. Hriting lists of things we give others (like our laundry) so that
we can remember to receive items back, or else lists of vhat ve receive
so that wo can give them back
4. Writing short notes or directions nhenever we can not ourselves
see a person we wish to instruct


-A
3. Reoding signs in streets, buildings, and other public places so
es to know where to go or which rooms to enter, or what to do, so that
ve can transact business vithout too many useless inquiries which onnoy
people vho would tell us, "Con't you read the sign?n
4. Reading lobels on medicine bottles and other contoiners so that
ve may toke the right medicine and not make mistakes which may cause sickness or even death
5. Reading labels of canned or packeged foods so that we may know
ourselves the good or bad qualities of the things we are buying
6. Reoding bulletin boards, notices, posters, etc. in order thot we
may not violate municipal ordinances, orders, etc. and in order that we
may take active part in community and national movements
7. Reading movie screens during the showing of films in order that
we may understand those that are absolutely essential for the understanding end enjoyment of the story
8. Reading notices warning the public agcinst possible danger or disaster, as when a building is about to collapse, a road or bridge is impassable, a detour is necessory, etc.
9. Rending the names of candidates during election so that we may
vote properly
10. Reading pamphlets, lenflets, folders, announcements, etc. in order
thot ve may be able to know the latest developments in the community
11. Reading pamphlets, erticles, and other reading motters giving
useful information on hon to ccok tasty dishes, how to increase one's
catch in fishing or increase one's harvest through methods found effective by others
12. Reading news, articles, stories, poems, etc. in newspapers and
magazines when ve are not busy working so that ve can get useful information or else pleasure out of our abillty to read.
13. Reading prayers and other religious materials from prayer books
end other religious publications in order that one may do one's spiritual
duties properly
14. Reading about other lands and other peoples in order that one may
know places other than our oun home toun
15. Reading about the inspiring lives of great and good men mho did
great and benutiful deeds, like those of heroes and saints, in order that
we may be inspired to lead better and more useful lives


- 5


1o. Reading ordinonces, orders, and other materials issued by our
government so that we may knos whatis exrected of us as good citizens
17. Reading nenspapers and mngazines in order that we may know the
developments in the Korean wer, in Congress, and follos other movements
and events thet affect qur daily lives
18. Reading uhen we are woiting at a bus station or other places
vhen we are not doing anything in order thot the time may pass more quickly or profitably and pleasurably
19. Rending tho books and materials being read by our own children
in erder that we may be able to help them in their studies or else see
for ourselves if what they are reoding is really useful and wholesome
20. Reading contrects or agreements before we sign them so that we
can not be cheated
21. Reading letters of friends or other members of the famidly
22. Reading the numbers on radio dials, on electric and uater meters,
on houses
23. Reading the denominction of paper bills (money)
24. Reading the calendar, the clock, etc.
25. Reading to know the value of check or money order received
26. Reading to knon current prices of articles et fixed-price stores
27. Reading to enjoy and arrreciate humorous anecdotes or jokes
MLITING
The followina ere typical vriting activities of adults:
1. Nriting doun things we vish to remember, like the names and addresses of our friends and acqueintances, things we should do at some
future time, like our collections when ne are assigned to do some collecting for an association, ete.
2. Hriting doun liat of accounts so that ve knon hos much we ove
others or how much some other people should pay us
3. Mriting lists of things ve give others (like our laundry) so that
we can remember to receive items back, or else lists of vhat we receive
so that we can give them back
4. Writing short notes or directions nhenever we can not ourselves
see a person we wish to instruct


6-


S. Vriting our names on important documents, petitions, requests,
etc. that need our signature
6. briting signs or posters nhich we vish to have other people read,
as when we vish to warn them of danger, to announce some happy event, or
to announce something we are selling or vish to buy, rent, etc.
" 7. Writing the names of candidates we wish to seleot during P.T.A.
elections, general elections, etc.
8. Writing letters of praise or complaint whenever we feel that we
have something important to exrress as when we wish to have improvement
made in our streets, our markets, our toun drsinage canals, etc.
9. Hriting the amount of harvest from fields or orchards in terms of
cavans, kilos , etc.
10. Making meekly or monthly budget
11. Vriting to be able to deposit and vithdraw money in the bank
12. Hriting to be able to cush one's own money order or warrant
13. Vriting the articles we vish to buy before shopring in the market
14. Vriting letters of condolence to bereaved friends or families
living in distant places
Teachers doing literacy work should bear these and similar basio
uses of literacy in order that they may be able to sive specific reasons
for aoquiring reading and uriting skills.
On the averane, a quota of from 5 to 6, possibly more illiterates
taught in each purok between now and December 31, 1950, seems ensy of accomplishment even on the each-one-tench-one basis.


7


DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR ON ADULT EDUCATION


A significant move in behalf of adult education sas made by Hon.
Sotero Baluyot, Secretary of the Department of the Interior. Even
before the War Secretary Baluyot identified himself vith the promotion of
adult educstion especially in the Kaledian Farm Adult Education Project
in arayat, Porpanga. Secretary Baluyot issued the following provincial
circular on adult education:


Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Manila


PROVINCIAL CICULAR
(Unnumbered)
SUBJECT: Adult Education - Promotion
of the Program of -
August 31, 1950
In line vith the educational provisions of Commonmealth Act No. 80,
each and every local official under the jurisdiction of this Department is
hereby enjoined to give every possible cooperation and assistanoe in the promotion of the program for adult education now being conducted by the Bureau
of Public Schools, to teach the illiterates to read and write in the vernacular.
Experience has shown that the great obstacle in the promotion ofthis
program is the apparent indifference and lack of interest on the part of
these illiterates to nttend classes for adult education being conducted by
our public school teachers in the community. To overcome this obstacle, it
is urged that all local officials, particulerly provincial governors, city
and municipal mayors should undertake a vigorous compaign in favor of adult


-8-
education and urge every illiterate adult to attend classes for adult
education in their respective conmunities.
It is desired that this circular be given the widest publicity possible.


(SGD.) SOTERO BALIYOT
Secretary of the Interior


To All
Provincial Governors and
City Mayors


---O---


Compaigns against illiteracy are
never more successful than when they appeal to the illiterate as the first stage
in a progression whose final end is not so
much leorning to read as securing the
meons to improve the material circumstances of their lives.


Dr. Joime Torres Bodet


9.
PAPAYA TURNS TO EGGS
From the Report of Mr. Pedro C. Magno
Principal, Papaya Provincial
High School, Nueva Ecija
Who would think Papaya turning to egasl Yet it happened. There are
fem papaya trees here, but one can see plenty of single-comb white leghorns.
Papaya is a small town in Nueva Ecija with estimated populetion of
8,700. It has been known traditionally for its abundance in papaya, but
presently it has the claim of second in egg production in the Philippines;
— second to Santa Maria. It lies just tuo kilometers from the foot of the
Sierra Madre Mountains at the end of the road leading to the national highwan
at Sen Leonerdo. Although it is an out-of-the-way town and on rolling hill
yet it enjoys complete peace and contentment which is a rarity in this
pert of Central Luzon. Papayenos are simple rural folks having the interest
and inclination to seek enlightenment in life as may be gleaned from tha
fact that they are responsive to opportunities offered for better living,
and that there are severalin Manila, seeking education in colleges and
universities. One of the main sources of livelihood in the community, for
chich the town is non becoming femous, is poultry raising.
THE BEGINNING OF THE POULTRY BUSINESS
IN PAPAYA
In 1937 Mr. Bienvenido abes, e native of Papaya, bought some Rhode
Island layers to begin poultry reising. Unfortunetely, due to his lack
of experience and knowledge obout the industry, he fsiled in his first


- 10 -


attempt. He turned to pigeon reising shich he found later not very lucrative. So, he shifted back to poultry raising, this time using the
native breed. Nevertheless, with the interest he has in vhite leghorns,
he tried all possible means to have them agoin in his stock. He bought
chite leghorn eggs and had them hatched through the native process.
In 1939, he sold the only carabao he inherited from his parents and
bought agoin 100 chicks. During this time he sought advice on proper
feeding and housing of the birds from Dr. Santos Porina, a doctor of veterinory medicine.
By 1941, An Abes had a production of 90 eggs daily, and vould have
made good in this business earlier had not the Wor interferred. Hovever,
efter liberation he started again poultry raising nith 200 shite leghorn
ohicks. In 1947, he added 100 chicks more to his stock. A few months
later, he was able to recover his investment of P2,874. Mith this success, he was inspired to propagate poultry raising as an industry omong
the people of Papaya.


THE GRONTH OF TRESENT INDUSTRI
The expansion of the poultry industry in Papaya has been the result
of the vork of Dr. Porina, Mr. Abes, ond the Papaya High School. Mith
their initistive cormunity assembly progroms with the use of audio-visual
aids on poultry reising, were held. As a result of the campaign several
vere induced to engage in poultry. So completely sold vere the small
formers to the business thet they went to the extent of mortgaging their
property just to hove enough capital to start even a small poultry of
100 layers. In furtherance of the industry, the Municipal Mayor and the


11-


Principal of the high school took steps to organise the poultry raisers
into a cooperative, known as the Papaya Poultry Cooperative Association.
Mr. Bienvenido lbes who is regarded as the father of the industry in the
community has been authorized to manage the business of the association.
The enterprise attracted the attention of the suthorities. To give
protection to the thousands of layers, pullets, chicks, and cocks, against
the ravages of the foul pox, abian pest, roup, etc., the government has
assigned Mr. Isabelo Bote of the Buresu of Animal Industry to give advice
to poultry owners sbout proper feeding and housing of birds and detection
end cure of diseases. Under such government supervision, and with the
earnestness of the townspeople, the poultry business in Papaya is assured
of its future. It will give sustenance to thousands sho mere previously
dependent mostly upon the betel leaf industry. It vill supplant betel
leaf growing, which hes foiled to raise the standard of living.
According to a survey made, the poultry business in Papaya is now
capitalized at one-third of a million pesos. There ere 185 individuals
engaged in the business, 93 of whom are members of the cooperative. With
the use of incubctors in the torn, the number of fowls have increased
considerably. Now the business brings a monthly net income of P8,000.00
to the municipality. This suecess has improved the living conditions
and ability of the people to contribute to publie improvements, such
es sehool buildings, churches, public parks, bandstand and puericulture
center.
EFFECT UTON COAMUNITI LIFE
But what is also commendatory about this enterprise, aside from its


- 12


succeas in raising the standord of living of the people, is the fact
that tuenty-one of the 185 poultry raisers are illiterates who have been
oble to understand and practise the scientific methods of poultry raising.
This is a healthy sign of the possibility of ameliorating the living conditions of our illiterate masses through the improvement of their earning
capacity, which may be attsined by promoting gainful industries and occupations and by instituting among them the woys of cooperative living.
Had it not been for the persevering and courageous efforts of the local
leeders to propagate the poultry industry, Papaya sould not be such a
thriving secluded toun as it is at present. The EGGS have made its citizens more economically independent and they are now more responsive
to the pursuit of other aspects of adult education, such as literacy,
health, etc. than they were before. Here is, indeed, an instance where
an improved economic life leads to the cultural and social improvement,
and, incidentally, to the building of a strong middle class in our small
towns.
--O--
Three fourths of the sorld's population are under-housed, under-clothed, underfed and illiterate.
-- - James Yen


- 13 -
HON FEDERICO BECAME A SHOTOWNER
Juan B. Gonzaga
Chief, Personnel Division
Bureau of Public Schools
The issues of adult Educstion in Action should attract the attention of all teachers, public and private. Ehe recent issues should
even be more of interest to the layman who has the welfare of the rhiliprine citizenry in mind.
If funds are available each public school tencher should be given
opportunity to read each issue. It seems strenge that despite the increased enrolment in the public schools, the percentage of illiteracy
has not appreciably gone down.
Our adult elements today are mostly non-literate and whatever instruction or information they receive is generally a motter of hearsay.
These elements vill be cooperative and helpful to society if they only
understand whet is going on in the world around them.
Teaching adults has many interesting phases such as are published
from time to time in the Adult Education in nction. In this connection,
I xish to add my experience vith our houseboy, Federico, who grew to be
a young mon in our family. When he became old enough and appecred to be
interested in marriage, I thought then that he would assume a responsibia
lity which belongs to the average citizen in the community. Mhen I asked
him shether he would be interested in learning to rend and vrite, he manifested interest.
I then storted to give him a few lessons and in surprisingly very
short peried he was able to use the 3 R's very profitably. In 1933


-IA

when I had my house under construction, I assigned him to prepare the
meals for the carpenters I hired from my hometown. As he had not much
to do after meal preparation, I thought of teaching him some other kind
of work and I told him that he should not be a houseboy all his life.
During the construction of my house he was able to get experience in
handling the carpentry tools. Rhen the house was finished, I sent him
to my hometown to mork in the shop of my brother nho was engaged in the
manufacture of mindos sashes and doors. He got married in due time and
continued to make sashes and doors. He learned the trade.

Juenls knouledge of the 3 R's helped him, and it taught him to
think of life too. He never was inside any of the school buildings as
a pupil. Now, he is running his own shop in San Jose, Batangas where
he has several men working under his direction. His machinery and equipment are warth about ₱l0,000, and the reputation of his business for
quality of norkmanship is draning for him orders from far and near.
- - -000O ---


The backward people are, in fact
not backmard st all. Being old, they
are clever and intelligent and vorldly vise folk, whether or not they read
and write.


- - Pearl S. Buck


- 15 -


FISH CONSERVATION
D. V. Villadolid
Director of Fisheries
Today I bring to you the message, "CONSERVE OUR FISH TO CONSERVE
OUR NEALTH". Refleet, my countrymen, on this day how much we depend on
our ses for the fish we all eat. A day of rice vithout fish is a day of
gloom! This shons how important fish is in our life. Think thet today
there are heartless fishermen who are destroying this phich God has given
us. These are the desperate men, greedy men, that for the lust of gold
vould dynamite and poison our sea. These men must be stopped, these heartless vandals must be won or they will continue to destroy what belongs to
all of us!
Ne are today enjoined to produce food and more food from the land
and from the sea. Each day that is born we have more mouths to feed but
our land and sea do not increase in area or in richness. What is worse
is that we are getting less and less fish from our waters each day. We
have to import millions of pesos of fish from countries thousands of miles
eway, we who sre a fiah-esting people and who live on numerous islanda by
the sea. This is because our fish are being wantonly destroyed. The dynamite and the poison not only destroy fish but they also destroy its
food, its environment, and its very home. The action of dynamite on a
fish community is no different from the effect of en serial bomb on a city.
then a city is destroyed by bomba, those who are fortunate enough to survive must go away and seek new shelter until they can rebuild their homes.
But can fish do this? There are no rehabilitation projects in fish land!


- 15 -
They must go somewhere. But where? Almost all perts of our seas huve
been blasted and poisoned, fish homes destroyed.
But blosting or poisoming is not the only orime agcinst fish life,
against our ses. You can also commit the crine of over-fishing, even
while fishing in the legal way. Fishing too much and using very fine nets
destroy the boby fish and the mothers full of eggs. Only a few fish gron
to maturity and our waters soon become poor in fish. Then even how hard
a fishermon may fish in the best way he knows, he con no longer catch
anough to feed himself and his femily. He has to be an ex-fisherman,
abandon his life-long occupation, the werk he learned as a boy from the
feet of his father.
This day, October 28, 1950, and every last Saturday of October of
each year is o day dedicoted to the Congervation of Fish. On this doy
let us remember the fishermen who use dynamite and poison, the vicked
men who have lost their sense of decency and public spirit and would
no longer use nets or hooks to catah fish. Let us not give them a
chance. Let our righteous anger prevent them from spawning their kind.
For our pert, remember not to catch the young and the breeding fish.
Plant our streoms, our lakes and our rice paddies vith fish. Let us
remember the message for today throughout the whele year! “CONSERVE OUR
FISH TO CONSERVE OUR REALTH".


-17 -
THE HALILI HIGH SCHOOL IN SANTA MARIA, BULACAN
. A Community-Centered School
The Hslili High School is located in a rural district, a small nearby barrio of the town of Santa Maria, Bulacan. The people belong to a
:.3
cless with a standard of living slarhtly higher than that of an average
rural community. It is a rice farming region, but the people have other
industries and are responsive to opportunities offered by new occupations.
The town of Santa Moria has become famous for its poultry industry,
ever since before the war, and up to this time it is claimed to be the
biggest producing center of mhite leghorn eggs in the Philippines. Before
the war the weekly production was 70,000 eggs. At present the production is 35,000 a week with every indicotion that the industry is bound to
surpass prewar records. The poultry raisers have organized themselves
into a cooperative with a long-range progrem on a scientific basis. The
securing of feed, merketing, control of diseases and improvement of product:
ere under the cooperative management. Dr. Teofilo Santiago, a leading citizen and former Mayor of this toun, who started poultry in Santa Maria
before the wor, is now also the leader of the cooperative of the tounspeople. There are 1,800 poultry projects owned by the members of the cooperative. These poultry raisers are getting the feed of their chickens
at reduced cost and are marketing their eggs on advontageous terms through
the cooperative.
Some 25 citizens of Santa Moria with the leadership of Dr. Santiago
has also organized another cooperative, a dairy club. Each member has
put in P500 for the purchase of 25 milch coms for milk production and dis

- 18


tribution. The care of the cous will be home projects of the members.
hith this leaning to economic projects, the town of Santa Maria,
particularly Bagbagin, the rural community supporting the Halili High
School, has developed an sttitude favorable to adult education and os--
munity improvement program of the public schools. Fortunately, Mr.
Santiago Fabian, the Principal of this school is a vocationally-minded
teacher. He morked in rural agricultural schools for about tvelve years
where he acquired valuable experiences and insight into the needs of rural population. He has become one of the leaders among the people of
Sante Maria and even holds the position of barrio lieutenant in his little berrio. 'hus, Mr. Fabian has the qualification and commands the facility to bring to his community the objectives and plans of community
education. He has gained the confidence not only of the local officials
and prominent citizens of the toun but also of the common people especially the farmers of the surrounding barrios.
The Halili High School has an active adult education and community
improvement progrom, consisting of projects, that certainly will effect
the life of the community, and Santa Maris with its several barrios is a
fertile ground for this program. The following are among the activities
of the Halili High School:
1. DRESSMAKING AND THILORING
This school opened s course in dressmuking for adults about two years
ago. Then the course in tailoring follomed soon. Last school year 53
graduated from the dressmaking course and 4 from the tailoring course.
These adult students, mostly housevives and housekeepers, ranging from
the age of lo to 43, were awarded Certificate of Proficiency signed by


-19-


the Director of Public Schools and the Division Superintendent. The
courses stimulated much interest and vere welcomed in the community becapse they were offered free of charge, saving the adults from paying
the-high fees charged by professional shops and the trouble of going to
other touns to learn the trades. But the most beneficial result of this
school enterprise is that the graduntes are now making a living on the
strength of their Bureau certificates. Some of the women have opened
shops of their own, ond the other graduntes are doing well as wage and
independent workers. They speak gratefully of the adult education classes of Halili and of Mrs. Victoria N. Sentiago, e high school teacher,
who manages to give a part of her time to this extre work. The class in
dressmaking and tailoring this year has some members from adjacent towne.
2. POULTRY PROJECT
Poultry raising is the most important project of Santa Meria, and
the Halili High Scheelis playing an important role in its program of expansion and improvement. With the encouragement of the Division Superintendent of Schools, the Principal of the Halill High School, Dr. Santiago
and other poultry-project leaders of the toun held a Poultry Institute
in the Halill High Schoel on September 25-29, 1950, mhich turned out like
a borrio fiesta for the people. To this Institute vere invited officials
from the Burequ of Animal Industry who ore specialistein the different
phoses of poultry raising. A representative from the Import Control Board
nes also invited to speak on the business aspect of the industry.
The teachers of the Halili High School have orgonized a poultry club
emong the older students with the sim of bringing the project home to the


20-


farmers, the parents and neighbors of the students. These home projects
are visited by the teachers; they have become in foct the projects of fathers and mothers. Poultry services, such as inoculation of chickens,
trestment of foul diseases, proper care of chicks, improvement of pullets,
and the like, ore rendered by the high sahool teachers for club members
ss nell as other poultry raisers in the community. One of the poultry
projects is located in the school ground under a competent poultry teacher
to serve as an incentive.
3. THE SOY BEAN GROMING
Mr. Fabian has storted the campsign for soy bean growing for poultry
feed as mell as for increased food production. He distributed seeds to
the farmers in the neighborhood. He planted a plot in the school ground
to soy beans ahich the school mill harvest this month. Mr. Fabian plans
to popularize soy-bean groving with the some effort as Dr. Santiago has
popularized the poultry raising.
A. COMMUNITY CENTER
I was taken by Mr. Fabian to a place in his barrio and shoned me s
well-made barong-barong built by the people. It is located at the junetion of three barrio roads. According to the principal the building is
used as a resting place of the people coming from their work in the afternoon. Community assemblies and group discussions are held here. Improvised
equipment are provided. Booklets, pemphlets and leaflets for adults and
farmers to read are arranged on a library table. Many of these materials
mere issued by the Buresu. Thus, the barong-berong serves as a reading


center as well as a place of civic meetings.
S. OTHER COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES OF THE
BALILI HIOH SCHOOL
The Halili High School is manufacturing cement seats for flush toilets,
which cost little. The people of the berrios are beginning to get these
seats for their toilets at home. The principal believes that this is one
woy by which he con provide sanitary toilets in the community, which he now
finds lacking in many homes.
A pump well was installed in the ground of the school. As the barrio
houses are far from the pipe line of the water system, it is more convenient
end less expensive to install pump wells in the home yords. One fomily, ofter consulting vith the principal, has installed his oan pump vell. Others
ore plannina to do the seme.
Piggery has but an initial start. One of the speakers in the September
Institute talked on pig raising. Mr. Fabian expects to develop this project
in this rural community:
Lecording to the principal, the Halili school progrom is giving literacy instruction by means of incidental teaching, shereby the adults are made
E
to recognise, read and write printed and seript materials in connection with
their project activities and interests. The plan is plausible. Itis suggested, hovever, that the method and procedure to accomplish the literacy objective be closely supervised and the result tested to find out if reoding
and sriting are learned fast enough by the adults.
The Halili High School bears watching as a community-centered school
rith slant tevord the improvement of economic conditions of the people and
vith such efforts as have given Santa Barbara a name in the field of health,
home and family life.
Report of Visit Oct. 12, 1950, by Mr. Vicente Garcia
Chief, Adult Education Division


22


MHY I OPENED AN ADULT EDUCATION CLASS IN DATAGON
From the Report of Buenaventura Tenebroso
Jones Primary School
Datagon, Tanjay, Negros Oriental
Datagon is one of the big barrios in the town of Tanjay comprising several sitios. The barrio proper is about fourteen kilometers
from the town, and is connected with s road running from the poblacion
to the arnsiz Sawmill. The big Hinutungan River gives help to successful
farming. The soil is very fertile and the people harvest three orops a
year. With these factors the inhabitants generally get along happily in
their own way of life.
Last year, when I first came to teach in the Jones Primary School,
I noticed that the people seemed to realize no problem in their community. Every femily had its home and lot. They were apparently contented
and had no difficulty in sending their children to school. They were
peaceful and law-abiding. The head of the barrio was industrious and
intelligent. He could speak well and counsel his barrio folks wisely.
He was well liked and respected by the community. I found that most of
the lesders were illiterate and the grest majority of the inhabitants
likevise could not read and write. I learned all this becsuse I was
boarding in a house near the "TABU-AN", a meeting place of the "principalis".
Wednesday mas market day when whole families came from different
sitios and barrios to bring their products. Sometimes the mothers and
children went home before dark leaving the men around the "TUYTUYAN",
s tuba-drinking center. They were gay spending the rest of the day
chatting, singing over glasses of tuba or gambling in groups.


The moment one got intoxicated he started talking, challenging the others
to a debate on any subject. As I listened to their conversations, I gathered that they possessed good memories and reasoning power. Many times
I mused over the situstion and said to myself that if these people mere
only given a chance to learn to read and write, they would be much better
reff. They could read news and receive new ideas. For one thing, they
would be relieved from embarrassment whenever government officials require their signatures. As a matter of fact many had come to me to have
their letters read and interpreted. I sympathized with them, so I'finalyU
ly decided to open a class for them.
But opening an adult school was not an easy matter. I called for
s general meeting of the barrio. I asked my pupils to heve their parents
sttend the meeting. I explained to the people the need for establishing
an adult educstion class and the incalculable value they nould get from
it. Only seven decided to enrol.
I orgenized-and taught the class behind closed doors. The adults
used to drink tuba before coming to the room. I should not have allowed
them to do this, but I had to be tolerant because I wanted reguler attendance of the fen thet I had. I alloved plenty of freedom, as my object was to encourage those who nere out of school and break down their
indifference. Before long, I noticed some improvement in my project.
In the folloving school year, the enrolment increased to thirty-six.
How long they would come regularly and how soon I could stop Tuba drinking from interfering with their school work, depended upon tactful and
patient approach I would be able to devise. I managed to hold monthly
assemblies of the barrio people in which I talked about duties and obliga

tions of citizens and about improvement of daily occupations. I used in
these assemblies the set of lectures provided by the Buresu of Public
Schools.
The sttitude and public opinion of the barrio gradually became more
and more favorable to my program. On August 10, 1949, a local Adult Education Council was organized by the barrio peopley with.Pristitg. Villas 30
flores as chairman, Constancio Borreros as Seoretervy mnd-Reupla, Sauconyo
Quirino Pudera, 'Estanislao Amini, Manuel Gercia and Melquiedeg Golistpanmembers. This Council campaigned for incressed, enrolment and regular attendance. Mr. Constancio Borrero prepared a big posten for the campnign,
and Mr. Quirino Cudera offered his housenfor: the uaseomfathatault classesa
Attendance had greatly improved, and even vives, relatives and children:
who were not regularly enroled, used to come around to hear the lessons.
Other adult education projects have been included in the community school
progrem.


--D--


A new trend in adult education today,
in both urban and rural communities, is the
scheduling of courses at the hours most convenient for those desiring instruction, without regord for the time-honored established
hours for such classes.


— L. H. Dennis


WORLD-WIDE HEALTH IMPROVEMENT A KEY
TO PEACE, SAYS THORP
(From U. S. Information Service, Oct. 2, 1950)
ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI, October 31 —- World-wide health improvement
has become a major concern of U. S. foreign policy because health is an
important factor in economic and social progress throughout the world —
and thus in the preservation of peace, eccording to Willard L. Thorp,
U. S. assistant secretary of state for economic affairs.
Speaking before the 78th annual meeting of the lmerican Public Health
association here, a professional organisation, Thorp pointed out that the
concern of the U. S. government for the health and well-being of peoples
everywhere "is bosed on a deep conviction that the very survival of our
democratio society depends upon the crestion of a free, peaceful, orderly and prosperous world society."
Thorp said it was tragic that much of the hunger and disease in the
world is preventable and observed that the United States has hundreds of
public health representatives in many areas of the globe working to help
eradicate disease and malnutrition.
"No estimate can adequately reflect the enormous losses of energy,
vitality end productivity that result from malnutrition," he said,
and asserted that money put into international health work is an investment that pays high dividends.
"Today," Thorp added, "disease must be prevented and eradicated at
its source. To do this, nations must have strong national health administrations as well as strong links among them — the kind of links
American health technicians have been forging for a generation."
U. S. health improvement assistance to other countries to which


26


Thorp referred is now part of the Point Four program of expanded technieal assistance of under-developed areas. Last August the U. S. Congress approved the first annual point four appropriation of $34,500,000.
"There cannot be a single pattern," Thorp said, "for the various
technical assistance projects in all countries. Some, like Turkey, Ceylon,
Western Pakistan and Thailand, have gone a long way toward building up
their public health organizations. In certain other countries almost
everything remains to be done."
Thorp noted that the U.N. World Health Organization has become an
important agency in the struggle to raise world health standards and said
this year it will spend spproximately 36,300,000 toward that end.
So much remsins to be done, however, he said, that large numbers
of U.S, volunteer workers are needed for technical assistance. The American Public Health Associstion, he asserted, has led the "great popular
movement which has made our cities and counties rate among the healthiest
in the world" and sald 'we, hope and expect that . . public health workers
from our states, cities and counties, and from our privete health institutions too, vill volunteer to go out and take their places in this unique
enterprise in building a healthier world."
Thorp said that "this great technical cooperation movement" to improve world-vide health will carry out the U.S. "ideal of respect for each
man, woman or child, with goodwill toward all. We shall then be waging
peace as never before in history, and on the battlefields of our endeavor
we shall count by the millions not the dead, but the lives which have
been saved."


-27


THE DISCUSSION METHOD
(Condensed from Verious Articles on the Discussion Method)
Artemio C. Vizconde
Chief of Section, adult Educstion Division
It is obviously incumbent upon those engaged in adult education, to
look closely into techniques and procedures to be used in educating adults.
In view of the truism that under the terms of democracy, common sction depends on a common understanding, the learning activities of our adults
should lend to the development of the necessary skills, knovledge and
attitudes for group action which is essential in a democratic way of life
we are endeavoring to promote among our masses.
Talking things over is a natural human way; hence, it has been pointed out that the discussion method is the most sppropriate procedure in
educating adults. From the discussion method, the following results have
been proved by experimental evidence!
1. Participants in a discussion acquire more information (as
much as 17 percent) and remember it longer (recalling as much as
56 percent of it six months later) through discussion than through
listening to lectures or even through reading.
The members of a discussion group are capable of producing
personal illustrations and experiences that are much more vivid
than those you can find in books.
2. Discussion method is an important democratic process. Studies
show that as many as 40 percent who toke part in or listen to discussion of alternative solutions of a problem chenge their opiIIne Citizen's Roundtable by J.J. tmer, adult Educetion Bul:,
February 1949, pp. 68-73


-28


nions. The method itself teaches men, in friendly intercourse, to
take a reasonable sttitude toward their own ideas and a charitable
vies on their neighbor's cherished beliefs. It does at least challenge them to re-exemine their concepts.
3. Discussion method encourages general participation of the citizens in reaching solutions of community problems. It provides
stimulus to a more highly socialized and a more effective intellectuol life.
4. as an adult method of learning, discussion permits on an exchange of ideas and experiences. It is more, likely to uphold
good suggestions than to reject them; hence, judgment of a group
is superior to most individual judgments.
5. Discussion keeps the conversation of the group members at a
higher level and continually progressing toward constructive end.
The following are positive guides in directing the discussion method!
1. As a leader, you must not forget that you too are an actual
member of the group. You have confidence in your leadership because you have made s careful plan of the subject to be discussed,
you have read as videly as you can, and you have thought through
the important aspects and major points of the subject. You have
references to suthorities in case difficulties arise. You are
not, however, posing as an authority with the final word upon
the subject. As a leader you maintain your impartiality while
serving as guide, moderator, and provoker of discussion.
2. Be careful not to force the group along the lines of your
cerefully worked out plan. If you do this, you might as vell


3-


read a paper. You may get resistance in the groupif you are
too aggressive in your leadership; or you may keep them'in the
lazy attitude of mind. Yo lead a group effectively means that
you lead the members to think through their own experiences.
Begin with the actual experiences of the group and help the members see the significance of each experience in their broader
relationship. Nhen the member; see things objectively through
discussion, they are learning not to let their feelings get into
the way of their thinking and actions.
3. Discussion must be employed with due regard to the realities
of the existing situation. This method to be effective must
stimulate all honest differences of opinion; a tendency to gloss
over or ignore highly centroversial points may lead the group
members to assume agreement whon none really exists.
A. You lead them to see by your questions every aspect of the
question. Give them every opportunity for: thahking that you
possibly can. You con add illustrative materialif the group
does not provide them in order to amplify the point. Your
questions must be such that they provoke further thinking and
are not merely to be answened ry yes and no.

The economic politecal and secial tfaining of
adults starts with the understandang of his omn situation, and he obviously does not limit himself to
the passive study of social phenomena-he studies
them mith a viey to improving his omn material and
moral existence.


Unesco Report


TRENDS AND PRACTICES OF ADULT EDUCATION ABROAD
"Sghool Nuclei” Campaigh in Peru ond Bollvia
In an average town in Peru like Cuzco 882 of the children do not
go to school. It is caused chiefly by the scarcity of means of communicstion and the defects in the organization of the school system; such
as, lack of school buildings and faulty training of teachers. The Indian children speak only their languages, the Quecha and Aimera, but
most of the teaching is done in Spanish.
The first step taken to remedy the situation was the establishment
of "school nuclei". Esch "nucleus” has a Director and a team of educators specialized in various subjects, and who speak the languages of the
Indians. The teachers are specially treined and are familiar with the
Indian ways of life.
The first task of the experts was the actual construction of "school
nuclei", built in the local style, with thatched roofs, letting in plenty
of light and air. Each member of the team looks after the school buildings in the area in which the "nucleus" has been set up.
Since children's education cannot of itself be sufficient to change
the living conditions of a large number of people, adult education is
therefore an important factor in the task of the "school nuclei!' Teachers who are attached to them impart knowledge to the people on such
subjects as soil conservation, agricultural technique and domestic training. (Unesco Courrier, June 1950)


Filma are Used in Indian Fundamentol Education
Elghty five percent of the people in Indis are illiterate, and so


the two important problems of that nation areto wipe out illiteracy
end to raise her standard of living in order to make her self-supporting in food. One of the means to accomplish these sims is through the
medium of films.
There are two kinds of audiences in India for adult education films.
One is the tonn sudience composed largely of mill and factory workers,
most of whom ere illiterate. The second is the village audience much
larger than the first. The films shown have commentaries in their own
languege and attempted to give the people a vider understanding of their
oun land, of their agriculture and industries, their towns and villages,
the rivers and sesports, their natural resources and their cultural heritage. Films were especially prepered for people who have little or no
education, so that great care had been made in order to give them instruction vithout offending them in subjects like civics, hygiene and
techniques of living and working. (Bulletin of Fundamental Education,
July, 1950)
Health Center on Wheels in Nigerla
A roving laboratory consisting of tvo trucks purchased by the Netional assembly of French Nigeria is a health center on wheels. Its
first mission is to combat tuberculosis and syphilis in that country,
peopled by from 500,000 to 600,000 nomadicinhabitants. When they attempted a large scale health examinstions the Nigerians expressed yigorous opposition. The Nigerians vere suspicious of strangers. To
overcome this suspicion, the mission used the technique of motion pictures. One of the trucks carries a motion picture projector and supplies of films, mostly animated cartoons, on health and sanitation


-32 -


subjects. The films are expleined to the native audience in their oun
language. After the show the sudience is examined for tuberculosis and
given blood-tests. (Unesco Courrier, June, 1956)
The El-Manayel Sociel Centers
El-Manoyel is, a small Egyptian village where they are conducting an
experiment on the best possible techniques for raising the standard of
living in all the Egyptian villages. The experiment is conducted along
scientific lines based on the principles of hygiene, economics, sociology, social psychology and philantrophy. The work is carried out through
social centers.
There are three interdependent and mutually supporting centers!
(1) The Sociel Nork Center consisting of a meeting-hall equipped. with
radio and a small rural library; (2) the Maternity and Child. Welfare
Center, well-equiped and operated by a qualified health visitor assisted
by the original midvives and other village girls; (3) and a Mobile Health
Unit for the treatment of endemic disenses. (Bulletin of Fundemental
Educstion, april, 1949)
Adult Schools in Britain
In 1948 there were 1,540,000, adults attending the British adult
schools. Hundreds of thousands of people devoted three or four nights
a week of their spare time to the acquisition of knovledge, More than
500 subjects were offered to the adults, ranging from aero-engineering
to zoology, an adult had a wealth of, subjects to choose, from, such as,


-32 -


artificial flomer-making, berge building, cosmetic manufacture, diamond
mounting, French polishing, glass-blowing, Hebrew, optics, play-writing,
and mig-making. Heny adults also enrelled in cultural subjects aside
from the vocatienal, such as musical appreciation, drama, bellet, and
opera. In some adult schools they teach courses in golf, lessons in
chess, and boxing. (sdult Education Journal, April, 1950).


---


In all of your activities in the classroom, you vill do vell to remember that you
ore not teaching the three R's alone. It is
true that you ere trying to teach people to
use these basic tools. But what is more important, you must forever be aware that these
adults have volunterily come to school because
they feel themselves unable to do things they
want and need to de. The crux of the problem
is to increase their social sensitivity, and
to contribute to their personal satisfaction
and social adequacy. Reading, xriting, and arithmetic are of little value to any person if these
tools cannot serve in helping him to live better
himseli, and to understand and appreciate more
people in more ways.


— LETIS HELP THE TEN HILLION
Teecher's Manual, Home ond Family
Life Series
Educator's Nashington Dispaich
New London, Conn. Nesh. 6, D.C.


ADULT EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IN THE PROVINCES
KANILA
Superintendent Macede has launched a pilot project on adult ducation in the district of Santa ana, Manila. The community selectad for
the adult educetion experiment is Barrio Pampango in the district. The
Community has a rural setting. The homes are clustered, the streets
are ill-kept, the schoclhouse reflects neglact and poverty of the community, health is affected by the unsatisfectory dispesal of garbage,
and civic spirit is practically dormant. The barrio lieutenant and other
local lesders see these conditions eye to eye vith Superintendent Maceda
who hopos to make Pampanga s model barrio through the efforts of the barrio people and with such educational agencies as may be mobilized to help
the enterprise. a meeting of the Parent-Tescher Associstion of Santa Ana
was held on Tuesday, October 24, 1950 to organize a planning committee
for the project.


SAMAR
Three high schools in Samar offered vocakional courses in  ultry
and hog raising to adults. High school students vere assigned by their
teachers to supervise and help the ovners of poultry and pisrery projects
in the town. The, adults taking these courses were also given lessons in
literacy.
Superintendent Tayco reported the projects of these high senools,
as follows:
Course
School
Taking the Coursg


l. Rart Mien sehoel


 Pounty end Finton T


205


2. Palapag High School


I Poultry and Piggery !


150


la Balangiga High School


! Poultry and Plagery !


16


Ital

-720


ILOILO


The Iloilo School of Arts and Trades according to Mr. Fermin Tarue,
Principal, conducted a community survey in the districts of Jaro and La
Paz.. The sim was to determine the phases of community life which need
improvement. A particular street was chosen as a starting point of
the survey. The following facts were revealed after the reports had been
gathered:
(1) About one half of the familles did not have sanitary toilets
(2) Pigs and chickens freely swarmed the streets
(3) Plenty of stagnant pools; yards improperly drained
(Z) People sleeping in cronded rooms
(5) absence of permanent home industries.
The teachers were divided into groups to teach and demonstrate different phases of vocation. One group was assigned to show how to make
simple household erticles out of abaca, bamboo, serap pieces of galvanized iron, etc. Another group was designated to campaign for sanitary
toilets and cleanliness of the home. A third group vas entrusted to promote home beautification and backyard improvement by showing how Lnexpensive materials could beautify the homes and surroundings.
FAMPANGA
Mr. Ruperto C. Torres, Principal of the Pampanga High School, reported that oo seniors had enrolled 121 adulta for literacy instruetion. These student volunteers vent to the homes of the adulta to teach
them from the Adult Primer. The adults ranged from 12 to 89 years old.
The mala adults were furmers, laborers and houseboys. The femole stu

dents were mostly housekeepers and housemaids.


NUEVA VIZCAYA
Mr. Tranquilino Basat, Adult Education Supervisor, reported that
vith the "each-one-teach-one" method, the schools in Nueva Vizceya had
promoted 219 adults from Project 1. The folloving participated in the
literacy drive
No, of Adults Promoted
Bayombong High School - ---
31
Pinagpagan District - ----
17
Aritao District -------
55
Dupex District - ------
25
Solano District -------
43
Bongabong District - ----
25
Bayombong District - ----
2.)
Total -- 219
The spirit of volunteer service among communtty lesders was commendable. In Bongabong and Bayombong districts, three volunteer tesohers successfully taught 29 adults. He spoke highly of the following
volunteer teachers: Mra Placido A. Radoy, Mrs. Venancia T. Cariazo and
Mr. Marcelino Sersenia.


CAMARINES SUR
Most of the adult classes in Camarines Sur mere organized in the
barrios and rural districts. Generally the harvest season affected
adversely the attendance in adult, classes. The Superintendent had circularised ell schools in his division to reopen all adult classes and
requested all teachers to promote the varicus adult education projects


-3!-


in the province.
At Baluang berrio school an adult class was organized with an enrolment of 60 adults. All teachers cooperated in teaching the adults
during Saturdays. Most of those who enrolled learned to read and write.
The faculty members of the Camarines Sur agricultural High School
conduct community assemblies instead of regular adult classes because
the fermers live far spart from each other, and they prefer to hear lectures on occupations.
The Lourdes Berrio School has an adult class of 40 students under
Mr. Juen abasolo. The adults requested the teacher to teach them subjects other than the 3 R's. In response to their request, Miss Salvacion
Ailes, Home Economics Teacher in Buhi Elementary School, was assigned to
teach them slipper making.


BATAAN
There were 20 adult classes organized in the different barrios of
Bataan with an enrolment of 741 adults. The adult students were found
to be more interested in practical arts, such as, basket and net wesving, cooking, cutting and sewing of shirts and pants, and food preservetion. In order to attract the adults, classes were opened for such occupetional pursuits, and later instruction in literacy and citizenship
education was given.
In abucay, the Supervising Principal conducts the adult education class. The adults cre taught the elements of tailoring, sewing
dresses, salting fish, and preparing ssuce or patis and bagoong. After
the vocational instrustion, reading, writing and practical arithmetic
are taught to those who need them.


-38- -


ISABELA
It nas reported that Isabela had increased tremendously the number
of adults promoted from Project I this year, shich reached 440 as agcinst
62 of last year.
Two volunteer teachers, Miss Nena Alindaya and Mrs. Antonia F.
Danny of Naguilian and Jones districts, taught 17 adults who learned to
read and write and received the promotional certificates for Project I.
Elght school districts in Isabela perticipated actively in literacy
drive, employing the "each-one-teach-one" method. The folloving number
of adults were promoted from Project I in the different districts!


San Pablo - --


-------- 38


Ilagan No. 1 - -


- -------


Santiago - --


-------- ak)


Angadanan ---


--- 36


San Mariano - -


--- 21


Jones - ----


---- ---
30


Canayan - ---


------- 30


Naguilian ---


----- 12.
Total-- 3e4


NEGROS ORIENTAL
Superintendent Tomas de Castro reports thet in the Negros Oriental
High School, the democratic method of approach is used in connection
with its progrem of adult education and extension service. The people
in the community, including the, barrio folks, are consulted in determining the projects to be undertaken, as, well as in fixing the detoils of
orgenization, meetings, etc.. On this, basis the members have been divided into four teams to work on their respective objectives. The school
slinic renders service not only to students and teachers, but also to
privete eltizens at specified days and time. Lakewise, the school librery facilities ere extended to the public according to definite schedules.


-23 -


MOUNTAIN PROVINCE
The Adult Education Supervisor has ofganized eight local adult education councils in the following places: Tuba, City Camp, Baguio City,
Baguio Old Central, Loakan, Guisad, Baguio Central School and Pacdal.
These councils are in cherge of securing the services of volunteer teachers to conduct adult education work.


TARLAG
The Adult Educstion Supervisor reported a story of three adult students whom he had observed in the adult schools of Tarlac.
Gregorio, age 57, of the barrio of San Jacinto, San Miguel
was only a week in school when I met him, but he could already
write his name and address. He said he wanted to learn how to
read and write so that he could write a letter to his son in
America. He would be most happy to be able to read the reply
of his son. His son went to America l4 years ago and has been
writing home. His tutor, a Grade Vl pupil, is his neighbor's
child.
Victoriano Valdez, age 73, of Sta. Barbara, Victoria, a
new student, would like to learn how to read and write so
that he would be able to sign his check on cashing with the
treasurer. Mr. Valdez is a veteran of the Philippine Revolution and is expecting to receive his pension checks very
soon. His grand son vas teaching him at the time.
Genaro Asio, age 52, of Pance, Ramon, is a holder of
certificate of proficiency. He said he knows how to read
and write and is very grateful. He wants to learn further
but due to poverty he lacks time to do so for he is the only
bresdearner of his family. Mr. Asio was tutored by a volunteer worker.


BOHOL
The Division of Bohol this academic year vill include in its adult
education program the organization of Farmers' Clubs to promote the
telfare of the farmers. Intensive investigations of farm problems,


such as seed selection, crop rotstion, soil fertilization, propagation
of citrus plants, etc. will be conducted. The Housewives' Clubs will
be another agency to work on the problems of mothers and homes, such
as child care, balance diet, treatment of diseases, etc.
Academic Supervisor Tiburcio Borja is encouraging the verious PTAS
in Bohol to help in financing adult education classes. He issued the
following statement!
"aside from the adult education class projects of beachers,
it is suggested that some schools initiate orgenizing classes to
be handled by a special teacher to be paid from local or PTA funds.
A PTA that connot, efford to have its omn teacher may join other
PTAs (from 3 to 6,PTAs may form a partnership) for the purpose of
sharing in contributing for the salary of the teacher, who should
render service in esch of the adult education classes spensored
by the different PTAs in partnership. The teacher may serve the
class of one PTA on Monday, another PTa class on Tuesday, still
of another on Wednesday, and so on until every PTA class has been
taught during the meek. The classes should be held at night and in
their respective barrios. It is suggested further that ench session be of not less than two hours' duration. The same course of
instruction and the same requirements for promotion of adults as
ere given in earlier memorandums should be followed."


--
The most enthusiastic and sincere ofedult educators have always been concerned
about the factthat the bulk of educational
courses sought by adults are vocational in
nature; the arts, and cultural activities in
general, play no very impressive partin rolling up sttendance figures.


—-Maria Rogers


Republic of the Philippines
Department of Public Works and Communications
BUREAU OF POSTS
Manila
SBORN STATEMENT
(Required by Act No. 2580)
The undersigned BENITO PANGILINAN, Editor of THE   published once in every two months in ENGLISH LANGUAGE, at Rizal Memorial Stadium, Manila, after having been duly
sworn in according to law, hereby submits the folloming statement
of ownership, management, circulation, etc., which is required by
Act. No. 2580, as amended by Commonmealth Act No. 2E1:
Post Office Address
Namg

BENITO PANGILINAN
Editor!
c/o Buresu of Public Schools
Managing Editor: VICENTE GANCIA
Rizal Memorial Stadium, Mamila
Business Manager:
N o ng
"
n
n
BUREAU OF PUBLIC SCHOON
Orner!
n
n
n
Publisher: BUREAU OF PUBLIC SCFOOI
n
n
"
Printer! ELEAU OF PUBLIO SCENI
n
n
n
Office of Publication: BUREAU OF FLBLIC SCHOOLS
If publication is owned by a corporation, stockholders owhing one
per cent or more of the total amount of stocks:
NONE
NONE
Bondholders, mortgagees, or other security holders owning one per
cent or more of the total amount of stooks:
NONE
N ONE
In case of daily publication, average number of copies printed and
circulated of each issue during the preceding month of ........
19 ....


1. Sent to paid subscribers -------------- Non e
2. Sent to others than poid subscribers - ------- No n e
T ot a1 ---------- Non e
In case of publication other than daily, total number of copies
printed and circulated of the last issue dated Sept., 1950:
1. Sent to paid subsoribers - ------------- Non e
2. Sent to others than peid subscribers -------- 3,000
T ota 1 ---------- 3,000


(SGD.) BENITO PANGILINAN
Editor
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 23rd dey of Sert., 1950, at
Manila, Philippines, the affiont exhibiting his Residence Certificate
No. 4-922 issued at Manila on Januery 12, 1950.


NO2


(SGD.) VENANCIO TRINIDAD
Assistant Director
Bureau of Public Schools