ECONOMIC ENCOUNTER WITH THE WEST I


general uproar in Philippine business and
industry followed the Central Bank’s announcement in February that henceforth, the
peso would seek its own level, vis-a-vis the US dollar. The rate was to be determined on a day-to-day
basis according to supply and demand.
Immediately, the dollar-peso rate shot up from
P3.90 to over Po.00 to the dollar No sooner did
this happen, than industrialists and businessmen
were up in arms, for many of them carried longterm loans from foreign suppliers. Amortization
scheduled at P3.90 per dollar was now to be paid
at at least P2.00 more. Those who had obligations
of say, $I-millon, had to pay over P2-million more!


No amount of criticism, however, can change
the sitvation. There is no choice but to continue
trade relations, particularly with the West, inasmuch
as we are dependent on them for the supply of
goods, equipment, and machinery we urgently need
for national development. Of no less importance is
our dependence on them to buy our products, mostly
mineral and agricultural.
Interestingly, our foreign trade activity dates as
far back as the pre-Spanish colonization period when
the Chinese, Japanese, and other nearby Asian countries were already engaged in trading with us —
if in an informal, primitive way.


Economists and pseudo-economists had a field day
criticizing the state of Philippine economy that
brought about the unwanted "floating rate." Many
traced the ailment to post-liberation days when merchandise-hungry Philippines imported goods more
than what it could afford, thus practically draining
its dollar reserves. Notwithstanding an inevitable
stop-gap measure of import controls, the economy
never recovered from dollar-anemia.


It was simply a matter of foreign trade imbalance — the Philippines importing more than it exported. This brought to focus Philippine foreign
trade, most of which is transacted in dollars, with
the United States as the primary supplier of imported goods; at the same time, the major outlet
of our imports. Some blame the preferential trade
agreement with the United States; others blame our
inability to develop foreign trade with countries other
than the United States.


The Galloon Jrade


Trading was simple —bartering and credit by
honor system were used. There was no foreign exchange or banking system to worry about, not even
any standard monetary unit. Yet, commerce was
active between native and foreign traders, extending
from Cebu to Luzon.
The Chinese brought into the country porcelain,
tapestry, and jars; the Japanese brought tempered
pots and pans; the Siamese, gold ornaments. In
exchange, local traders had silk, pearls, mats, jute,
sinamay cloth, and coconuts.


The Peso
hen Spain established control of the islands
in the first quarter of the 1oth Century,
ha commerce became regulated, and standards
were adopted. A monetary unit was introduced,
later to be recognized as the Peso, to serve as medium of exchange for commerce, trade, and more
importantly, for tax purposes.
No doubt, Spain’s dream of gaining access to
the Orient unfolded into reality and the Philippines


LEGEND


MABLIA


VOREA
RA


bar
RO
ANORTH PACIOCBANA
Mge
ie lele elabardiree
 MALL


VANIA


Suadalcanal
SE Crist6n


PACIFIC


THE GALLEON ROUTE


became the starting point to an empire build-up
in the east. By political expedience, Spain continued
to dominate the islands. As a consequence, the number of Spanish immigrants swelled year after year
reaching to a point where they became a problem
to the local government.
Supporting the local government, especially the
residents, became a financial burden to the nearbankrupt economy of mother Spain. Mexico, at that
time a Spanish dominion, was therefore required
to send part of its tribute to the Spanish government in the Philippine islands.
The Galleons
o augment the support from Mexico, the
authorities in Manila developed a system of
trade, whereby goods from the Philippines
and the neighboring countries were shipped to.
Mexico on ocean going vessels — the galleons. The
goods were either sold for gold, or exchanged with
merchandise to be sold in the islands and other
Asian countries. Thus, the Galleon Trade developed,
and with it initiated the Philippines’ bid for foreign
trade with the West.
The 'Philippines’ proximity to the neighboring
Asian countries encouraged the government authorities to develop Manila as a center port and intensify
shipments to Acapulco.
For two and a half centuries, the galleons came
and went, pursuing a long and lonely voyage between
two distant ports. The continvity of the line was
to be interrupted only from time to time by shipwreck, typhoon, or piracy. The galleons were the


richest ships in all the oceans, and were the most
sought after prize by pirates.
English pirates captured four — the Santa Ana
in 1847, the Encarnacion in 1709, the Covadonga
in 1743, and the Santisima Trinidad, the largest
ship of the time, in 1762. The Dutch too, took an
unrecorded number of galleons.
Galleon Trade Operations
he Galleon Trade was intended primarily to
earn proceeds for the benefit of the Spanish
government in the islands, its officials, the
clergy and other Spanish citizens.
A certain amount of loading space is alloted
to a citizen depending on the capacity of the ship


The (Galloon Trade


available for the voyage that year. The volume of
space available for cargo in the galleon was divided
into equal parts by a committee, or junta, appointed
for that purpose. Each equal part is called pieza,
and for each pieza a boleta (ticket) or certificate
of ownership is issved. Thus each person’s proportion of loading space was expressed in terms of
boletas.
As to the eligibility requirements for boleta recipients, a law in 1593 decreed that the loading
space should be divided among all Spanish citizens
in the islands — proportionate to their wealth—
in order that everyone might share in the advantage
and profit of the traffic. Every boletero was, in a
sense, a galleon trader with license to ship.
As always, where money is involved, corruption
creeps in— and the galleon trade was not spared.
To put it mildly, it became a nest of fraud and
corruption.
Francisco Leandro de Vianna, a critic of government operations at that time, observed that "brazen
corruption attended the junta" and he denounced
the whole business of boleta-distribution as the root
of rampant graft which the authorities seemed to
ignore, if not altogether tolerated.
Favoritism and self-interest made mockery of
laws that regulated the trade. An association of
Spanish merchants, many of whom belonged to the
governor’s circle of friends and family, created a
consulado (monopoly) which ushered a radical
change in the galleon trade operations by fully
controlling the galleon’s activities, giving the islands
its first taste of an anomalous syndicate.


The early decades of the Galleon Trade saw a
number of Spanish residents in Manila actively trading with Mexico on their own account. It was not
very long before the monopoly edged them out by
cornering all loading space. In some instances, some
shippers needed more loading space, forcing them
to buy from the monopoly at excessive rates. On
the other hand, some boleteros who did not have
enough shipments, had to sell out to the monopoly
at ridiculously low prices.
The price of the boletas depended on certain
factors: the results of transactions with the Chinese, the prospects for a profitable sale in Mexico,
the quantity of ready money in the islands, and
the total loading space available in the year’s galleon


as well as a number of boletas for sale. Usually,
each boleta cost from P125 to P200.
Among those who profited excessively from the
system were the administrators of the obras pias.
The obras pias was a charitable institution run by
the religious orders that superintend religious and
charitable work. But instead of charitable work, the
funds were loaned out to aspiring galleon traders
at high interest.
Historians point out that a large percentage of
Spanish immigrants to the Philippines were poor and
idle in their own country. Upon reaching the Philippines, they suddenly turned rich and prosperous —
thanks to the Galleon Trade.


But then, the system deteriorated; it was shot
with anomalies which led to its end. The last of
the galleons sailed into port in 1815. Manila was
opened to foreign trade under the Royal Decree
of September o, 1834, finally bringing to a close over
two and a half centuries of the Galleon Trade. Soon,
the ports of Cebu, lloilo, Pangasinan and Zamboanga
were also opened to foreign trade.
Whether the Philippines profited or not in the
galleon trade traffic, it is more important that this
trade formally opened the ports of the country to
the West — for other European countries and America — to more formal trade relations, the economic
legacy succeeding generations, including ours, experience today.


Overnight a new identity emerged: Student Power.
Student Power is a concerted effort by student
activists — young and righteous people ever vigilant
of their right to demand justice and democracy,
expressed in rallies and demonstrations.
Student activism began to gell towards the end
of 1969. At about the same time, another form
of student activism took shape. Non-political and
non-vocal — shying away from demonstrations of
protests — this other student activism engaged in
a demonstration of cooperation, industry, perseverance and self-confidence.
Instead of provocateurs, they had among their
ranks counsellors drawn from top management of
successful enterprises.
Expectedly, their activiites did not command nationwide attention for they lacked emotional appeal.
None of them made the front pages of daily newspapers, While their counterparts — the political students activists — were hugging the headlines, all
they could show were modest profits: monetary and
experience.
The "other” student activists are members of the
Junior Achievement of the Philippines. No one older
than 21 years old, they come from different schools,
colleges, and universities. Like their counterparts, they
pursue different fields of studies — business, law,
engineering, and liberal arts.
What It’s All About
Junior Achievement is a community effort aimed
at building a corps of entrepreneurs, employers,
employees, and in general, citizens who understand
the full meaning of private incentive and ownership.
Stodents organize themselves to form miniature enterprises which they operate under the guidance of
adult executives. Thus, they gain first-hand experience as workers, managers and investors.
As a first step, the students establish a typical
‘corporation" whose capital is pooled from shares
which they save from their pocket money, or sell
to friends who have confidence in their ability and
honesty.


Youth Achievers take their jobs seriously.
Above, they are exposed to product planning. Below, Atmar executives go over
product sales.


janior Achievemnent
nf ithe Pntippines


Once the "mini"-corporation is formed, they elect
mong themselves a Board of Directors and a set
f officers. Almost always, the business student
ecomes Company president, and the engineering
student vice-president for production. But, regardess of their managerial positions, all put in an egual
hare of productive work — and get paid accordingly.
One such JA company is Atmar Enterprises — a
jroup of students from Ateneo and Maryknoll (hence
he name). Atmar Enterprises is under the counse!
f Getty Oil executives.
“Upon advice from our counsellors, we decided
o produce satchel bags, explained Jun llagan, an
Ateneo business student and Atmar president, "Imnediately, we were exposed to the different phases
of a real industrial enterprise. We learned how to
naximize each other’s talents. For instance, we have
n our group, one who knows his way around Manila and has good bargaining talent — so he is in
harge of purchasing.
"Another was very good in design — he could
cut out the raw materials with practically no wastage; he is in charge of production.
"Of course the girls take charge of sewing Up
the bags, llagan points out.
Atmar’s carry-all bags are attractive — especially
with the name of one’s school proudly printed on
it, complemented by the school’s insignia. Aside from
eing roomy, the satchels are designed to go anywhere, bring anything anywhere, and reasonably resistant to dirt and smudge. Ingenuity best describes
se of leatherette for the bottoms and duck canvas
for the body. Sturdy strings top the bags to secure
whatever personal effects are placed inside.
Although the students meet only two nights a
week, Atmar has already produced 603 satchel bags,
540 of which have already been sold. Since they


An Achiever as a ma
nufacturing worker.


started operations a couple of months back at a
capital of P485, Atmar already reflects a net profit
of P1,301.38 — after "operating expenses" and
taxes."
But it was not that easy, llagan recalls that at
some point the group almost broke up because of
a growing animosity. With the help of their Getty
counsellors, the problem was isolated. It appeared
that in his effort to make a faster turnover, Jun
was driving the group too hard, reaching a point
where morale was dangerously low. Everybody, particularly Atmar’s president, learned their first lesson on the valve of human relations and the maintenance of proper attitude for efficiency.
Support
To insure a constant flow of young people getting the feel of private enterprise — an understanding that is essential to them if they are to "take
over" business and industry as employees, managers,
and stockholders — a Center is being maintained at
Malugay Street in Makati, Rizal where the students
operate their business.


The Junior Achievement of the Philippines, Inc.
counts with the support of business and industry,
among which is Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. Getty
is a founding member as well as counselling firm.
Executive Vice President George B. Campbell sits
in the Board of Trustees. He also serves as First
Vice President for JA.
In addition, Getty executives, C. E. Tuason, I.
Sanchez, Jr., and A. V. Amagna, take time out to
serve as counsellors, providing youngsters the benefits of their experience in production, administration, and marketing.
What does the Junior Achievement seek to accomplish?
The objective of Junior Achievement is to instill
in the new generation a sympathetic understanding
of the private enterprise system in which business
thrives and prospers. Letting today’s youth understand economic problems will make them better prepared when they find themselves either in government service, or practitioners in private enterprises
after they step out of school.
In a way, JA is harnessing student power today
for better captains of business and industry tomorTOW.


Achievers found satchel bag-making is an easy
but challenging process.


Clipboards are saleable items, too


Each Kart is meticulvously inspected to insure safety.


O! ONIELO ARVD COOMAOL


ASTERY over cams, gears, wheels, rods, belts,
and bearings put together, marked two Gettysponsored sports events: Go Kart Racing and
otorcycle Obstacle Run. In both events, rugged and
letermined men raced over speedways and hurled
ver makeshift obstacles in a valiant demonstration
f skills and courage.
Go Kart Racing
Go Kart racing is relatively new in the exciting
ield of motor sports. Primarily, it is geared to
est the endurance of man and machine. Go-Karting
tarted in the United States as a backyard sports,
inally finding its way into the Philippines where
t immediately gathered a number of enthusiasts.
Keeping interest aflame in this motor sports
s the Philippine Karting Federation. Under the spon

Off the track, a last minute
adjustment on his kart is made
by a contestant.


O


A competitor is assisted to get into
starting position.


Two contestants execute a difficult hairpin turn. At high speed, these turns sometimes throw racer and kart off the speed
way.


MG S 
PKE
PHILIPPINE KARTING


FEDERATION


Oops! A spin throws a contestant out of position.


The Winner! Nanding Villanveva of the
CAM Wreckers Association displays trophy
he won in Open class event. From left:
Samuel O. Abellera, Getty general sales manager; Ditas Rustia, PKF muse; Villanveva
and Jaime Rojas.


sorship of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc., the first
of a series of Go Kart races was held March 8,
at the Elliptical Road in Quezon City.
At the Quezon City races, Getty provided participants with Flying "A" premium gasoline and
Veedol lubricants. Trophies for the winners were
also donated by Getty.
The races, comprising four classes — novice, super Formula I1, and Open — saw the participation
of the Philippine’s top racers, such as Nanding Villanueva, who captured the Open class title with his
blve-colored Bug powered by a MeCullough twin
engine; Boy dela Paz, who claimed the Super class
title; Ric Catajan, who lorded over the Class II
event; and Ernesto de Jesus who romped away with
the Novice title.
Two early favorites, veteran karter Tom Zimmerman and Asian Champion Joey R. Bundallan, were


bugged with mechanical and brake troubles. Still,
both were in the thick of the races and impressed
the spectators with their motoring finesse.
The fantastic speeds in go-kart racing required
strict supervision and safety measures. Drivers qualifications were very strict, requiring special licenses
for the competitions. Similarly, racers had to be
submitted for thorough safety inspection.
The race track itself had to be properly barricaded to protect the thousands of spectators who
lined the kilometer-long speedway. Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc, saw to it that the races were accidentfree by installing safety signs and barricades.
The valve of Getty’s sponsorship was summed
up by Joey R. Bundallan, Philippine Karting Federation’s executive secretary, who commented:
'Getty Oil’s support is definitely a strong indication of the healthy development of the sport."


Riding bike No. 32, Jim Creech poses for souvenir picture wth Richard Huffman,
then went ahead and won over Huffman for the Light Heavyweight title.


Scott poses with his winning bike in
front of Getty streamer — he got racing
power all right.


OF SKILLS
AND COURAGE


Great Obstacle Run
In the Philippines, the motorcycle has made its
oresence felt both as a means for transportation and
for sport. But very often, motorcyclists figure in
accidents on the highway due to over-rating of capabilities of the machine, and over-confidence of the
-ider himself.
Like drivers of four-wheeled vehicles, motorcyelists must be familiar with the limitations of their
oike.
Hundreds of cyclists from different Motorcycle
clubs in the Philippines gathered at Nalinac for the
Sreat Obstacle Run. Among those who sent in coningents were the Ridge Riders of Clark Air Force
3ase, the Iron Horsemen from Subic, the Angeles
Motorcycle club, the Wallace Team, the John Hay
Team, the Philippine Motorcycle Racing Association,
and several motorcycle clubs in Greater Manila.
The competitors were classified according to moorcycle engine size: Bantam (up to 100 cc), Light
Weight (200 cc), Medium Weight (250 cc), Lighteavy Weight (over 450 cc). Rules were based on
he Sportsman Competition Rule Book of the Amercan Motorcycle Association.
While the races were primarily a test of the
yclist’s skill and his motorcycle’s efficiency, in some


measure, the event provided an opportunity for fuel
and oil quality to prove themselves, For instance,
Eldon Scott, winner of the Heavy Weight class, used
Flying "A” Premium gasoline and Veedol Racing
Oil. He clocked 12 min. 4 sec.— a good four minutes ahead of his rival, Joseph R. Drury, who came
from the same club. Jim Creech also used Flying "A"
Premium and Veedol Racing Oil, and romped away
with the Light Weight class trophy.
James E. Smith (Wallace Team) copped the Bantam title on his bike No. 17, after switching to
Veedol racing oil.
The first of its kind in the Philippines, the
Great Obstacle Run was both a race against time,
and a test of the rider’s skill as well as the sturdiness of his "iron horse." In motoreycling language,
the event is technically defined as "observed field
trials. Obstacles, natural and make-shift, were laid
along the route. Each rider was granted 350 points
at the start of the race. Demerits were deducted for
obstacles unsuccessfully hurdled or purposely avoided, or for violation of rules.
Getty extended support to the Great Obstacle
Run project largely because of its meritorious objective. Getty provided Flying "A” Premium gasoline
and Veedol racing oil to the participants. It also
donated some of the trophies which were awarded
to the champions. Enlivening the site were Getty
buntings and streamers.
Aside from the benefits pointed out, the races
proved that no matter what the power and efficiency,
it takes man’s skill and courage to accomplish the
purpose.


12


A competing cyclist
hurdles one of the 35
obstacles strewn along
the route.


James E. Smith fills up his bike No. 17
with Veedol racing oil. He copped the Bantam title.


IE OVVNGNO BLOOT


RED Jeanjaguet belongs to the swinging set
— not the group that stays up swinging till
the wee hours of the morning, but with the
group that swings at the crack of dawn during weekends on the green trying to beat the par, or improving handicaps.
"I'm classified as a week-end golfer," dr a wis
Fred in his soft, clear voice. He admits, however,
that he sneaks in a game or two whenever he can
during holidays.
Unlike most golf-bugs who started early in the
sport, Fred Jeanjaquet did not learn how to swing a
club until he was transferred to the Manila office
a few years back. But he quickly caught on as attested by over a dozen trophies.
By natore a sportsman, Fred plays football, basketball and tennis. He is a good swimmer and an
avid hunter, but until his association with Getty Oil,
he never played golf.
Motivated by group inflvence, he bought a set
of golf clubs and started practice swings. He enjoyed
this sport very much and soon became an avid
golfer.


There is a sudden glow on Fred’s face as he
recalls winning his first trophy. "I won it in 1964,
at the inter-Company competitions. That was the
very first tournament ! entered.” The fact that he
beat the field of more experienced golfers affirms
his decision to improve in his new-found sport.
He kept on improving his style and his swing,
ever since. To do this, he joined the Capitol Hills,
Fort Bonifacio, and UP Tee Jots Golf Clubs. He is
a member of the exclusive group called "As Is,
Where Is.
"Actually, the group merely plays the game more
strictly than usual,” Fred explains, "Whereas in normal play, if yoor ball lands, say behind a tree
or atop some dry twigs, you may take a penalty
stroke. But with the 'As Is, Where Is’ players, you
hit the ball wherever it lands."
The self-imposed restriction forces one to be
careful in his strokes; it also trains him to get
out of difficult sitvations without assistance.
As a member of the Manila Lions Club, Fred
participates in the monthly tournaments of the Philippine Lions Golf Association (PLGA). He has improved his rating from C to B in this tournament,
and is now on his way to Class A. At the UP
Tee Jots however, he has improved from Class D
to Class A.
Fred points out that contrary to popular belief,
golf is not an expensive game. The only substantial
investment required is the purchase of equipment.
As soon as this is accomplished, one can enjoy the
sport no more expensive than tennis. Counting the
benefits one gets — physical, mental, and moralone is well rewarded.
Elaborating further, Fred points out that walking
around the course to complete 18 holes, with fresh
air and morning sunshine, equals any exercise to
preserve one’s physical constitution. And the serene
atmosphere, away from the rush-rush environment
of city life, affords one appreciation of the beauty
of nature and serves as relaxation to the mentally
depressed business executive.


4


16


MEET A SUPERVISOR


NUREON C. EIVELO
And His Moments Of DECISION


T some time or another, one faces a moment
of decision — to compromise, or to stand
firm en what he thinks is right.
To Nunilon C. Livelo, accounting supervisor, his
refusal to compromise on what is right came at
a time when he was a high school student in his
hometown in lmus, Cavite. During a break in study
period, some of Noli’s classmates pulled a prank
which displeased one of the teachers. Somehow,
Noli was mistakenly identified among the culprits.
At the confrontation, all except Noli admitted
participation. It became a matter of Noli’s word
against the teacher— he faced a moment of decision: whether to compromise and let things be forgiven and forgotten, or stand firm on his innocence. He chose not to compromise, even though
it meant transferring to another school.
And like the man who once said, "I’d rather
be right, than President,” Noli preferred to continve schooling in Manila, away from his boyhood
chums.
There were subseguent moments of decision Noli
faced like the matter of selecting his profession. At
times of self-reflection, Noli oftentimes wonders
how he would have fared had he decided to become
an engineer instead of an accountant.
"My choice narrowed between Engineering and
Commerce.! was told that engineering classes were
longer, involving laboratory work on Saturdays and
Sundays. Since I was deeply interested in sports
and needed sufficient time to participate in athletics,
enrolled in Commerce so as to have my weekends free,” he explains.
After graduation, he took the government examinations for Certified Public Accountants. Simultaneously, he took an employment test at the Philippine National Bank. He passed both, and his high
mark in the PNB test was his passport to employment.


Part of his training was assignment to provincial branches, an experience which served him well
when he was appointed head of PNB’s agency at
llagan, Isabela. Much later, he was transferred to
the Trece Martires City agency in Cavite. Activity
was slow in the newly-created city and he was getting into a rut. Noli faced another moment of
decision.
Not content with a job that offered no challenge, he quit and joined Sycip, Gorres, Velayo 8
Co., Certified Public Accountants. He was with this
firm when he learned of the opportunities at Getty
Oil. It was also about that time he decided to
settle down. He married a long-time sweetheart, and
the couple now has four children: Felino (coined
from Fe and Noli); Glen (who was born the year
John Glen orbitted the earth); Dennis, and Sandra,
the only daughter and easily the family’s favorite.
At 37, Noli displays remarkable enthusiasm, although he admits he has his share of responsibility
problems.
Since he joined Getty Oil in 1957, Noli has been
thoroughly exposed to the Company’s various accounting work, earning promotions to positions of
responsibility. Just before his appointment as accounting supervisor, he was a junior auditor.
"I consider my position not merely a job, but
a career," he emphasized. "I find within it the potentials of career development. Opportunities for
self-improvement are evident — in fact many can
testify to the benefits they obtained from professional development seminars they attended under
Company sponsorship.” Noli himself is active in
professional circles, particularly in the Philippine
Institute of Certified Public Accountants (PICPA).
Thirteen years of service provide sufficient evidence that Noli likes working with the Company —
a decision he does not regret having made.


1





POOSAPONVIE


XTENSIVE research by automobile manufacturers and motor associations reveals the
great difference between the time you think
of stopping and the time your car actually stops.
Assuming that your car runs at ten miles per hour
when the car ahead of you suddenly stops, your
car would have travelled 11 feet even before your
foot touches the brake pedal. This is your reaction
distance.
Granting that you press the pedal down quickly, the car would still take another nine feet before
it completely stops. Between your reaction to the
danger and the car stopping completely, you have
travelled 20 feet. If yoy were following the car less
than 20 feet, you would have hit it.
The faster you go, the further it takes to stop
the car. At 50 MPH, your reaction distance would be
55 feet; your braking distance, 133 feet — a long
188 feet before complete stop.
Of course this is true only if your brakes are
good. If they are not, your are courting disaster. Keep
your brake system properly maintained and save
yourself a lot of costly accidents. A regular check
up of brake fluid level is one way of insuring that
your brakes are good. A reduction in the flvid level
means a leakage in the system that should be repaired at once.
Jost as important in brake system maintenance
is the selection of the correct brake flvid.
For the correct brake flvid, visit your dependable Flying "A" dealer throughout the Philippines,
or better yet, have a safety check to determine
whether your brakes are in proper working conditions.


TEAUY DUT
BRAKE


IIL
MESPECIEICATION IOR
NICONTENTS 12FL R


EANON


MENNO


Employee Receives Award


Roberto Facundo, an employee
of the Bacolod branch, recently
received a suggestion award check
from Melencio J. Jamili, Getty
Dil’s branch manager.
Pacundo suggested that the


220y buzzers being used with the
SF-69 pumps be replaced with oV
buzzers.
His suggestion lessened, if not
totally eliminated, the usual pump
troubles.


Gefty Oilmen
Af IRRI


Getty Oil technical representaives, maintenance personnel and
lesign engineers of the Internaional Rice Research Institute
IRRI) in Los Banos, Laguna and
tudents from the UP College of
agriculture gathered for a semnar on lubrication held at the
RRI recently.


D. Abella, wholesale and technical services supervisor were
among the lecturers. He talked on
proper lubrication methods.


W. F. Hagans, president and
general manager, recently announced the appointments and designation of three key personnel
to the following positions:
A. L. Jimoga-on as lloilo branch
manager, G. C. Martin as credit
manager and G. C. Herrera as
operations superintendent.


JIMOGA-ON
Jimoga-on was formerly salesman B assigned in Bacolod branch.
He joined the company in July,
1963. He has a BSC degree.
Martin, formerly credit supervisor, is a BSC graduate and a
CPA. He joined Getty Oil in November 1959.
Herrera previously held the position of plant superintendent and
branch plant acvisor. A holder of
a BSME degree, he joined the
company in May 1963.


20


ATMAR Execs Visit Getty Oil


A Station Opens
In La Union


Another service station opened
in Aringay, La Union, to serve motorists in that area.
Rev. Marcos Carmelo, Aringay
parish priest, blessed the service
station, BL 9628 managed by D.
G. Juloya, dealer.
The other guests included: (L
to R) H. B. Gay-ya, Jr., Poro
branch salesman; P Pimentel,
PVTA executive assistant; Mrs.
Lita Yabut-Chan; Mons. Marcos
Carmelo; D. G. Juloya; and Aringay Mayor Moises Dulay.


To acquaint the members into
the different phases of work activities going on at the Pandacan
Plant, the members of the Atmar
Enterprises, a JA company, toured
the plant site. Francisco llagan,
Jr., president, led the group.
A. V. Amagna, Jr., I. H. Sanchez, Jr.. C. E. Tuason, advisers,


acted as tour guides explaining
the various processes involved.
The group also visited the different offices, shops and the Blending Plant.
B. PQuisoit, asst, plant superintendent, and C. G. Nolasco of
National Accounts accompanied
the visitors during the tour.


Cebu Secretories Elecf Tubolado


Rogelio M. Tubalado, clerk/stenographer, Cebu branch, was recently elected as assistant treasurer of the Philippine Association
of Secretaries, Cebu Chapter.
The other elected officers of the
association are: Tessie lrazo, president; Alice Keesey, vice president; Glo Zosa, recording secretary; Brenda lgnacio, social secretary; Stella Carolino, treasurer;
Loi Arriola, auditor; Dinah Tan
and Chinggay Orat, PRO.


FIYING NEy LENS


Proud and happy A. S. Parungao
of the Cebu branch recently pinned
a gold medal on his daughter,
Annora Belinda for topping her
first-year class.
Annora has been a consistent
gold medalist at Stella Maris
School for the fourth consecutive
year now.


After 33 years of faithful serv
ice with the Company, Engracio
D. Ringor driver of the Pandacan
plant, recently received his retirement check from Mr W.F Ha

gans, president and general-manager of Getty Oil (Philippines)
Inc.
Looking on are Mrs. Ringor and
V. B. Lainez, personnel manager.


22


1970 GETTY RADIO NEWSCASTS


mg A News Lanain
gamalst Berih nan ngGetty Oil (Philippines) Inc, has
been chosen as one of the finalists
in this year’s Achievement for Management Awards Program sponsored by the International Council
of Industrial Editors.
The top winners in the various
categories will be announced at
the ICIE-AAlE conference in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania which begins
on June 2.
Other finalists in the AFMA
Program are the following: Bemis Company, Inc., Minneapolis;
Canadian Industries, Ltd., Montreal; Florida Power and Light
Company, Miami; Gimbels, Milwaukee; Gulf Oil Canada, Ltd.¬
Toronto; Lockheed-Georgia Company, Marietta, Ga.; New York
Telephone Company, New York;
Northe ast Utilities, Hartford,
Conn., J.C. Penney Company, New
York; The Southern New England
Telephone Company, New Haven,
Conn., State Farm Insurance Companies, Bloomington, IIl.; Vanda
Beauty Counselor, Orlando, Fla.,
Weyerhaeuser Company, Tacoma,
Washington; and Wyandotte Chemicals Corporation, Wyandotte,
Michigan.


Mr M. Doke Douglas, chief internal auditor of Getty Oil Company in Los Angeles, was a recent
visitor to the Philippines. While
here, he conferred with local officials and tovred provincial offices
of Getty Oil in the country.
During his stay, he was honored
at a party given by Mr. O. Soriano,
vice president-finance.


STATION


TIME


DAYS


DZJC Laoag


7:00


—7:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


DZHB Baguio*


6:00


—6:05


AM


Mon. — Sat.


DZWJ Lucena


6:00


—6:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


DZGE Naga


7:00


—7:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


DZGB Legaspi


12:30—


- 12:40


PA


Mon. — Fri.


DZHP Manila"


6:00


—6:05


AM


Mon. — Sat


DYRI Iloilo


8:00


—8:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


DYHP Cebu"


6:00


—6:05


AM


Mon. — Sat.


DXVM Cagayan


de Oro"


6:00


—6:05


AM


Mon. — Sat.


DYHB Bacolod*


6:00


—6:05


AM


Mon. — Sat.


DYWC GuihuIngan


6:00


—6:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


DYVL Tacloban


8:00


—8:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


DXOR Cagayan


12:50


—1:00


PA


Mon. — Sta.


XDC Davao"


6:00


—6:05


AM


Mon. — Sat.


DXBC Butyan


8:00


—8:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


DXND Cotabato"


6:00


—6:05


AM


Mon. — Sat.


DXSY Ozamis


7:00


—7:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


DXLL Zamboanga


7:00


—7:10


AM


Mon. — Fri.


*Radio Mindanao Network


Microwave


Newscast (Si

mulcast 7 Stations)


GETTY TV COMMERCIAL SCHEDULE


Channel/ City


Placements Time


(PM)


Days


Ch. 2


— Manila


Pre: Hawaii Five-O


8:00


Friday


Pre: Code Name Apollo


7:00


Saturday


Ch. 4


— Manila


Pre


tronsides


9:30


Monday


Pre


Mod Squad


8:00


Thursday


Pre:


Tancho Tique Show


8:00


Saturday


Ch. 7


— Manila


Pre: Mission Impossible


9:00


Sunday


Pre


Survivors


9:00


Friday


WII


: Name of the Game


8-9:30


Thursday


Pre: Love American Style


9:00


Tuesday


Ch. 9


— Manila


Pre


Dakotas


8:00


Monday


Pre: Cinehouse "o”


9:30


Wednesday


Pre


Ringside "o"


9:30


Sunday


Ch. 11


— Manila


WIi


n: MICAA Basketball


Series


Wednesday


(No definite schedule)


WA


in: Straight from the


Shoulder


7:30


Ch. 15


— Manila


Pre: Strange Report


8:00


Sunday


ch. 3


— Cebo


Pre:


Buhay Artista


6:00


Friday


Pre:


Si Tatang Kasi


6:00


Monday


Pre:


Evening With Pilita


7:00


Sunday


Pre:


Code Name Apollo


6:00


Wednesday


Pre:


Nida Nestor Show


6:30


Tuesday


Ch. 4


— Bacolod


Pre


 Buhay Artista


6:30


Tuesday


Pre:


Evening With Pilita


8:30


Wednesday


Pre:


Code Name Apollo


6:00


Priday


Pre


Nida Nestor Show


7:30


Thursday


Pre:


Tom Jones


7:00


Sunday


JIMENEZ


MALOTO


VALENZUELA


MA


AZUL


QUIROLGICO


A


LUALHATI


MENDOZA


GOMEZ


WELCOME


Reynaldo C. Jimenez, Makati Clerk
Accounting, is a BSC gradvate, major in Accounting and
Auditing, of San Beda College.
Arturo C. Maloto, Makati Clerk C
Accounting, is a certified public accountant. He is a graduate
of the University of San Agustin
in lloilo City. He was employed
by Mr Felicisimo Requillo as
bookkeeper from June 1964 to


May 1968 in lloilo City, and by
Southern Motors, Inc, as Accounting Clerk from February 1969 to
July 1969
Pedro C. Valenzvela, Jr., Makati
Clerk C— Accounting, graduated
in May 1969 with the degree of
Bachelor of Science in Commerce,
major in Accounting, from the
Philippine College of Commerce.


Dominador B. Bayais, Pandacan,
Painter is a high school graduate
of Francisco College, Manila. Immediately prior to his employment
with the Company, he was connected with Mabuhay Painting
Service as foreman/painter
Lolito B. Azul, Manila Salesman
C (Trainee), finished Commerce,
major in Marketing, at the University of the East. He also took
up law in the same school. His
first employment was with Procter & Gamble PMC as field adman,
then with Wyeth-Suaco Laboratories as detailman, with Johnson 8
Johnson (Phils.) as detailman. Immediately prior to his employment
with Getty Oil, he was connected
with La Tondena.
luanito J. Quirolgico, Manila Salesman C (Trainee) took up Chemical Engineering at Mapua Institute of Technology. His first employment was with Lexal Laboratories, Inc, as detailman, then with
Associated Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
and Richardson-Merrell (Phil.),
Inc, as medical detailman.
Amor N. Lualhati, Pandacan Receptionist-Telephone Operator, graduated from High school at Jose
Abad Santos High School, Arellano
University, in Pasay City. She also
studied Education for two years
at UE. She had been employed as
clerk at Lirag Textiles and at Pagasa Commercial and at Magsaysay Lines as casual telephone operator
Elmer R. Mendoza, Makati, Clerk
C— Accounting, graduated with
a BBA degree, major in Accounting, from UE. He had been employed at the Bankers Club as
accounting clerk and at Philippine
Air Lines as stock control clerk.
Exequiel S. Gomez, Manila Salesman C (Trainee), is a BBA gradvate, major in Accounting, of UE.
He had been employed with Erlanger & Galinger Inc, as sales
promotion assistant, Wyeth-Suaco
Laboratories as territory manager
and with Bristol Laboratories as
medical representative.


24


NOS I


RG
E SAN USN
SEDOLOTES S
agangi
VO
A R
ARh
BUICAV 
PA


ARUAS
OLoe
 SSoe
Baibalan
N


aIeDaden
U



Homan
II


ALS
PIERN

AA


 UBUABORt

NEDAA


Tiempe


E
A Af
 
SGANesg


PROVINCE


S-deipud


Me


layoyat
IE
S
 


A


EC


Bakuni


E


LPRIENE
SNeSOU


BAPOHReR 


Seloo.





le
IMn Fsote
oserio


ohgWSl


En


EA


LAP


IK


ecess


E2
LA


OUR COVER


Set against the map of Northern
Luzon, beauty spots which tourists
and visitors may find in the region
are depicted in this issues cover.
Story on page 2.
IN THIS ISSUE


EDITORIAL


P. I


JUNIOR ACHIEVERS
BEAUTY SPOTS
P. 10
OF THE PHIL./P. 2


OPERATION SUNSHINE/P. 12


MEET A BRANCH
MANAGER/P. 14


FLYING -ANEWS
VEEDOL PRODUCTS
WINS TWO AWARDS/P. 15 LAUDED/P. 16


MANAGERS' CONFERENCE/P. 18


What You Should Know
About A Safety Program


FIYING G NEWS


W. F. HAGANS
Chairman of the Board
O. SORIANO
President
S. O. Abellera
Editor
N. G. PRIMAVERA
V. B. LAINEZ
Editorial Assistant Business Manager
CORRESPONDENTS: M. ALTAMIRANO, JR., Apalit; A. C. EMATA,
Manila; M. J. JAMILI, Bacolod; S.
Y. VILLACIN, Cebu; R. S. SISON,
Davao; A. L. JIMOGA-ON, Iloilo;
W T. KHO, Legaspi; J. REYES,
Batangas; R. B. SERAFICA, Poro;
C. E. TUASON, Finance; R. B.
ABAD, Operations; G. C. HERRERA and A. V. AMAGNA, Pandacan Plant.
Flying "A" News is a quarterly
publication of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc, and is duly registered
as a third class mail matter with
the Bureau of Posts under permit
No. 153.
Please address all communications
to P. O. Box 2258, Manila.


PHILIPPINE COUNCIL G
INDUSTRIAL COMMUNICATORS


BauBG


INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF BUSINESS COMMUNICATORS


Cover Photo:
M. S. Domingo
Other Photos:
Courtesy of
BTTI
Layout:
Roger P Morota
Printer:
lournal Press
Publication Consultants:
Corporate Communications
Services


EMISE


here are moments in the life of a hation when its citizens tend to be dazzled by the lures of foreign lands — and bewitched by the talk of phantasm,
gor there to satisfy their sesthetic needs —stopping no longer to find out
if right where they are the same needs can be provided for, Such a momerit has
come to this country.
At such a moment like this, an instrument of concern needs come to the fore
to make some reminders. Flying-A-News volunteers to tackle that task.
For its 1971 issues, this publication hopes to promote domestic tourism, Soch
a project sims at conserving dollars for the country's economy by encouraging Fili
pino tovrists to do their "thing” right here in the country
To succeed in this drive, Flying-A-News will remind readers: that the Philippines is rich in beauty spots; that renovations had been made to many tovrist spots
in the country lately, such that these places are more easily accessible now, and
provided with comfortable resting places; that more beauty spots had been unco
e besuty spots can compare with many beauty spots any
vered lately; a
where else in the world
er show that these beauty spots have been drawThe pub
ve
ing tobrists fro
forld, and that Philippine leadership is esteemed in
international
rthern Luzon for this issue. Three other regions will
Flying-Asues. The central objective of all these presentations
be featured in
is to gain ye
country's economy can be improved by doing our
touring and 
re in our own beautiful country, thereby helping
to be uncooperative?
conserve doll


N AN Teng
orid. THe Eeard of Travel ande To,
ustry Teperis ihat 1970 registeres
eiemeeeWHo entered the Esuntry
sts, The ngmobertor tporistg inereng


BEAUTY SPOTS OF THE PHILIPPINES
NORTERS SOLON


A Filipino is familiar with the fact that
in certain places in his country there are
underground brooks and rivers; that a hot
spring or a beavtiful fall spurts or cascades;
also that there is a coastal town with fantastic beaches; and somewhere else, there
towers a mountain or a volcano. He may have
read that in a particular spot the first bullet
of resistance was fired; that in still another
spot, a valiant soldier died defending his country.
Recently some of the above mentioned
places have been developed into beach resorts
with good accommodations for tourists. Good
roads and passable mountain trails have been
opened to many springs, fall sites and mountain villages. Close by resthouses have been
constructed. Places where valiant men fell
have been developed into national parks, and
are now easily accessible. Many more beauty
spots have been uncovered, and are ready
for the nature-loving visitors.
A country sight-seeing trip can provide a
real respite from the troubles of the world,
where one can enjoy with his country men
the beauty and wonders of nature in the Philippines.
In Northern Luzon, the people who know
the countryside very well are the sturdy Igorots, the industrious llocanos, the revolutionary Pampangos, and many others who dwell
in the ever green countryside of Northern
Luzon.
COOL, INVIGORATING BEAUTY
SPOTS OF NORTHERN LUZON
The City Atop a Mountain
Famous for its invigorating climate and
towering pines, Baguio City, the summer capital of the Philippines, is nestled atop a
breath-taking mountain 5,000 feet above sea
level.
This mountain resort is sometimes referred to as the “City of Gold.” All around
Baguio are rocky mountains which have been


yielding inexhaustible mineral wealth for
years, Even beneath the city itself, it is believed nuggets are abundant. Thus it can be
said that gold built Baguio, brought the hand
of civilization to it, and transformed it into
the beautiful and progressive city it now is.
Baguio is 150 miles north of Manila, accessible either by air car or railway with
connecting bus service. By bus, it can be
reached in five hours. One can also reach Baguio by train up to Damortis town in La Union
and then by bus up the zig-zagging Kennon
Road.
Interesting spots in Baguio include:
Mansion House. Official summer residence
of Philippine presidents. Less than five-minutes away from the city proper and is surrounded by a park and garden.
Camp John Hay. One of the few remaining military reservations of the United States.
Gen. Yamashita ended war in the Philippines
by signing formal surrender papers in this
historic place.
Philippine Military Academy. The leading
military institution of the Orient where the
Republic’s military leaders are trained. Famous for its straight-backed cadets and the
honor system."
Trinidad Valley. North of the city, it is a
veritable "vegetable paradise.
Burnham Park. Right in the heart of Baguio, sporting a man-made lagoon. A sharp
contrast to the characteristic scenery.
Halsema Road. A picturesque mountain
highway leads one to native villages and world
famous rice terraces, which are considered
Wonders of the World.
Ideal for picnics or excursions, are the
Asin Hot Springs, Mt. Sto. Tomas, or Crystal
Cave. Asin Hot Springs is a 20-minute ride
from the city. So is Mt. Sto. Tomas, which
rises 7,000 feet. Beautiful sunrises and sunsets may be viewed atop this mountain.
Crystal Cave, on the other hand, is famous
for its stalactite formations.
(Please turn to next page)


A


Min es VienPark, affording
a lovely scenery of green
pines and rolling hills, is one
of Baguio's innutmerable beatity spots.


Stairways to the Sky
Ifugao is known the world over for its
Rice Terraces. The awesome beauty of this
"Eighth Wonder of the World" compensates
for the long and tiresome ride one undergoes
to reach there.
The Rice Terraces are made up of thousands of miles of ricelands carved by hand
from the mountainsides more than 2,000 years
ago. Towering like gigantic stairways to the
sky, the terraces soar to 5,000 feet, an estimated distance of 14,000 miles. The more
scenic terraces cover the three towns of Banave, Batal and Mayaoyao in the Ifugao country.
The Rice Terraces is a two-hour drive from
Bontoc; ten hours from Baguio.
The Home of the Igorots
Rich in natural resources, Mountain Province has the largest land area in Luzon, Bontoc, its capital, is usually an overnight stop
on the way to the Banave Rice Terraces.
It is a seven-hour drive by car from Baguio to Bontoc. The ride will end 7,000 feet
above sea level. Here, too, excellent hotel facilities are available.
Bontoc is an ideal base camp for sight-seeing trips to nearby spots. Sagada town, an
hour’s ride from Bontoc, is famous for its
burial caves. Lepanto is rich for its copper
mines and exotic flora. One can also visit the
Ulog, a dormitory for young, unmarried girls,
or he can observe the hillside barrios, women
weaving hand looms under their houses, plus
other mountain scenes.


Sailboats at Burnham Park in Baguio City strike
a sharp contrast to Baguio's mountain scenery.
Burnham has a host of other facilities.


4


Zigzag, Baguio


Banawe rice
terraces, called
"Stairway to the
Skies,” have
been carved out
of mountain
sides with bare
hands and primitive tools by
the Ifugao tribe,
since 2,000
years ago.


Baguio


Where Industry and Thrift are a Way of Life
llocos Norte is fabled for the industry and
thrift of its people. It is also known for its
tobacco plantations, beaches, cathedrals and
guaint Spanish towns.
Laoag, the capital, is accessible either by
bus or plane from Manila. It is 12 to 13
hours away by bus. By plane, via Aparri,
Cagayan, it takes just three hours and fifteen
minutes.
Places of interest include the earthguake
proof Spanish church in Paoay; the Raquiza


Another of Baguio's beautiful
tourist spots is the grotto of
Virgin of Lourdes situated atop
a lofty hill. More than a hundred steps lead to the image of
the miraculous Virgin.


(Please turn to next page)


NORTHERN
LUZON
Garden and waterworks, which is the main
source of water supply for the whole province; the government resthouse in Pagudpod;
and Juan Luna’s residence in Badoc.
Swimming at D'Coral Beach in Currimao
town is an experience one will long remember.
Hotel accommodations can be found in
Laoag, where international cuisine is offered.
A Relic of the Castillan Era
Vigan, ten hours away from Manila is the
capital of llocos Sur and was at one time
the capital of Northern Luzon during the
Spanish time. She still retains many of her
charms of that bygone era. Old villas and
buildings with Castillan motifs are very much
in evidence.
Heroes Hill National Park on the southern coast of Vigan, with its lagoons, waterfalls and rock formations, is a sight to behold. Bessang Pass in Cervantes, and Tirad
Pass which traverses Angaki, Concepcion, Sigay, Cervantes and Suyo are historical places
which are now national parks.


Many old Spanish churches, like the Vigan Cathedral, have a wide variety of architectural styles.
Gateway to the llocos
San Fernando, capital of La Union, is the
terminal point of the Philippine National Railways and bus companies plying the routes
between the llocos and various points in Luzon. Travelers, merchants and tourists pass
here on their way to Baguio and the llocos
region.
This capital town is located atop a hill,
overlooking the placid China Sea and the narrow llocos Coast. Here the sea and the mountains would have met but for the narrow
space of land between them in the business
and residential sections.
Poro Point, a narrow tongue of land sticking to San Fernando Bay, is an ideal resort.
Only five kilometers from the heart of the
capital, it is now adorned with cottages which
have become the haven of picnickers, excursionists, and even honeymooners.


The Raquiza Garden House and Reservoir, perched on top of Ermita Hill (once the site of a Hermit house during the Spanish period) is the source
of the water supply of the whole Ilocos Norte.
Added attractions are a wide and spacious dancing pavilion, a fresh-water swimming pool, a
tennis court and hotel facilities.


Ancient Paoay Church, a tourist attraction in the
North. is an enduring tribite to the engineering
genius of the Agustimian missionaries. The massive structure hears a mixture of local and forcign architecture.


6


The newest and the biggest resort in Bauang, La
Union is Nalinac which has a resort-hotel complex,
complete with beach cottages and a two-storey hotel
with 40 air-conditioned roomis.


Cresta Ola Beach Resort, also in La Union, has a
fine hotel, the Las Brisas, a clubhouse known as
Hechizo del Mar, a fresliwater swimming pool,
a Cabana-type resthouse, El Aquanata and several
others.
Bavang, some ten kilometers south of San
Fernando, today draws more visitors than the
provincial capital. A fantastic stretch of sand


facing the South China Sea, Bauang is reputed to have the best developed beach resorts
in the country.
Six beach resorts: Nalinac, Cresta-Ola, Malaysia Inn, Long Beach, Mar-pil, and Bali-Hai
complete to attract adventurers to fishing and
water skiing in the calm waters.
Bauang is only five hours by bus from
Manila. It is one hour by bus from Baguio,
and from San Fernando, only five minutes.
The Hundred Islands of Alaminos
The Hundred Islands of Alaminos is Pangasinan’s major attraction. It is 240 kilometers northwest of Manila.
The Hundred Islands National Park, with
its white beaches, warm waters, underwater
caves and coral gardens, is also one of the
most beautiful seaside resorts in the country
It consists of 400 little islands scattered over
the waters of Lingayen Gulf. Some of the
islands are named. Examples are Quezon Island, Roxas Island, Magsaysay Island, Osmena
Island, Virgin Islands and Milagros Island.
A favorite of excursionists, marine biologists and skin divers, the Hundred Islands is
located off the coast of Lucap, Alaminos, Pangasinan. It is about a half-hour ride by motorboat from Lucap. Lucap is seven hours away
from Manila by bus.
Where Pygmy Aborigines Fight for Existence
If one is to visit Zambales just for mere
sight-seeing, go to Olongapo — for its beaches
and the U.S. Naval Base. Room accommodations are available at Beach Resorts. White
Rock has reasonably-priced hotel rooms and,
reputedly, the biggest swimming pool in the
country. At Mar-Azul, one can get a hotel
room or rent any of the three cottages decored with Filipino, Japanese, and Cambodian
motifs.
Should one find himself in lba, Valley
Beach Resort is recommended. Hotels are
also available:


Ilocos Sur is one of the few
provinces in the country
which has retained its Castillan heritage. Centuries-old
Spanish buildings are the
pride of the province.


NORTHERN
LUZON


White Sand Beach, Pangasinan Cove
Pangasinan fishermer


Primicias Island, one of the Hundred Islands in Alaminos,
Pangasinan, has resort and boating facilities. Various improvements have been made on the island lately.


Quezon Island, one of the islands which was
developed earlier, has an enticing strip of
white-sand beach, a resthouse, a pavilion, as
well as swimming and boating facilities.


Olongapo is four hours ride from Manila
while lba is 84 kilometers farther on. It is
210 kilometers away from Manila and takes
five hours to travel by bus.
Aside from a swim, scuba or skin diving.
one may also visit the U.S. Naval Base through
a special arrangement. Or, one may venture
a visit to the eastern mountain region of the
province where the Negritos, the pygmy aborigines of our country, live.
Other places equally interesting for a
Northern Luzon itinerary are:
ABRA. Among the important vacation resorts and scenic spots in the province are:
Victoria Park in Bangued, Calm Spring in Penarubia, Mapaso Hot Spring, Baclingayan Waterfall, Botot Cave, and the Rice Terraces at
Iemin Valley.


BATANES. This is the northernmost province of the Philippines. There is a natural
cave near the Mahatao-lvana boundary, some
eight kilometers away from Basco, the capital.
Basco can be reached by plane from Manila.
CAGAYAN. Famous for its santos", or
religious wooden figurines. It is renowned for
the Cagayan River which is the longest in
the Philippines. Beauty spots in this province
include the "seven-chambered beauty” Callao
Cave in Penablanca, the Dos Hermanas Islands,
and the Aparri beach.
ISABELA. Should one venture out to this
province, he can have an ideal picnic day
with his friends at a place near the Magat
River Irrigation Dam site.


White Rock Beach Resort, also in Olongapo, has a 35-room Pagoda-type hotel,
duplex cottage, a restaurant, a dancing
pavilion, a fresh-water swimming pool
and a combo which provides music 24
hours a day.


Snow white mounds looking like huge icebergs, are
actually mountains of salt deposits which make up
the fabulous Salinas Salt Spring in Bayombong,
Nueva Vizcaya.
Camp 4, the SEATO Airfield and Minalungao Caves are some of the places one can
see there.
TARLAC. The Death March of Filipino and
American soldiers during the early stage of
World WarII which started in Bataan ended
at Camp ODonnel in Capas, Tarlac. Here one
can still see the old concentration camp, a
relic of torture and suffering.
Other places worth seeing include the Pon
Patling Hot Springs in Capas, the Bamban
Rest Area in Bamban, and the Magsaysay Dam
in Mayantoc.
PAMPANGA. Clark Air Base in Angeles
City is a major attraction. The city, which
is 85 kilometers away from Manila, also
boasts of its nightspots which appeal mostly
to the servicemen from Clark. Angeles City
is only two hours away from Manila.
Should one find himself in Pampanga on
the first week of June, he should not fail to
see the colorful fluvial festival in Apalit. He
may also visit the old historical town of Bacolor.
KALINGA-APAYAO. Kalinga-Apayao is one
of the sub-provinces of the Mountain Province one can not afford to bypass, especially if he is a camera bug.
On a trip to the Rice Terraces, Banave,
one can proceed northward to Bontoc. From
here, fourteen kilometers away, is Anabel, a
picturesque village built atop a mountain surrounded by rice terraces.


llagan is the capital of the province, some
408 kilometers north of Manila. It is 33 kilometers away from Cavayan where planes from
Manila land.
NUEVA VIZCAYA. Beautiful spots abound,
such as Borobbob Springs, River Dyke and
Dynamite Hill in Bambang, the Dalton Memorial in Santa Fe, the Natural Caves at Diffun
and Saguday, and the Ponggo River in Madela.
NUEVA ECIJA. Nueva Ecija is one of the
foremost rice-producing provinces of the country. No wonder its new capital is called Palayan City.
Cabanatuan City, previously the capital of
the province, is 115 kilometers away from
Manila. The distance can be covered in three
hours by bus.


Outside Olongapo City, in Subic, is Mar-Azul Beach
Resort which boasts of three cottages of Japanese,
Filipino and Cambodian motifs, plus facilities for
swimming, fishing and dancing.


PV
BX



It is easy enough for youth to dream of "sunshine and roses", but the problem is how to change
illusions into hard reality. To some youth, however the problem is no problem as they embark
on an ambitious venture into the complicated world
of business, hopefully to bring down to earth their
dream for tomorrow today.
Determined to be experts in their respective
careers and knowledgeable about many aspects of
other professions, twenty-one students from various
universities and colleges in the Greater Manila Area
thought of a daring idea one day in July, 1970.
They banded together elected their officers,
agreed on Craft-Buff Co, as their business name,
and set out on a bold venture of manofacturing
eternal wooden calendars.
It seemed difficult at first. The chosen product
was, and is, hard to manufacture. And they were
not experts. With their united efforts, however,
they managed to keep themselves above water —
with their Po75 capital — until master hands came
to their aid.
The helping hand came from three Getty Oil
executives —R. Bustamante (finance), C. K. Chan
(sales), and G. Quijano (operations). The three acted as advisers of the group, met with them once a
week, and helped them greatly in the practical and
actual business practices.
Almost a year has passed. The group continues
to meet with their advisers once a week and goes
on with their calendar manufacturing business from
which they get, more or less, 15 per cent profit
per unit. It is expected that by the end of the
school year when most of these students will be


graduating, a net profit of from P800 to P900 will
have been realized.
Craft-Buff Co. is just one of the many mini companies of "Junior Achievement, Inc, of the Philippines. JA is a non-profit educational organization
which aims to develop among our young people,
capable entrepreneurs, employers and employees for
tomorrow— citizens who will understand the full
meaning of private incentive and ownership and the
actual operation of business firms in a free society
-by giving these youths first hand practical experience as workers, managers and investors.
Business companies operating as a free enterprise,
such as Getty Oil, volunteer technical aid by providing
executives to guide JA company youths in their "moments of uncertainty. Such an aid is deemed as an
investment — for these youths, at some future date,
will inevitably take over the responsibilities of people. When that time comes, these youths will be
ready and qualified.
Craff-Buff Co., just like any other JA company,
will liquidate its assets, pay all bills, close the books
and declare a dividend (if operation proves profitable) — after a year’s operation.
The officers of this mini company are: Vincent
Tan (Ateneo), president; Miguel Tan (Ateneo), vice
president-sales; Charles Sy (Ateneo), vice presidentmanufacturing; Cecilia Ramos (Maryknoll), secretary;
Sandra B. San Juan (UP), treasurer; Carolina Coreces
(Maryknoll), personnel director; Ma. Beatriz F Pamintuan (Maryknoll), PR director; Marie Zelie Santos (Maryknoll), sales manager; Lauro Teung
(Ateneo), production manager; Marcus Antonio P
Santos (La Salle), safety director; and Ernesto A.
Moya (Ateneo), quality control manager.


10


BU
RA!

I



 S


anila, it seems, never had it so bad! Student
R.
demonstrations, transportation strikes, uncolylected garbage, rising prices, paralyzed businesses, rumors of martial law, pollution of air and
water — altogether an unending threat of chaos and
disorder that shakes further the foundation of an
already collapsing establishment.


Under such conditions, a city child grows up
with little hope for the future. Many of his elders,
with a sigh of resignation, shrug this off as a
worldwide trend. Isn’t the situation far worse in
some countries such as neighboring Vietnam, India,
and even the distant Middle East, they ask.


Faith, Hope, and Love
Yet, there are those who refuse to be dismayed.
Standing firm in the face of a worsening social setup, some look beyond the storm clouds in faith.
steadfast in hope. Instead of lamenting over a troubled world, they act — individually and collectively
to make things better.
One such exercise in social action is ¡"Operation Sunshine. Started by Getty Oil (Philippines)
Inc. in 1969 — without fanfare or full blast publicity which characterizes many endeavors in social
service — "Operation Sunshine” has penetrated deep
into the hearts and spirit of some 600 economically
disadvantaged school children in the Greater Manila
Area.
"Operation Sunshine” is more than a phrase. It
is a commitment to make pupils in Grades IV, V,
and V! — aged ten to thirteen — happy, at least one
Saturday in a year. These pupils emanate from indigent families in the Greater Manila area.
Recommended to participate by their teachers
through their school principals, they are screened,
and the ten most qualified candidates are selected
from each of the chosen public schools in Manila,


CIB
A

Quezon City, Pasay, Makati, Mandaluyong, and San
Juan.
For school year 1970-71 — the second year of the
project — the "sunny days" began for these pupils
on August 1, 1970, and continued up to last April
13. Each Saturday between August and March, ten
selected pupils were accompanied by a teacher and
by Getty Oil representatives on an educational tour
of beautiful and historical places in and around Ma

12


nila. Afterwards, they were treated to a savory
luncheon. Finally, a wholesome movie in a first-run
theater in downtown Manila, then merienda and a
return to their starting point.
“Sunshine Crvise” Down South
"Operation Sunshine” extends beyond the Saturday outings. Once school year ends, the 300 participants undergo an examination to determine how


A typical “sunshine" day starts with the siudents
and their teacher-chaperons posing beside the ta
miltar "sunshine" kombi.


the project has encouraged them to aspire for selfimprovement. The examination is prepared by the
Bureau of Public Schools' Elementary Education Divi
sion and is conducted by Getty Oil representatives.
The first thirty pupils who top the examination are
rewarded a "Sunshine Cruise” — an all-expense-paid
boat trip to the Southern Islands. The crvise further
enhances the pupils’ appreciation of the country and,
hopefully, reassures them of the nation’s potential
for progress.


Last year, 20 deserving pupils toured Iloilo, Cotabato, Gen. Santos, Davao, and Cebu. This year's 30
deserving pupils will join the "Sunshine Cruise" and
have a chance to see these same places for two weeks
this summer.


Rather than a welfare program, "Operation Sunshine” is Getty Oil’s investment in youth, as well
as an opportunity to practice its corporate social
conscience. e


1:


Meet A Branch Manager


POSETSO. OIOOry
ano me onauenge
Anead


Sison, however grew impatient. He realized it
would take him many years to finish medicine. And
he was anxious to be independent. So he left San
Carlos University, went to Manila, and enrolled at
Adamson University to take up Chemical Engineering. To his surprise, he found Amparo again — enrolled in the same school, and working for the same
course he had chosen. He began to woo her. Two
years after graduation, they were married.
Today, six years later they have two children —
Rowena and Aleli Ann, the gems of their married
life.
Born April 10, 1940 in Talisay, Cebu, Ruben, our
Davao branch manager, is a fast rising young man.
Starting as a trainee salesman in 1965, he advanced
rapidly. He was named to his present position on
October 16, 1970.


Davao branch today enjoys a good sales record.
This is due to good management. Sison says he had
gone out of his way to explain to the customers
that the company, in spite of its foreign name, is
Filipino in conscience. (The president is a Filipino.
The two vice presidents are Filipinos.
Sales volume in Davao has been steadily increasing every year, says this youthful manager. Last
year’s sales were much higher compared to those
of previous years, in spite of the nationwide ruckus
over the price of oil. In addition to good management, increased sales are also due to the fact that
Davao is the fastest developing commercial center
of Mindanao.
And just to think that Mindanao’s actual progressive posture is yet to be seen in years to come.
The builders of this dream posture are the people
from all regions of the country who migrate to
Mindanao in large numbers yearly. The expansion of
business which will go along with the development
of the area will demand more and more petroleum
requirements. With this trend, Sison foresees a bright
future for Getty Oil in Davao. And a more formidable challenge for him.
At 31, Ruben S. Sison is typical of modern Filipino executive: young and dynamic. His success with
Getty Oil did not come about by chance. He succeeded because of sheer hard work and dedication
to his job, and to Getty Oil.
He is still desirous of improving his sales by
developing new outlets and increasing his current
accounts, With such ambition, we have no doubt
he will succeed.


e was there and
she was there.
He left end she
left also. He appeared here and here she
appeared too... Not
long afterwards, they
were united in a lifetime partnership.


That’s the simple
story of Ruben S.
Sison and his wife
Amparo, From 1957
to 1959 Sison was at the University of San Carlos
in Cebu City taking up pre-medicine. Amparo was
there also, pursuing the same profession.


14


Bonifacio L.
Amor, PCIC outgoing president,
congratulates O.
Soriano, Getty
Oil president,
for Flying A’s
winning an MCA
award. S. O.
Abellera, Getty
Oil vice president for marketing and Flying-A-News editor, is at center.


FETING -A-NEWo
WINS TWVO AWARDO


The management valve of Flying-ANews as a communications tool was
further recognized when it won two
awards from the Philippine Council of
Industrial Communicators.
Flying-A-News was adjudged "Most
Outstanding" in PCIC’s Management
Communicator Award Program (MCA).
Flying-A-News was entered in Category
No. 5 under the theme: Developing
Community Group Understanding and
Support.
In PCIC’s Evalvation and Awards
Program (ESA), Flying-A-News won an
"Award of Merit" for being best in its
category.
The MCA program honors communications projects supporting management
goals. Flying-A-News’ series on Economic


Encounters with the West in its 1970
issues was considered by the judges as
an exemplary effort to win understanding of Fil-American economic relationship in the face of growing nationalistic
sentiments.
The ESA program, on the other
hand, seeks to further develop professionalism in Company publications. Certain standards are set for a publication’s
appearance, contents, and editing proficiency. Flying-A-News garnered an
overall total of 92 points.
The awardis were presented to Samuel O. Abellera, Flying-A-News editor,
during appropriate ceremonies held at
the Sulo Restaurant. Present during the
presentation of awards was Getty Oil
President O. Soriano.


15


Veedol products have been lauded as the
motor oils of high quality. The commendation was made recently by Schorsch Meier,
a German motorcycle racing champion in
1939.
Schorsch Meier was the first non-English
driver to win the famous Isle of Man Tourist
trophy. His sensational victory came on a
BAW motorcycle.
Simultaneous with his racing career reputation, Meier also built a career in the business world. Shorty after the last global war,
he opened the Schorsch Meier firm and became the Munich representative of BAW
(Bayerisch Motorenwerke, Munich).
Meier decided to use and sell Veedol products exclusively. He is convinced that fast
cars and motorcylces must be lubricated with
high grade motor oils in order to operate
at peak efficiency, He says Veedol has equalled his highest expectations.
His firm now is a corporation, a subsidiary of BMW, and continues to sell Veedol
products exclusively. s



A
ECDO
PLTIR
VN


Getty Oi Managers
10ld COrforOrieo


February 4 and 5 saw Getty Oil branch and district office executives gathered at Pandacan Terminal
for the 1971 Management Conference.
The first day began with W. F. Hagans, chairman of the board, speaking on “The State of the
Oil Industry.” O. Soriano, Getty Oil president, reviewed 1970 Operations and gave an outlook for
1971. A. F. Jeanjaquet made a review of 1970 Sales
Performance and plans for 1971 Sales and Profit
Improvement Program.
Branch Sales Manager E.B. Baria, on the other
hand, appraised the participants on "Branch Operations."
The branch managers gave their respective
"Branch Manager’s Report."
S. O. Abellera, vice president for marketing, made
a slide presentation on "Why Price Adjustment of
Petroleum Products Is Necessary."
The second day of the conference saw R. B.
Abad, operations manager, presenting his paper,
1971 Operations — Profit Improvement Program;"
G. C. Herrera, operations superintendent, "Optimum
Delivery — Plant Operations"; and A. V. Amagna,
Repair and maintenance supervisor, "Safety."
V. B. Lainez, personnel manager, on the other
hand, enlightened all the participants on "Personnel — Policies and Procedures." A financial outlook
for the year was presented by C. E. Tuason, vice
president for finance, under the topic "1971 Finance — Profit Improvement Program."


Chairman of the Board W.
F. Hagans points a finger
up to emphasize a point
in his speech on “The
State of the Oil Industry."


18


President O. Soriano talks on “Review of 1970 Operations —Outlook for 1971."


Finally, Finance Manager G. C. Martin discoursed
on “Review of Location Profit and Loss.
Among those who also reported on their respective areas were: N. C. Livelo, credit manager and
S. R. Tan, chief accountant.
Highlighting this year’s Management Conference
was the announcement of branch and distributing
plant winners in the credit contest for the quarter
ending December 1970.
The branch winners were: Legaspi, first prize
(P3,000); Apalit, second prize (P2,000); Poro, third
prize (₱1,000); and Davao, fourth prize (P500).


W. T Kho (in dark
glasses), Legas pi
branch manager, gets
a warmi handshake
from N. C. Livelo,
credit manager after
receiving his check


jor first prize in the
credit contest. Others
in photo are C. E.
Tuason (extreme
left), vice president
for finance, and O.
Soriano, presidenr.


Distributing plant winners were: Gumaca, first
prize (P1,500); Tagbilaran, second prize (P1,000);
and Naga, third prize (P500).
Basis of evalvating the credit performance of
each location for the purpose of the contest were:
current monetary percentage, liquidation period,
number of accounts managed, return of accounts
managed, and other receivable.


C. E. Tuason (left)
hands R. S. Sison,
Davao branch manager, a check, his
prize for winning
fourth place in the
credit contest. At
right is N. C. Livelo.


19


YLENS
EN 


International vice president of the International Association of Business Communi

Abellera Inducted
PCIC Officer
Flying-A-News Editor S. O.
Abell er a was inducted as vicepresident of the Philippine Council
of Industrial Communicators during appropriate ceremonies held
at the Sulo Restaurant in Makati,
Rizal.
Inducted along with Abellera
were: Antonio O. Vasquez (FNCB),
president; Christina K. Amper
(GE), secretary; Nora Z2. Saba
(Shell), treasurer; Aurelio B. Dacanay (PLDT), PR officer; and
Adorable F. Cerojano (SMC), J.
C. Borja (American Chamber),
Alexander C. Quibin (Meralco),
Pedro R. Narvasa (Facets), Bonifacio L. Amor (Philam), and Ru

PCIC officers and directors undergo the
"Pen & Book" ceremony as they are inducted into office by Charles B. Harper,
dolfo L. Urgel (Kodak), directors.
The Philippine Council of Industrial Communicators is an association of practitioners in corporate
communications, particularly company publication editors, audio

cators (IABC).
visual specialists, information officers, and communications program directors.It has more expanded
membership services and development than its forerunner organization, the PCIE.


Flying A Basketball Team Wins Tournament


The Flying A basketball team
won the championship pennant in
the 10th Annual Christmas Basketball tournament in Maribojoc,
Bohol.
The tournament was organized
nine years ago by the family of
Mrs. Margarita Medequiso, Getty
Oil BCP dealer in Maribojoc. It
is held annually.
Twelve teams participated in
the 1970 tournament. The teams
were sponsored and financed by
the different barrios and business
firms in Maribojoc. Flying-Awas sponsored and financed by
the Medequiso family.
In a letter to the staff, Mrs.
Medequiso explained that what
inspired her and her family to
sponsor the yearly tournament is


Maribojos Flying A basketball team members
pose with their muse in this victory picture.
Shown (T-r) are: Boy Agpasa, Boy Reselosa, Ben Albelda, Vic Orano, Poly Arano,
their desire to help the government’s effort to curb juvenile delinquency by providing wholesome
recreation for the youth.
The tournament seeks to deve

Nabor Medeqviso (organizer), Miss Mary
Ellen Logue (muse), Flor Evasco (coach),
Oscar Valles, Muloy Linggo, Ate Dascallar,
Butchie Badilla and Mike Redulla.
lop the spirit of sportsmanship
among youth, as well as to discover new talents, and finally to
serve as a wholesome recreation
for the general public.


20


Team captain F. L. Rillon throws the first
ball which served as the stepping stone to
a two-trophy victory for Getty Oil.


Getty Oil team captain F. L. Rillon receives the trophy in behalf of the team
from La Union First Lady, Mrs. J. Gverrero.
Looking on is Mrs. V. Carino.


New Distributing
Plant in Antique


F. L. Rillon gives a short talk after receiving his trophy for the highest individual
score.


Co-captain C. S. Ancheta speaks in behalf
of Getty Oil team at the awarding of
prizes to the winners.


La Union Getty Oil Pinbusters
Triumph


Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. pinbusters romped away with the first
runner-up trophy in the 1970 La
Union Bowling Tournament held
at Carino’s Recreation Center in
Poro Point, San Fernando, La
Union recently.
Eleven big business firms, including six oil companies, in La


Union participated in the tournament. Only Getty Oil among the
oil companies managed to win a
place.
F. L. Rillon, skipper of the La
Union Getty Oil team, also garnered a trophy for registering the
highest individual score in the
tournament.


Above is a camera view of another Getty Oil distributing plant
now in full operation in San Jose,
Antigue. This new West Visayan
distributing center is managed by
Mr. & Mrs. Serafin Gustilo (right).
The plant serves customer in the
entire Antique province.


Bugle For
San Vicente


Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. donated recently a bugle to the San
Vicente Elementary School in Apalit, Pampanga. This came in response to the request of the school
faculty and the Parent Teachers”
Association.


21


FIYING GLENS


The school principal received
the bugle from Apalit Branch
Manager M. M. Altamirano in the
presence of the school faculty and
branch personnel.


Service Station
inaugurations


RIBBON-CUTTING. Mrs. H. Pepito, First Lady of Consolacion, Cebu, cuts the ceremonial ribbon to formally opan new Flying
A service station BL-9666. Assisting her is
Mrs. L. Villacin, wife of our Cebu Branch
Manager. Photo shows (l-r) S. Y. Villacin,
Cebu branch manager R. O. Alejandro;
Mrs. Alburo, BL-9666 operator; Mrs. H.
Pepito; Mrs. L. Villacin; Mrs. N. Alejandro;
and R. T. Uytiepo, Cebu salesman.


Mrs. Alicia Alburo, operator of BL-9666,
fills up the station premium to the car of
Consolacion Mayor Hilarion Pepito.


Hagans Donates Basketball Court


One hundred and sixty orphan
boys at the Hospicio de San Jose
will not easily forget the "human
angels" they have heard of quite
often. This was how one orphan
called Chairman of the Board and
Mrs. W. F Hagans when they do

nated a basketball court to the
orphanage.
Complete with lighting facilities,
the basketball court was blessed
January 9th, with the donors
attending.


Mrs. R. Ticao, Iloilo’s First Lady, cuts the
ceremonial ribbon to signify the formal
opening of S5 1659, the newest Flying A
service station in Iloilo City. Assisting her
is C. E. Tvason, vice president for finance.
$5 1659 operator Julio Militar fills premium
gasoline into the tank of Vice President Fernando Lopez’ car. Looking on are C. E.
Tuason, M. R. Jimoga-on (Vice President
Loper' personal representative) and A. L.
Jimoga-on, lloilo branch manager.


ZZ


corsogon
Cervice otation
maugurations


Ribbon-Cutting. Mrs. T. Ravanilla cuts the
ceremonial ribbon to signify the formal
opening of S5 1634, another Flying A
service station in Sorsogon, Sorsogon. Photo
shows (1-r) Mrs. E. D. Garcia, wife of
service station operator Elias M. Garcia;
Mrs. T. Ravanilla; W. T. Kho, Legaspi
branch manager; and E. San Pablo, Masbate
distributor.


Msgr. Arnulfo Arcilla officiates while Fr.
Martin Hallum assists him at the blessing
of the new station. Candle-bearing ladies
are (1-r) Mrs. Joel Atchahul, Mrs. Arminghal Reantaso, Mrs. Ester Frayna, Mrs. Enriqueta Moraleda, Mrs. Helen Rottches, and
Mrs. Tobias Ravanilla.


Pupils from the Bacon Central School in
Sorsogon render a musical number during
the station’s inauguration.


S. O. Abellera (in light coat), vice president for marketing, gets an award for
completing 15 years of service with Getty
Oil. In photo are (I-r) O. Soriano, presi

dent; V. B. Lainez, personnel manager; S.
O. Abellera; and C. E. Tuason, vice president for finance.


V. B. Lainez (second from right), personnel manager, receives a service award for
completing 15 years with Getty Oil. Photo
shows (lr) O. Soriano, president; S. O.


Abellera, vice president for marketing; V.
B. Lainez; and C. E. Tuason, vice president
for finance.


a


Cebu Branch Manager S.Y. Villacin (right) is given his service award
for having served Getty Oil continuously for ten years.


FIYING


Poro Branch Manager R. B. Serafica (right) gets a service award
plos a handshake for having served Getty Oil for ten long years.


So that the bereaved are
not left helpless. This
underlies the Group Life
Insurance Program at
Getty Oil. The widow of
Mariano San Juan, s
Makati accounting clerk,
who met his untimely
death in a vehicular accident are shown receiving the insurance
proceeds. W. F. Hagans
(left), chairman of the
Board, and O. Soriano
(right), president, presented the check to
Mrs. N. L. San Juan,
the victim’s mother.


Pete W. Guerzon, Cagayan de Oro Getty Oil distributor, was recently
installed Master of Macajalan Lodge 184 of that southern city. Guest
of Honor and Installing Officer was E. L. Shepley, grand master of
the Free and Accepted Masons of the Philippines. Photo shows (I-r)
Worshipful Brother Poblete, master of Maguindanao Lodge 40; P.
W. Guerzon; E. L. Shepley; F. Caburian, district deput grand master;
and Most Worshipful Brother Munnariz, Grand Secretary and master of ceremonies during the affair.


Pete W. Guerzon, Cagayan de Oro distributor, gradvated from the Bachelors Club
when he married the former Chare Viray,
a Cagayan de Oro beauty. The marriage
was solemnized on Janvary 9th.


2A


ldi TOu OrIOLio RIOvy
About A Safety Program


Every Plant and every work place, whether it
has 10 or 10,000 employees, needs a safety program
designed for its specific need. Surveys have shown
that the highest injury-frequency rates are commonly found in the medium-size plants — those with from
50 to 500 employees. Somewhat better rates are often
found in small plants of less than 50 employees,
while larger plants, with 500 or more employees,
tend to have the best rates. However, the need for
a safety organization exists regardless of size.
Small establishments, because of their closer relationship between management and workers, can conduct an accident prevention program with a minimum of organizational details. Such a program can
osually operate with the service of the Supervisor,
Branch or Plant Manager.
There can be no question about the valve of
a safety program. From a financial standpoint alone,
safety pays dividends. The fewer the injury claims,
the better workmen’s compensation insurance rate.
Rate differentials may vary as much as 2 to 5 per
cent total payroll costs between plants with good,
and those with bad accident records within the same
industry. This may mean the difference between
operating at a profit or a loss.
There are other financial benefits. Operating costs
can be reduced with less damage to equipment and
product, Production increases because men can work
without the fear of personal injury. These are tangible assets.
Less tangible benefits are a direct result of a
successful safety program. A plant with a bad accident record does not attract nor hold the best workers. A clean, safe plant creates the climate where


good work habits can be cultivated. A safety program will help to attract good workers, keep them,
and conserve their skills. A safe plant is a wellorganized and conducted plant that soon becomes
a "good place to work.” Management’s attitude
toward its workers is reflected in such a plant, and
this is good public relations.
An unusual feature about successful safety programs is that they are so integrated into the routine
of the operation of the shop or plant that it is difficult to determine whether a safety program, as
such, actually exists. This is a perfectly normal condition because of the close relationship between an
efficiently operated plant and its accident record.
Where engineering planning is done effectively before production begins, hazards can be eliminated
while still in the planning stage. And a good purchasing department will insist that safety and health
protection be built into the equipment it purchases,
whether such purchase be well-guarded machines,
properly designed ladders or less hazardous solvents.
A plant safety program, therefore, is a well-defined effort to organize and direct certain activities to
prevent accidents. The kind of program and the
emphasis to be placed on certain features of it will
vary widely from plant to plant. Factors such as
size and the inherent hazards of the business will
ultimately determine the kind of program which
will work best. But there are certain basic elements
which should be incorporated into every program.
These elements may be identified as follows:
1. Top Management Leadership.
2. A Safe and Healthful Place to Work.
3. Proper Training and Supervision.
4. Employee Participation and Interest.


I1
NakiKisama po kami.
We came to the Philippines in 1922. We have
lived with Filipinos for 49 years. We have learned
to speak their language. Appreciate their jokes.
their welfare has become our concern. We live
and think as Filipinos. Our sentiments are those
of a Filipino, for Filipinos.
* We are the first foreign petroleum organization
to have an all-Filipino President and VicePresidents. We are managed by Filipinos for
the benefit of Filipinos. This is in consonance
with the long-established policy of this company
that there shall be no discrimination against
any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, age, or national origin.
* Some of our present employees have been with
us for more than 35 years. We must be treating
them well.
* We have contributed substantially to a number
of humanitarian organizations because we feel
that it is our responsibility to help uplift the
Filipino nation.
* We, therefore, pledge to extend all possible assistance in the improvement of the economy in
the hope that the present problems inherent in
a developing nation will thus be solved.


Cet
yOll
"Laging nakikisama"


Y


E


BLYING
ISUE ONE


HHRIMERNTTINA
B NEWS
1972


S
 ES
AE

O
ARLA

AS
Addrens
NeS
E. o. Sos eh, anta
tor extst o, Aastisn
amtes  a. e?
f. O. pox 2aja, Manila
 USTI OnL (PHlliFPINES! INC.
₱. O. 3ox 2a5a, Manila
ishor MiT Gil (PEILIFPINSS) Me,
P. 9. pas Pano, maple
ter  JOURtAl PLESS
leseien keteroie surapo eso susonn Wede, hikern, est


a gdia iaig kaia an ang an baa  la Panl
Ea


   a


AA
HA
mai
Cctober, 197l a 
a bas la  unanan, pot
iting
da, Mianl a aaap  E


LMAGILE
MAA



KINISAN3"


L
LEHLGO
MEI

AA
EN
la7
SATRES

MDA
AEOE
1
E

R
5
PEINCR
E

RE
S
EKI
TON
MD



esign & Layout: Narciso Rodriguez, Jr.
Tevrism Photes; Ceurtesy of erri
Publications Consultants; Corporate Communications Services


Philippine Council of Indestrial
Communicators


International Association of Business
aBG Communiestors


UNIVERSITV OF THL PNGE
INSTITUTE OFNNS ZOMN!
LIBBARY


As the year 1977 closes and we review
ur accomplishments, we find many things
o be thankful for.
Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. has completed
nother successful year of operation and
vhile it may not be considered a banner
ear, it is one of which we may be proud.
Management wishes to avail itself of this
pportunity to express its gratitude to the
nembers of the Getty Oil (Philippines) famy for their loyalty, dedication and devotion.
our efforts are greatly appreciated.
In the light of accomplishments in 1971.
look forward to 1972 with some optimism.
he spirit which was demonstrated in the
ast, will, I am certain, produce the drive
ecessary to succeed in the coming year.
I hope each of you had a happy holiday
eason and wish you a prosperous and
uccessful 1972.


 klan
E. L. SHEPLEY
Chairman of the Board


Iwould like to share with you what a
certain poet has written and which reads as
follows — "I was sad cause l had no shoes
til I saw a man who had no feet."
This verse, in time of hardships and despair brings some light to our darkened spirits. It is a verse similar to our Filipino saying of not comparing our situation with the
richer but with the humbler and impoverished Juan de la Cruz.
In this age, contentment is almost always
equated with material blessings which unfortunately never seem to satisfy us for we
ask for more as the years go by. This is
probably because true happiness lies in the
spirit.
This to my mind is one message we
should all imbibe for the coming year. Let
us be thankful for all the good things that
have been bestowed upon us and for those
that may still come our way.
To all of you: A happy prosperous 1972!


President & Chief Operating
Officer


1 in Aguinaldo Pearl Farm in Samal Island.
houses on stilts; A tree house in Pasonanca Park;
cotic fruits like durian and marang for sale in a marketplace in Davao City;
Corals fished out of the ocean provide additional income to muslim fishermen.


MYSTICAL
MINDANAO
CONTINUED


Beach. But the most famous, sand-wise and
historic-wise, is Talomo Beach. This became the landing site of the Japanese invading forces in 1942, on the one hand, and
the American liberating forces in 1945, on
the other Again, in 1963 more than 10,000
Filipino troops staged "Operation Bawi" on
Talomo’s two-kilometer fine grey sand.
Another point of attraction is the city’s
104-room Davao Insular Hotel which is one
of the plushiest hotels in the Philippines
and certainly the most luxurious in the
South.
MINDANAO'S GRANARY
If you want to see where all those appetizing fruits "where the bottom is the top
come from, drop by Davao’s neighbor Cotabato, a rice-producer and one of the country’s bigger provinces. Cotabato, politically
subdivided in two, is a homesteader’s and
cattle ranchers paradise. She will open your
eyes to an idyllic way of life.
ZAMBOANGA'S BEAUTIES
The country’s more beautiful women, the
awe-inspiring mosques, the sea-roaming Badjaos and their house boats, tree houses, a
moss-covered Spanish fort with an embossed
image of the Lady of the Pilar are but a few
of the colorful sights that await you in


Zamboanga del Sur whose capital city, Zamboanga, is but three hours direct flight from
Manila.
Zamboanga, from the Malayan Jambangan" "a place of flowers” is also where
the country’s national hero, Dr. Jose P.
Bizal chose to live in exile for four years.
In Zamboanga del Norte, a large relief map
of Mindanao, executed by Bizal still stands
today in Dapitan where Bayanihan, a manmade island, can be found.
Zamboanga’s beauties are all there for
the energetic tourists to see.
CRISTINA AND MARAWI
Faith and power are forces which characterize Mindanao’s two Lanao provinces.
Visit Mindanao’s seat of Islamic faith, Lanao
del Sur, and you’ll enter a world of mosques
and Muslim practices.
The province boasts of a capital city,
Marawi, whose 4,000 feet above sea level
locale rivals the country’s many resorts.
This capital city now houses the South’s
only government university — the Mindanao
State University.
You'll surely not learn all about this proud
province without seeing the Agathan Museum, Signal Hill, Lake Dapao at Purong and
Mabel Beach in Malabang.
Continued on next page


At left: Spell-binding Maria Cristina Falls, a major
tourist attraction in Mindanao. Below: Sarimanok
brassware. Bottom: Moss-covered Fort Pilar in Zamboanga
del Sur.


MYSTICAL
MINDANAO
CONTINUED


Native Muslims enjoy a
pleasurable promenade
on Mabel Beach in
Malabang, Lanao del Sur.


The other province, Lanao del Norte,
boasts of power and beauty. Maria Cristina
Falls — a breath-taking falls — in Iligan City,
has enough power to light up Mindanao, Because of this power, lligan is now proud
to give rise to the country’s first integrated
steel plant.
Aside from Cristina, the province has
Twin Falls, Cathedral Falls, numerous beach
resorts, and beautiful Lake Lanao.
MINDANAO DEEP
Before 1968, tourists flocked to Surigao
to experience a rare treat; the privilege of
knowing where the 35,400 feet Mindanao
Deep — the deepest known to man — lies.
Today, one can fly to Nonoc Island
to see the country’s biggest nickel mining
project. They can also go to Lake Mainit,
Mabua and Cabantay beaches.
THE FRIENDLY CITY
Cagayan de Oro City, the capital of Misamis Oriental, has been dubbed the friendly
city or the gateway to Mindanao. Indeed,
she’s friendly enough to offer you coconuts,
beautiful parks and the pinched lanzones


which are "in season" from September to
November.
For nature lovers there is Barrio Bonbon,
site of an old Boman Catholic Church, which
was buried under the sea during a volcano’s
(Hibok-Hibok) 1871 eruption in the "Island
of Fire” Camiguin Island. Only the church’s
steeple can now be seen pointing lacomically to the sky.
Agusan, a timber and coconut country,
offers many fine beaches. Experience Lake
Mainit’s mineral waters and an annual "Pintakasi" — which attracts cockfighting afficionados all over the country.
Drop by Bukidnon, summer capital of
Mindanao and home of the Del Monte pineapples. You can reach this cool country's
capital, Malaybalay, by bus from Cagayan
de Oro City which is only 77 kilometers
away from the pineapple plantations.
Sail to Jolo in the Sulu Archipelago, the
country’s backdoor home of the sultans,
palaces, pearls and white beaches. Miss this
exotic place and you’ll have missed a whole
cultural life. 62


OEs
R
 BOSLSS LU


There are no tricks, no magical incantations or sorcerer’s
potions which can make
a business or a businessman
an overnight success. Many
qualities and much
hard work are needed,
as are innumerable
other elements.
Conditions are much
different now than were in 1938,
1932, or 1915. Just the same,
the last things that American
business needs are complaints,
alibis and defeatist philosophies.
What American business
does need — and in ever
increasing numbers — are
young businessmen who are
willing and able to assume
responsibilities of progressive,
vigorous industrial and commercial leadership.
When I first began in the
oil business, I spent most
of my time in the field
working on the drilling rigs
with my men, a habit
which paid many handsome
and unexpected dividends.
The men felt they were
partners with the boss


From: GETTY NEWS
November, 1971


in a mutual effort, rather
than merely employees of
some corporation run by
executives they never
saw and who had probably
never set foot on a drilling
platform in their lives. Morale
and production — soared
as a result.
Since my younger days,
however much of my own
business success has been
due to my executives loyalty
and efficiency.
I have always held that
the first acid test of an
executive is his ability
to think and act for himself.
He should have the intelligence
and ability to originate ideas,
develop plans, implement
programs, solve the problems
and meet situations without
running constantly to his
superiors for advice.
Now an executive’s principal
duty is to direct the activities
— the work —
of those
under him. Direction being
nothing less than another
word, leadership, it follows
that the good executive
must, perforce, think and act
as a leader.
He must have the ability
to communicate, for time
is money in business.
Misunderstandings in the
interpretation of requests,
reports or instructions can
orove very costly. Thus, the
good executive is one who can
explain things and tell people
what needs to be done
quickly and clearly.


Interest and enthusiasm are
two more qualities a good
executive must possess. No man
can properly do a job
in which he is not interested.
An executive’s interest must go
far beyond the limits of his own
particular department or
office. It is essential that
he know what goes on in other
departments and that he be
completely conversant with
the company's policies and
over-all activities. Only then
can he evaluate the role and
relative efficiency of his
department and relate its
operations as a functioning part
of a functioning whole to the
other parts and to the whole
itself.
Then, his interest should
go even further: To embrace
the entire field or industry
in which his company operates.
Only if he knows the field can
he understand his company’s
strenghts, weaknesses and
problems.
Business, on the other hand,
must supply a need. In so
doing, it must give value
received. The value received
or the price of the service
rendered or product
sold — must be fair, low
enough to be within the buyer’s
ability to pay, yet high enough to
give the business a reasonable
profit.
In order to keep old
customers, obtain new ones,
meet competition and
justify his profits, the businessman must constantly seek to


raise quality, reduce costs and
prices, increase production
and improve all facets of his
business. He must accept
the fact that he will
always be faced with problems
and that these exist only to
be solved in the most efficient
manner possible.
am firmly convinced that
the future of American
business, of the American
people — and, indeed, the
entire free world — lies in the
perpetuation of a progressive,
farsighted free-enterprise
system guided by progressive,
farsighted businessmen who
will reap their rewards
from improving the living
standards of all.
There are still fantastic
demands to be met by
businesses. No one can
rightfully say that
business has discharged its
responsibilities and done
its job until every employable
citizen has steady, full-time
employment and until every
family is well-fed,
well-clothed, well-housed
and able to live in comfort
and without fear.


Today, my companies are
thriving, and they're carrying
out ambitious programs for
further expansion. My primary
concern and main interest lie
in making certain that
these companies continue to
grow so that they can
provide more employment
and produce more goods and
services for the benefit of all.


9





OPERATIONS MANAGER


A


OiSO


It may take some magic to be successful
in a chosen career, but to Gettyman G. L.
Quijano, it takes only hard work.
A middle-aged man, bespectated, Mr. Quijano starts his day at the office with a bit
of straightening up. With a schedule of
priorities in his hand, he breaks the ice with
an official call to one of the sections of
his department, "Routine, he says, "But it
sets the day rolling on the right track.
Mr. Quijano has a full schedule of responsibilities including manufacturing, ship
ping, purchasing, stock control, planning and
construction, and maintenance of companyowned plants and service stations.
"Service is the key word in my department" says he. "All the jobs we have to accomplish during the day must be better than
those of the previous day’s
A veteran engineer, he has seen action
in his profession even prior to the date he
joined the company. In 1945, right after liberation, he worked with the U.S. Engineer
Corps at the Nichols Air Base and Fort
McKinley.


At Getty Oil, he has 16 years of performance. Even in his early youth, he already
knew what it takes to succeed. Working his
way through college, he apportioned his time
to night studies at the Mapua Institute of
Technology, and to varied jobs at daytime,
including helping his mother tend their store.
It is no wonder, therefore, to find his academic record lean of extra-curriculars. To
this he says: "I entered the age of responsibility even before l got there. But it pays
off well."
Mr. Quijano is not the politically-activist
type of person, in the modern sense. But he
believes that changes are necessary in our
society. "I believe in reforms, not revolution."
Since the time he joined the company
under its former name Tidewater, he has
seen the company tackle the challenges of
the times. He recalls that in 1956 there were
only a few company-owned service stations,
while today there are over a hundred.
What about 19727 “The new year beckons
to us with a better hope and a more challenging effort. The plan to modernize company-owned stations is now in the works”
he quips. "In line with our modernization
program is the company plan to replace the
name of our corporate product from Flying
A to Getty."
To his record in the company are various
accomplishments, including professional
ones, For this year, he hopes to take up
five to seven management seminars. "This
sort of activity keeps me on the tab of the
trends in business, he says.
Old in years but young in ideas, our engineer looks at life as full of opportunities
and surprises. 8e


George F. Getty I1, executive vice presideni
and chief operating officer of Getty Oil Compan
in Los Angeles, California recently visited Getty
Oil (Philippines) Inc. He was accompanied by his
wife Jacqueline.
The couple was met by former chairman of
the board, W. F Hagans, Mrs. Hagans and com
pany officials upon their arrival at the Manila International Airport.


A major part of Mr Getty’s itinerary in the
country was a courtesy call on Philippine President
Ferdinand E. Marcos at Malacanang, followed by
a call on US Ambassador to the Philippines, Henry
Byroade
During his stay, he also toured the company
offices in Makati, inspected the facilities at the
Pandacan Terminal, and visited various company
service stations in Greater Manila. Mr. Getty also
took part in the deliberation of the regular executive committee meeting held in the District office.
Prior to departure, the couple were feted to a
luncheon and a dinner by Getty Oil (Philippines)
officials. Various representatives of the business
sectors attended the gathering.
This was Mr. Getty’s second visit to the Philippines. The first was in 1967.


OE

VIOTTO

CONTINUED


12


Among the world’s famous
and renowned classical music
composers, Tchaikowsky is one
byword during the Christmas
season because of his composition: The Nutcracker Suite.
Casse-Noisetter or the Nutcracker Suite (1892) originated
as a ballet score from the story
of E. T. A. Hoffman. The story
tells of a girl who dreams that
her Christmas gift — a nutcracker — is a handsome prince who
consequently leads the toy soldiers to battle against the mice.
After a resounding victory, the
prince then takes the girl to
Jam Mountain in Arabia where
she is greeted by the Sugarplum
Fairy and is entertained with
games, dances, and toys.
The ballet score is said to be
one of the few works which
revealed Tchaikowsky in a lighthearted mood with delight and
wonder in a child’s fanciful
world. This by itself is a wonder
if we look into the composer’s
life.
Peter llitch Tchaikowsky was
born in Votinsk, Russia on May
7, 1840. He was a hypersensitive
person who had several nervous
breakdowns. In his own eyes he
was a misanthrope while his
homosexuality made him psychopathically shy.


Listen: “The greater reason "
have to be happy, the more discontented do I become. A worm
gnaws continually in secret in
my heart, I suffer from torments
which cannot be put into words
.Every new acquaintance,
every fresh contact with strangers has been a source of acute
moral suffering." This was Tchaikowsky speaking. But despite his
solitude and inner turmoil, he
was still able to create music
that could give joy and contentment to one’s heart.
Tchaikowsky'’s first musical
impression came in early childhood when he heard opera airs
tinkled on a little mechanical
instrument called the orchestration. He tried to imitate these
tunes on the piano. Soon he began piano lessons when he was
five years old. After watching
a concert one night, he was
found weeping on his bed. "The
music won’t leave my head. It
won’t let me go to sleep, he
whimpered.
To his governess, Tchaikowsky
was a "porcelain child” for a
single word of rebuke usually
quickly forgotten by other children upset him alarmingly. Moreover, he preferred to play the
piano, and to read or write
poetry than associate with other
children.


SIAROOTO
CITROIMAO
OUOIND.
E OTCRAUREROOE


Unlike Bach, Beethoven, Chopin and other immortal composers, Tchaikowsky was not a
child prodigy for he began to
devote his life to the study of
music at the age of 27 The
Russian composer was firs t
prodded to take up law after
which he became a clerk for
three years in the Ministry of
Justice where he was so disinterested with his work that he
did not recall any specific duties
he had. At this time, he became
a fancy-dresser and a snob who
neither had direction nor ambition and was only concerned
with having a good time.
However he attended the
opera regularly and began taking piano lessons again in his
last years at law school where
he became absorbed in improvisation. So he started composing.
It was only in 1867 that he
began thinking seriously about
music. Nicholas Zaremba, his
music teacher became a great
source of inspiration that Tchaikowsky overcame his natural
tendency toward indolence and
worked hard and well. Simultaneously at this time, a change
was already evident for he became completely negligent of
his appearance.
While studying in a conservatory, he wrote his sister: "I do
not for a moment think that
expect to be a great artist,
whether I become a famous
composer or a poor music
teacher is a matter of indifference to me. At all events, my
conscience will be clear and
shall no longer have the right
to complain about my lot."
But his musical propensity
was not to be taken for granted for even as a student his cantata Ode to Joy elicited the following words from a critic:


“You (Tchaikowsky) are the
greatest musical talent of contemporary Russia, more powerful and original than Balakirev,
more creative than Seroy infinitely more cultivated than
Rimsky-Korsako. In you,! see
the greatest, or rather the only
hope of our musical future."
After finishing his music
course he began teaching in
the conservatory established by
his former mentor’s brother By
1869, he had completed his first
masterwork, Romeo and Juliet
which was received apathetically in Moscow. Fifteen years
later he received the Order of
St. Vladimir from the Czar which
was followed four years later
by an annual government pension for life.
Meanwhile, he accepted an
invitation to tour the USA and
in 1891, Tchaikowsky arrived in
New York City to help celebrate
the opening of Carnegie Hall
by conducting his 1872 Overture.
Back in Russia, his misery
deepened and once again he
thought of going mad. It was
in this mood that he wrote his
last symphony.
One day in November 1893,
he made the fatal mistake of
drinking unboiled water when a
cholera epidemic was then raging in St. Petersburg. Consequently, he died of the plague.
Despite his sexual aberration,
three women were historically
associated with Tchaikowsky.
He fell in love with Desiree Artot, an unattractive opera singer
who chose to marry a baritone:
and contracted a precipitous and
inadvisable ma rri ag e with a
young music student, Antonia
Miliukona whom Tchaikowsky
abandoned immediately. But his
most fruitful involvement though
on a platonic level was with


Madezhda Filaretovna von Meck,
an affluent widow and lover of
music who sustained the composer with financial help for 13
years. This enabled Tchaikowsky
to give up all musical activity
except composition.
Inspite of his neglect for his
appearance and the shabbiness
of his quarters and other peculiarities, he led an inner life
suited to creativity. Observed
one author: “Tchaikowsky rose
between seven and eight, drank
tea and read the Bible. He then
studied English or read serious
books and took a short walk.
He worked from half-past nine
to one o’clock which was his
dinner hour After dinner no
matter what the weather he
took a solitary two-hour walk...
and it was during these afternoon walks that he did most of
his creative work, jotting down
memoranda in innumerable notebooks. When he was not
composing on his walks, he
would recite aloud usually in
French.
This was the life of a composer whose music has been
upheld immortal by music connoisseur and whose particular
work the Nuteracker Suite gives
joy and delight to our musical
souls. 6e


15


RER
RRVRVDBEV
IO


A person may not be able to give joy to every heart and soul, but
how gratitying it is to give to as many as possible! Every year, the
staff and members of Getty Oil headed by Mr. and Mrs. W. F. Hagans,
treat the children, the staff and other inhabitants of the Hospicio de
San Jose to a Christmas party.
It was a day eagerly awaited only by the children, but also by the
entertainers themselves —TV and radio personalities who generously
gave their time and talent to an enjoyable presentation
But joy-giving is a two-way affair and, as a thank-you, the Hospicio
children gave well-rehearsed and well-practiced ago-ago dance numbers,
rondalla selections and choral medleys.
Finally, Getty men gave bagsful of candies — tokens of a wonderful
day — to the children. 6


TA


HOSPICIO DE SAN JOSE
ESTABLISMEP 10


OAvE OSr
SEn


The human eye is an incredible camera that
takes colored pictures continuously and develops them instantly. It even stores some away
for later recall. But it doesn’t take much to
damage this marvelous mechanism — to cancel
out the colored pictures and replace them with
constant blackness.
The loss of sight from flying particles chemicals or radiation is tragic enough But the
real tragedy is that the vast majority of such
injuries are needless and preventable -Of
course no one can predict exactly when an
eye accident will occur, but you diagnose ha
zardous situations that will expose eyes to he
 Eyes have their own defenses. Eyebrows,
lashes and lids help keep dust, gases and
sweat from irritating the eyeball. Blinking
the eyes spreads protective moisture across
the front of the eyeball, and glands secrete
tears to dislodge particles and wash them
away.
9 We can assist these natural defenses. When
we get something in the eye, especially if
it is a chemical, the best thing to do is hold
the lids open and apply lots of water to wash
the chemical away.
In such emergencies, use eye wash fountains, drinking fountains, showers’ or hoses
for at least 15 minutes. Use showers and
hoses very gently. Or, lying down, you can
just pour water onto the bridge of the nose,
letting it run across the eyeball. Then go
to a doctor.
 The eye’s natural defenses cannot cope with
the hazards of our modern world. Eye hazards are particularly severe where many of
of us work. That is why it is so vital that
everyone wears a protective device to safeguard his eyes from chips, dust, hot metal
and other particles.
 These eye protectors, such as safety glasses
and safety goggles, have tough lenses that
resist breakage when struck even by powerful impact. Also, the frames are specially
designed to prevent the lenses from being
displaced and hitting the eye.


jury. You know, for example, that nearly all
industrial operations endanger the eyes to
some degree, Certain jobs are particularly eye
hazardous and can injure not only the operator
of the equipment but also other people working nearby or even the casual passer by.
Conclusion: The need for 100 per cent eye
protection in most plants.
Those wonderful fuill color cameras of yours
need some insurance coverage Wearing safety
glasses or other protective eyewear is the best
deal going!
Following are ten pointers to aid you in
protecting your sight:


- Many home jobs too can cause eye injuries
home workshops, using power mowers, using
strong chemicals or insecticides, lt’s a good
idea to wear eye protectors for such activities too, because no one has yet invented
to glass eye that can see.
o Special hazards require special types of eye
safeguards, For some jobs faceshields offer
better safety; for chemicals and gases, enclosed goggles are needed. For welding radiations lasers and glare, safety glasses or
goggles with dark lenses must be used.
People requiring glasses with corrective lenses can be of the hardened safety type and
can be fitted into safety frames. Or a larger
safety "cover goggle" can be own outside
the regular glasses to protect the eyes and
also the prescription glasses.
Modern safety glasses are neither ugly nor
heavy nor cumbersome. They’re worth the
small price of getting used to them. It makes
sense, too, to keep the lenses clean. When
you can’t clearly see what you you’re doing,
you're more likely to have accidents.
In conclusion: You can’t really get a spare
part for your eyesight. So keep your eyes
for your eyesight. So keep your eyes focused
on how smart it is to wear eye protectors!


18


Safety Huddle Bulletin No. 444
Delaware Refinery


FIYING V NEWS


LEGASPI OL COMPANY GETS
GETTY OL TECHNICAL AD


In a drive to boost production
through proper maintenance of
manufacturing machinery in its
processing plants, Legaspi Oil
gets technical assistance from
Getty Oil in keeping its manufacturing equipment in tip-top
operating condition.
With processing plants in Legaspi, Davao and Cagayan de
Oro, Legaspi Oil gets all its fuel
and lubricant requirements from
Getty Oil.
Periodically, Getty Oil technical service engineers conduct inspection of Legaspi Oil machinery and other equipment in
its three plants. Shown in photo
is Getty Oil Technical Services
Supervisor Job Marasigan checking a gear box in the expeller
section of Legaspi Oil plant in
Davao. With him in the inspection tour are Engineer Lumantad
of Legaspi Oil and Getty Oil
Branch Manager R. S. Sison.


Shown in photo are huge storage tanks of Legaspi Oil and
drums of Veedol lubricants. The
storage tanks contain processed
coconut oil for export.


CHRISTMAS
It was a merry Christmas for
the Davao branch employees
and their families, Ruben S. Sison, Getty Oil branch manager
in Davao, led his staff and theil


IN DAVAO
tamilies in celebrating the
Christmas season. The Getty Oil
“family affair" held at the plant
compound in Davao City was
highlighted with games, gift-giving and a musical program.


19


FLYING
LENS
A





Venerando L. Agas, secretary
B— Main office, is a BSC graduate, major in advertising, from
the Philippine College of Com
merce. He worked with the Uni
versity of the Philippines and
with Ewald Huenfeld Commercial.
Ciriaco Avila, Jr., branch clerk
Legaspi, has worked with the
N & S Lines in Legazpi City. He
earned his BSBA degree from
Aquinas University.
Augustus Calantuan, Jr., accounting clerk— Makati, was
formerly employed by the Boy
Scouts of the Philippines. He is
presently an NCBA commerce
student.
Abraham M. Custodio, salesman-C trainee— Poro, has a
chemical engineering degree
from the Manuel L. Quezon University. He was formerly connected with the Caloocan City
Engineer’s Office, Marsman 8
Co., and the Nicson Office Machines.
Efren J. del Bosario, accounting clerk C— Main office, is a
Certified Public Accountant. A


UE alumnus, he was previously
employed by Ever-Ready Hardware and by Tanduay Distillery
Eduardo L. Escarrilla, salesman
C trainee— Pandacan, is a registered chemical engineer. A
Mapua graduate, he was with
Canada Trading before joining
the company.
Armando S. Estolas, accounting clerk C— Main office, is a
BSBA graduate of UE and has
no previous employment.
Jose D. Dionisio, laborerPandacan, a company retiree’s
son, finished his studies at M.
A. Roxas High School in Manila.
Edgardo L. Emperado, secretary B— Main office, is a commerce student at NCBA and was
previously employed with MESMA, Inc.
Bomeo B. Gaela, automotive
inspector—Pandacan, is a BSME
graduate of Mapua. He has
worked with Santiago de Leon
Motors, Malabanan’s Auto Repairing, Peter Paul Phil. Corporation and Marcelo Steel Corp.
Eduardo B. Gollena, salesman
C Trainee — Manila, has been


employed by Signet Distributors,
Inc., Citadel Insurance, E. S. Baltao & Sons, Filipinas Life Assurance Co, and FAST Airways.
Rolando S. Gonzalez branch
clerk— Manila, is an accounting
major from the University of the
East. He worked with Sarmiento
Securities Corporation and Safeway Sales Corporation before
joining Getty Oil.
Jesus P Posadas, salesman
C Trainee — Pandacan, earned
his BSME degree from the University of the Philippines.
Job P. Bastrullo, laborerCebu, has had no previous employment before joining the company. He studied at the Araullo
Evening Vocational School in
Manila.
Rogelio D. Beyes, accounting
clerk C, Main office, is an accounting major He worked with
C & B Enterprises, Unitd., Muller
g Phipps Manufacturing Corp.
and Consolidated Builders Supply Corp, before joining Getty
Oil.
Alejandro A. Sabanal, stenographer/clerk— Bacolod, is a
BSC graduate from the Colegio
de Sta. Rita in San Carlos City.
He was previously employed by
the San Carlos City Assessor’s
and Treasurer's Office.


AVILA, JR.


CALANTUAN


CUSTODIO


DEL ROSARIO


ESCARILLA


ESTOLAS


DIONISIO


SABANAL


AGAS


GAELA


GOLLENA


GONZALEZ


POSADAS


RASTRULLO


REVES


EMPERADO


FIYING NA LENS


SIAIN


ES
Uorveeorlo
EOlDE


Rudy Chan, marketing manager of Getty Oil Company Philippine Branch was recently
elected president of Creative
Concourse.
Creative Concourse is an organization for the promotion of
creative thinking in the light of
today’s business trends. It is
composed of leading professionals who believe in creative
thinking as a vital approach to
problem solving in business.
Other elected officers of the


group are: E .F. Meneses of Solar Plastic Corporation, first vice
president; N. G. Boque of JLB
Enterprises, Inc., second vice
president; M. D. Vitangcol of
University of the East College
of Nursing, secretary-treasurer;
E. R. Tarog of Procter & Gamble,
PMC, business manager; S. S.
Catig of Moonwalk Development
& Housing Corporation, auditor;
and V. B. Noble of Amphil Company, public relations officer.


PICPA CONVENTION


The Philippine Institute of Certified
Public Accountants recently held its
annual convention in Cebu City. The
theme of the convention was "How
Relevant is Accounting Today?” Dele

gates from Getty Oil are (from lelt):
R. S. Bustamante, R. B. Cruz, N. C.
Livelo, T. M. Maaliw, and A R. Alejandro, Not in photo is S. R. Tan.


NEW APPOINTMENT
FOR ANCHETA


Getty Oil announced the appointment
of Catalino S. Ancheta as assistant
branch manager for Manila. Until recently, he was assigned with the company's branch in Poro. He joined the
company in 1968 as salesman.


21


EXANGT


NEWS


GETTY BRASS COMPLETE MANAGEMENT COURSE


Four Getty Oil executives recently completed a course in
Distribution Management conconducted by the Economic Development Foundation, Inc. They
are: S. O. Abellera, vice president-marketing; G. C. Herrera,
vice president-operations; E. B.
Baria, sales manager-branches;
and R. P. Merza, sales managerdealers, distributor development.
The four executives took the
management course under the
sponsorship of the company
thru its Management Training
Program.
Photo shows Abellera, Merza
and Herrera tackling a problem
during one of the sessions of
the course. Not in photo is E.
B. Baria.


CMAP BOWLING TOURNAMENT


An honorable mention award was
given by the Awards Committee of
the Philippine Council of Industrial
Communicators to Flying A News, official company publication of Getty
Oil (Philippines) Inc., for the year 197i.
The publication was chosen together
with Meralco Magazine, Kaunlaran,
Elinews, Esso Silangan and Filoil Pipeline from among the entries evaluated
by the committee.


The Creative Management Association of the Philippines recently concluded its bowling tournament for 1971
with the awarding ceremonies held on
December 16, Getty Oil Credit Man

ager N. C. Livelo, winner in the highest triple, is shown being presented
the trophy by Mario Reyes, CMAP director. Looking on is Manuel Acol,
president of the association.


FIYING W LENS


THERES
ROOM
Al
OF
There’s still room at the top at
Getty Oil.
The recent promotion of A.
V. Amagna Jr., A. S. Parungao,
and A. B. Pedrosa proves this
statement true.
Amagna Jr., Parungao and Pedrosa have been named operations superintendent, engineering and construction supervisor,
and repairs and maintenance
supervisor, respectively.
Until recently, Amagna Jr. was
repairs and maintenance supervisor; Parungao, construction inspector; and Pedrosa, automotive inspector.
Meanwhile, B. A. Donida has
been appointed Service Station
Training and Development supervisor vice M. B. Corleto who was
appointed branch manager for
Batangas. He was formerly SSTD
training assistant. He joined the
company in 1969.


DONIDA


PEDROSA


PARUNGAO


SERVICE STATION INAUGURATION


(Topl A new service station in San Jose, Antique was opened to the public at blessing and inauguration ceremonies held recently. Mrs. Enrique Zaldivar cut the ceremonial ribbon with Mrs. Serafin G. Gustilo and Mr. A. F. Jeanjaquet assisting. (Below)
Service station operator Leopoldo T. Lavilla marked the opening of business with
a token fill-up of Antique Governor J. Pacificador’s car.


23


AIIVAAN
COliPARI.
MSRS
SCRrRo
BCROLmS


For the ambitious young men and women
who seriously want the challenge, the experience, and the reward of business, it is
the Junior Achievement Company. Seriously, there are 18-year-olds and 27-year-olds
in our colleges today who think business
even before they pass through the portals
of their alma maters.
Such young people are the officers and
stockholders of Aim-Hi Company, a Getty
Oil sponsored JA company engaged in the
business of T-shirts, car stickers, scrolls and
other such products. They believe they can
accomplish more, collectively rather than individually
Like any self-starters, they started out in
the dark until Gettymen R. P Merza, N. C.
Livelo, and R. Hidalgo showed them the light.
The three Getty Oil executives advised
them on the Productions, Sales and Management phases of their business. With a capital'of only P796, the JA Company is already
pushing up, and making progress in their
business.


Aim-Hi, an ambitious name, is brained
and muscled by twenty students from De
La Salle College, Holy Spirit, University
of the East and Far Eastern University.
They meet regularly on Saturdays with their
Getty Oil mentors to chart the course of
their business. The officers of the company
are: Melchor Go, president; Fernando Po,
vice president for sales; Gilberto Tan, vice
president for manufacturing; Samson Co.
treasurer: Lorna Cornel, secretary; and Magenn Cuyson, public relations officer.


COVER


Mystical is the
description for
Mindanao, the
Philippines’ land of
promise. On our cover
is the artist’s
expression of that
mysticism.


CONTENTS


GETIY ON BUSINESS
A PROMISE LANDJP. 3
MESSAGESYP.


ETHICSJP. 8


THE NUTCRACKER
GETTY II VISITS
MEET AN OPERATIONS
PHILIP
NESY/P
MANAGERJP 10
11
SUITEJP. 14


A DAY T
SAVE YOUR SIGHIJ/P. 18 LEGASPI OIL GETS AIDJ P. 19
REMEMBERJP. 16


GETIY BRASS COMPLETE
SERVICE STATION
AIM-HI: T-SHIRTS
INAUGURATION/P. 23
MANAGEMENT COURSEJP. 22
STICKERS, SCROLLSYP. 24


4


AA


A
MER
E


A



PAD
 



MN



"517


S


E


*


ES,

N
NOT
— 


I


SUE ONE


FIYING S NEWS


COVER
To have a peek into
Philippine progress is
to have an overview
of the country's export industry. A
crate containing export products is
shown on our cover.


E



ne of the major economic
thrusts of the Philippines is
exports, In many areas of the
industry, from handicrafts
to car manufacturing, there is
a strong indication that the
country is forging ahead into
a new horizon of progress.
Economic erystal-gazers
predict bountiful years ahead
for the country.
"All Philippine quota-products
(sugar, cigars, cordage, buttons
and scrap tobacco) made impressive
gains in the first half of fiscal
year 1972 — 1973 and assured the
country of enormous earnings
this year." This was reported by
the Department of Trade and
Tourism. This year’s estimated income from exports is $7.2
billion.
In the direction of promoting
Philippine export products, the
government took concrete steps by
participating in six major international fairs held in Toronto, Canada; Berlin Frankfurt and
Cologne, Germany; New Delhi,


India; and Tokyo, Japan. The
Frankfurt International Fair
for instance, resulted in the first
Philippine trade with Yugoslavia.
With the line of marketing efforts
of the government, it is expected
that at the turn of this decade, exports as an industry will be the
major breadwinner of the country.


Source of Income
Employment
In the context of national goals,
exports are desirable not only
as earners of foreign exchange but
as a source of additional employment.
A country where there is
critical need for more employment opportunities, the
Philippines has embarked
on a bold export venture in an
effort to generate more income
and more jobs for its people.
Out of a labor force of 12


A PEEKNTOPHLPPINEPROGRESS


million, there are one million
who are unemployed and
more than another million visibly
underemployed. These facts
present a situation where there is
truly an imperative need for
the government to go into new
frontiers for more income and job
opportunities.
Vicente T Paterno, Chairman
of the Board of Investments,
said: "If we compare the land arez
of 10 million hectares arable
agricultural land to the 6.4 millio
families comprising the Philippine
population, it is clear that land
cultivation does not represent a
long run opportunity for increasit
employment opportunities in
the country, If the total arable ag
ricultural land were to be divided
equally among the 6.4 million
families, each family will have
only 1.6 hectares of arable agricultural land to be tilled, less than
the minimum required for a sub
sistence farm.
In this light, therefore, the industry represents the best longterm prospect for the generation
of employment opportunities. On
aspect of the industry which
offers a bright future in meeting
this objective is the exports
industry.


Export Opportunities
The Southeast Asian region is
eplete with opportunities for
growth. Taiwan Korea, Hongkong
and lately, Singapore have shown
that developing economies can
successfully achieve exports of manufactured products as distinguished from exports of primary
products.
In the government’s exports
priorities plan are listed some
of the promising industries for
exports. A substantial amount of
capacity for certain manufactures
is present and serves as strong
support to the country's export
move.
Government Incentives
One of the elements of the
country’s strategy for industrialization is the encouragement of
exports of manufactured products.
The Philippines, in order to increase the labor content of its
exports in answer to the critical un

employment problem must give
a dedicated support to the efforts
of developing a strong exports
industry.
A principal tool for furnishing
this encouragement is the implementation of the Export Incentives
Act, Very briefly, this Act provides
certain tax benefits to the producer or export trader who is registered with the Board of Investments, and as such under the
Export Incentives Act he accepts
the supervision of the Board of
Investments in his export
operation. Simplified export
procedures have been devised
for the administrative requirements of export operations by
export entrepreneurs.


APEEKNTO
PHLIPPNE
PROGRESS


In brief the Act seeks to promote and expand the exportation
of local products which are
processed or manufactured.
Export Outlook
The Board of Investment in its
progress report to the nation
projects an optimistic performance
of the export industry for the
next few years. With the bright
prospects of the country’s major
products (log products, copper
concentrates, sugar copra
products, abaca and canned
pineapple) in the world market,
there is a general feeling of a
forthcoming rise in export
volume. With the renewed enthusiasm among those engaged
in exports and with the backup boost being given by the
government, the export industry
will soon fulfill a long-cherished
dream of attaining for the nation
an economic bulge in export
earnings G


4


f every Filipino citizen were to justify his existence
before the society to which he owes much, from
childhood to adulthood, two important things shall be
tried: whether he is a nuisance to society or a contributor to its life and growth.
For a corporate citizen the same could very well be
done, But the two factors against which the pros and
cons shall be evaluated are: whether it contributes to
society’s aims and objectives or fails to exercise this
public responsibility.



E


UUOl IL EINVINOINVIE!N


5


These analogies touch the very nerve of today's
changing social environment. A vibrant society in
which business thrives and prospers must continually
meet the demands and needs unfolding on the horizon. And from those who sonstitute the society itself is demanded the unselfish exercise of responsibilities and the intelligent performance of duties
and functions.
Society is in the thick of change. Men have gone
outside the earth and explored the moon. They have
invented the cure for deadly diseases. Amid this background, society’s constituents must, if they are to be
relevart at all, address their efforts to the events and
conditions around them.
In the years just passed, segments of the business
community took a hard look at themselves in the
light of a growing, swinging social environment. They
realized that business had adopted a more direct involvement in the handiwork of progress. They recognized that the problems had become big and were
growing in size and gravity. Specifically, they saw the
basic problem of educating a responsible citizenry. In
this direction, they took significant steps.
Realization and acceptance of this social responsibility is not a totally new effort to corporate citizen
Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. Over its years of existence,
it has lived in the community and taken active part in


it.
Fifty years ago, Getty Oil struck roots in the
Philippine scene. Since then it has always made itself
part of the great drara of progress. And in the early
sixties, it went several steps with positive projects in
the direction set by the moods of the economic situation prevailing in the country. It affixed its unconditional support to education, national effort for
economic development; provided employment to
many Filipinos; encouraged employee participation in
civic activities; and participated in changing the face
of the community through cleanliness and beautification programs.
Early in the 1960’s, student unrest broke out in
many of the campuses and the main problem expanded in serious proportion. The restless students
took to the streets and staged protests against excessive school fees and "totalitarianism" of school
administrations. The problem became worse when
they moved up higher in their demands, and unified
their protest under the shadow of nationalism. It
became, therefore, a political issue.
What was a political issue in the sixties took a
different twist and became an economic issue at the
start of the seventies.
Getty Oil took the hint and made a commitment
towards helping the plight of the righteous youth. A


C


non-vocal student action, the Junior Achievement of
the Philippines, was given the total support by Getty
Oil and the movement made a tremendous impact on
student activism. The youth as a result shied away
from the streets and, instead of chanting slogans, demonstrated cooperation, industry, self-confidence and
usefulness in the community.
During summer vacations when most of the
students are out of school, the company holds apprenticeship programs wherein students from various
colleges and universities in the country are selected to
take part in company operations, thus making summer
vacation a most rewarding and profitable experience.
This youth program is complemented by another
form of activity wherein the very young Filipinos in
the grade schools are given the rare opportunity of
learning about the Filipino culture and, thus, appreciating the beauty and richness of the country’s
history and heritage. Through the company's "Operation Sunshine" project, the company continues to
inculcate in the minds of grade school students love
for and devotion to the fatherland.
In the national effort for economic development,
the company is strongly committed. Since its inception, Getty Oil continuously supplies the fuel requirements of the heavy industries, It branched out
into strategic areas to provide an umbrella of coverage
for the fuel needs of the burgeoning economy.


With its employee body now much bigger than
decades ago, Getty Oil has encouraged and motivated
its human resources to take productive and concerned
participation in the development of enlightened and
responsible citizenry. Some executives of the company, aside from their positions in the corporate or
ganization, perform public functions as leaders and
officers of civic organizations. The corporate philosophy is that the public good is first and foremost
Very recently, the company made significant accomplishments in line with the national effort to
promote tourism. It threw its aces in support of
tourism, a very promising economic area for national
profit. Through its services, and specifically the company publications, the company endorsed and even
went further into motivating the industry to pledge
its heart to the growth of tourism in this country.
A series of full-length articles on the country’s
tourist attractions and export items made it more
dramatic and inspirational in the eyes of the readers.
So helpful was the project that a nationally-circulated
newspaper dubbed the effort as most relevant to the
developments in the economic program of the
country, Just this year, Getty Oil capped its themed
articles on the “Environment of Change" with a
special calendar issue on "Philippine Exports.
But Getty Oil recognizes that these efforts constitute merely a beginning toward dealing with the
social problems of the times, It fully accepts the fact
that the most important of all is the recognition of a
deeper sense of responsibility in the community,
corporate citizenship. And this basic public duty must
be fulfilled at all costs.
Concerned leeders in the corporate organization
believe that as a corporate citizen of the community
the company can not come to grips with the realities
of the present if it encases itself in the conference
room. It must go out where things are happening,
listen, communicate and feel the problems, and, maybe, understand and learn how to solve them. These
the company has been doing for the last few decades
of its existence in the business community.
With the opening of a new year a fresh new outlook for Getty Oil has come. It should be gratifying
for the industry to know that the company will continue to demonstrate the same dedication and devotion to the goal priorities of the present. G


atalino S. Ancheta paints on
canvas, If you meet him you’ll
think he is another student of
Amorsolo. But strike a conversation, and the impression
changes. As soon as he starts
rattling off figures, you begin to
know what he really is — a
businessman.
Cat (friends call him) has a
unique hobby: painting and
music. In his free hours, he indulges in listening to his collections of records. If it is not music
he’s busy with, he occupies his
time lobbing thick paints on a
white canvas with a pallete knife.
“These are mere hobbies” he
confessed.
But what really turns on this
hunk of humanity is business. He
likes to discuss subjects like sales,
profit and expansion. He gives
“beauty” to figures, and infuses
meaning into them.
A native of Balaoan, La Union,
he knows very well the needs and
demands in his area.
“The future of Poro branch is
bright. With such areas as llocos
Norte, llocos Sur, Abra, La


Union, the Mountain Provinces
and Pangasinan under my jurisdiction, and considering their
great potentials, ! view the
coming months or year with
great optimism' he said.
"For the year just passed, "
believe the branch has attained
the ideal proportion of petroleum products sold in the market.
This is reflected in the increase in
sales of greases and gasoline.
Cat, however does not rest on
his achievement, With the same
sense of mission to make his
branch number one, he sees keen
competition from oil companies,
and prepares how to meet it. "To
survive keen competition and
keep our share of the market, we
will keep on educating our accounts and continue to create
new outlets for our products.
Cat joined Getty Oil in October 1968, as salesman C
trainee. It was a change from
selling pharmaceutical products
to selling oil products. And for
awhile it was a problem to him.
"It was hard at first considering
that it was a complete switch


from selling pharmaceuticals to
oil products. But the harder the
problem is, the better I become,"
he said.
Cat believed that the problems
he met in his job were responsible,
for his growth in the company.
"I am convinced that the ability
to handle problems counts a lot.
Ican cite the fact that after six
months as salesman,! got a promotion. That set me off on the
track for more achievements.
Exactly two years after I was
appointed Assistant Branch
Manager in the company’s senior
branch in Manila. And on
February 1 1972, I was named
Branch Manager for Poro."
He explained his rise in the
hierarchy of authority in the organization as "result of determination and dedication to the
job."
"I believed that a compound of
mental exercise, sincerity and a
lot of energy in tackling day-today problems result in personal
success, as well as success for the
company.


NL—
BAINO
IVIANAOL..


CAIALINO SANGETA


iI, a mixture of gaseous liquid Second, go to the fertilizer.
crude form, it is practically of no ment. And this equipment, too,
value. When refined, however, it needs lubricants in order to run.
has numerous uses. It supplies, Let’s follow the process
for instance, lubricants to the further.
industry.
application.
actually goes through a number crush, lime and crystallize it.
of processes. And during these When the sugar cane comes in the
use. First, before any sugar cane is packed. In all these steps in the
which it is planted must be tilled. harvesting to the packing, maCultivation of the soil requires chines are used. And whenever
these equipment to run, it must are there in use G
be lubricated.

VMNI


and solid hydrocarbons, is found where do you get the fertilizer ?
in varying amounts in sediFertilizer is manufactured with
mentary rock deposits. In its the full use of mechanical equipWhen the sugar cane is already
From simple to highly sophisripe, it’s harvested. Then, the
ticated machines used in the instocks are transported to the
dustry, lubricants find useful central on trucks or cane cars.
When it gets in the central, it is
Let us take, for instance, sugar, fed into a huge conveyor which
The sugar we mix with our coffee brings it to the mills. The mills
processes, lubricating oil is in form of ordinary table sugar, it
can be produced, the soil to production of sugar, from the
the use of farm tractors. And for there are machines, lubricants


9


LISIRSSIO
NUUSO


TUOVO


Bujreswasomeinngtortre
old fogeys, the saying goes. But
today many young men are already at it even before they turn
thirty. This is the temperament
of the age.
Julian N. Mercado, Jr. did not
even wait for his degree in Busi
ness Administratiori from the
University of the Philippines.
Convinced that he had the necessary knowledge (at least the
theories and principles, he said),
he went right ahead into business.
At 24, he is at it and already
exudes “the feeling of confidence" typical of mellowed
businessmen.
Jeng, as he is fondly called by
his friends, owns the Getty Oil
Distributing Plant in Calapan,
Mindoro Oriental. The plant services the twin provinces of Mindoro Oriental and Mindoro Occidental.
Jeng’s entry into business even
at a tender age was not a surprise
to those who knew him, especially his parents. They all
knew it was coming, but not as
early at it happened.
Asked how it came about, Jeng
guessed that "it was a young
man’s aggressiveness" that prodded him to brave the perils of
business. "Just couldn’t wait, so
grabbed the first chance ! had."
It all begun with the youngster
Jeng having a dream of becoming
a businessman, Immediately after
high school he enrolled at the
University of the Philippines for a
course in Business Administration. It was necessary, he said.
But he was in such a hurry that


despite the headaches of studies,
he got himself an employment
with one of the big commercial
banks in Manila.
"It was a tough situation — too
much to do for very little time,"
he confessed. "But it was worth
it. After all I needed some experience.” So, for a while, he was
learning theories and at the same
time testing them in his job.
Jeng, is not the type of man
who waits for things to happen.
He knew he could make it in
real business. When he finally
developed some confidence in
handling business procedures, he
grabbed the first chance and set
up his own business. Today, he
doesn’t regret his being "a young
man in a hurry."
With a beautiful wife (a former
classmate at UP) who, he said, is
“the inspiration" of his life, he is
now well on the wheel for a
bright business prospect.
"At present,! am initiating an
aggressive business development
program for my distributing
plant, It’s been my inclination
always, in business or otherwise,
to double whatever ! have attained by anticipating the future
needs and demands. For his
area, he expects some big deals
as soon as the plant goes full
steam ahead.
Jeng is the outdoor type. He
loves to play bowling, and go
hunting for wild boars in the
forested area of his province. He
likes tamaraws, but never touches
them for it "symbolizes the
strength in spirit of the Mindoronenos. "Gi


VNNDOSNO


10


GETTY OL ON THE SCENE


SAN FERNANDOLA UNON
HEARTOFLOCANO PROGRESO


he town of San Fernando,
the capital of what is now known
as the province of La Union, is
situated in a mountainous region
along the west coast of Luzon
Island. It was founded in 1786
and made provincial capital in
the year 1850. It was named in
honor of King Ferdinand of
Spain, and was once a village
commonly known as Pindangan,
formerly belonging to the province of Pangasinan.
In the year 1783, the two extensive provinces of Pangasinan
and llocos got into trouble because of boundary disputes. To
settle this dispute, which now
and then caused so much bloodshed, the province of La Union
was created. And the newly
created province took its name
from the historical fact — the
union of that part ceded by
Pangasinan and that part ceded
by llocos. Senor Toribio Ruiz de
la Escalera was made the first
Governor-Politico-Militar of the
newly-created province of La
Union.
The early stages of the life of
the province was characterized
with internecine tribal warfare,
punctuated here and there by the
invasion of marauding Moro pirates. Moro watch towers dot
the coast—mute evidence of that
power which once instilled fear
into the hearts of the Christian
people along the coast. As a consequence of that turbulent


period, the old sitio of Balanac
beautifully perched at the head of
a well-protected harbor was
burned and sacked by the Moro
pirates who massacred the people
and carried away many into
slavery. A few miles northeast of
Balanac, there stood an inland
sitio called as Dalangdang whose
people were continuously harrassed and attacked by hostile


An aerial photo of the town proper
showing the commercial center.


San Fernando has one of the
best natural harbors in the country. Photo shows Poro Port,
an international port of entry
which can accommodate large
ocean vessels.


Igorots living in the wilderness of
the neighboring mountains. Th
Governador-Politico-Militar Se
nor Don Toribio Ruiz
calera, exerted his influ
united the remaining p
of both Balanac and
and made then
of Pindangan.
fectively guard the
Moro pirates
and hostile igo
Don Santiag
became their
cillo, which po
valent to a municipal

Padre Juan So
resident priest
parish priest tend
faithfully injecting goodu
fellowship to them. The
be baptized under the O
Church of San Fernando was
Matias Simon in 1712. The first
church was erected at sitio Lapog
but because it was too small for
the growing population it was
never reconstructed when it was
destroyed. Its remains are still
visible this day.


12


In the year 1887 the increase
in population made possible the
construction of a bigger church
which was finished in 1786, sym
bolizing the union of Balanac
and Dalangdang. Forced labor
on the part of the people made
this church strong as it had
enabled it to withstand numberless earthquakes. The first record
of this town to be written was in
1712.
San Fernando has grown slowly
from the time it was founded.
THis was attributed to the fact
that travel during those days was
long and tedious. Sectionalism
was rampant because education
was not widely diffused. Intermingling of the people was limited to the neighboring towns.
Only the well-to do and powerful
obtained education and this, too,
was limited, as it was then the
policy of the Spanish regime to
deny education to the masses
throughout the length and
breadth of the archipelago. Inspite of this backward policy,
however the people improved
economically, educationally and
spiritually. An offshot of this
improvement was the revolt
against the Spaniards. This revolt
assumed greater proportions when
the Spaniards became too abusive,
Although the people were sub
servient to the ruling power
there were fateful prohibitions
that cut deep to the private life
of the people which found outlet in the form of uprising and
occasional revolts to give vent to
their pent-up emotions. Spain
could no longer hold the rising


tide of nationalism of the people.
Over three centuries of subjugation by a ruthless power was
too much for them.
The climax came in 1896 when
the country was swept by a widespread revolution. The Spanish
garrison in San Fernando was
attacked on May 1896 by
Filipino insurgents under the able
leadership of the late General
Tinio and Mauro Ortiz. The
latter was twice elected Governor
of the province of La Union.
The Americans came to conquer the Philippines in 1898
when war broke out between
America and Spain. Spain fell in
ruins victim of her own greed
and ambition. San Fernando also
tasted naval bombardment by the
Americans as well as actual
fighting on land when General
del Pilar commanded the rear
quard of General Emilio Aguinaldo to cover the latter’s retreat, The Filipino fought the
Americans hard and well. But this
was of short duration. Eventually
the Americans caught General del
Pilar at the famous battle of
Tirad Pass. At long last peace
came, followed by a long period
of adjustment. This period was
the "renaissance” to the Filipinos
With a new era, a new thought, a
new mode of living came to life—
unique and novel to them. San
Fernando grew in population and
the new order was assimilated
by its people readily. The people
settled to a life of peace and
quiet imbibing the air of democracy. Agriculture and education thrived well under the


NALINAC and CRESTA OLA
beach resorts offer first class hotel
and cottage accommodations.


d


hands of American teachers. Democratic government took the
place of that once proud despotic government of Spain. The
people of San Fernando took to
heart all that the Americans could
teach. Politically the province
progressed with the rest of the
land. Civil administration came
into the hands of the people
through free elections. Under the
able leadership of President
Quezon, successive changes in our
government took place of which
San Fernando, too, had a share.
San Fernando progressed by
leaps-and-bounds, It became the
northern terminal of the Philippine National Railways, hence
the trading center of La Union.
People from all over the province
converge at San Fernando
especially on market days. A
more ambitious project was
afoot... .it was to make San
Fernando a port of entry.
San Fernando today is a haven
of peace and order immediately
after the imposition of Martial
Law on September 21, 1972 by
President Marcos. The New
Society is in good effect, wellabsorbed by the townspeople
under the able leadership of the
incumbent town executive, Mayor Antonio Ferraren with the
cooperation of the members of
the municipal council.G


Some of the finest beach rejorts are found in nearby Bauang, La Union.


14


UOSOECO
PPORRrORTOO


should he worry about it? When
he does something right, something positive, let security take
care of itself. If he keeps dishing
out better and better performance in his job, and meets his
obligations and responsibilities
to the company and his fellow
employees, what does he have to
worry about?
Job security will come by as a
consequence of his dedicated efforts and not as a gift from
management.G


As a motivating factor, job
security is misunderstood most
often. It seems to come down to
many of us saying that an employee has job security if he is
assured beyond doubt that he
will stay to have his job, We
would like to argue this, Every
employee, whether he is new or
veteran, has a secured job in the
company. As an employee he is
not supposed to look for it, but
creates it himself.
If he does a good job, why


15


GLTPPOn—
DONATLO
OLELO


Senior Vice President S. O. Abellera, Operations Vice President
G. Herrera and Harry Pettit, Fuel
Oil Sales manager, Getty Oil
(Eastern Operations) pose for a
souvenir photo with first baseman Ron Blomberg and infielder


Hal Lanier of the New York Yankees. The three Getty Oil executives took time out in their
busy schedule to witness the
game of their favorite baseball
stars held at the Yankee Stadium,
New York.


Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc.
recently donated a variety of
seeds to the Barrio Addition Hills
Neighborhood Association, Inc.
in connection with its "Plant for
Life" project.
S. O. Abellera, senior vice president, personally handed to a
representative of Teotimo A.
Roja, chairman of the neighborhood association the bags of
seeds. Earlier, the company also
donated to the provincial government of Sorsogon 100 packs of
“Bagong Buhay" seeds for distribution to the farmers in the
province. The donation was made
through Ernie B. Baria, Legazpi
branch manager.


GEPTMEN TAIN ¡ALIMIOLANO


Gettymen "invaded” the rustic
island of Talim in the province of
Rizal for a day of swimming and
boating with Primo Expiritu
Santo playing host.
The holiday proved to be a
much needed break in their daily
office chores as the group returned with exciting stories to
relate.
Those with the trip were: A.
Batara, of Advertising; R. Perez,
E. Maximo, A. Campo, E. Santos,
G. Castillo, E. Balajadia and A.
Javier, all of the Finance department, and R. Feniquito of Getty


Oil Company, Philippine branch. of Gettymen during an all-day
"bash" at Talim Island.
Photo captures the jovial mood


I


GUERZONREELEOIEDLIONSTTEODENT
Pete W. Guerzon, Getty Oil
distributor in Cagayan de Oro,
was recently reelected president
of the Lions Club, District 301-8.
Also reelected president of the
local Lionettes was Mrs. Charo
Guerzon, his wife.
Twin photos show Pete Guerzon delivering his inaugural address and Mrs. Guerzon (left)
being pinned with the Lionettes
emblem by Mrs. Maggie Hofelina,
ma las
wife of the governor of Lions
District 301-8, during her in
EA
duction into office.


VVELCUVI


AQUINO
JAVIER
BALAJADIA


Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc.
recently announced the appointments of Emmanuel O. Aquino
and Ermin Y. Javier as salesmen
C (trainees) for Manila and Pandacan branches, respectively, and
Erlito C. Balajadia, as order clerk
in the Manila branch.
Aquino is an AB graduate from
the University of the Philippines,
and a degree holder in Industrial
Engineering from Adamson University. He was formerly connected with Engineering Equipment as planning engineer, and
with the Bureau of Public Works
as engineering aide I.


Adamson University. Prior to his
joining Getty Oil, he was employed with Corwen, Inc. as construction inspector and with
Weenee Green Pharmacy as salesman.
A certified public accountant,
Balajadia previously worked with
Concepcion Industries as accountant. He had also been connected with Grolier Enterprises
as accounting clerk, Rizal Pest
Control as bookkeeper and E.G.
Furnishings as upholsterer. He
holds a degree in Bachelor of
Science in Commerce from Jose
Rizal College.


Javier is a BSCE graduate from


VEEDOL SERVES
HKESH
INDUSTRY
Getty Oil Company has been
supplying Hongkong’s fishing industry with Veedol lubricating
oil. Photo shows (left) Hai Cheong
Hong, Getty Oil marine reseller,
servicing fishing boats in Wanchai,
Causeway Bay and Aberdeen and
Rudy Chan, Getty Oil Marketing
Manager (right).


DLOVISLAVAHDO


(Photo A) M. J. Jamili, Bacolod branch manager, receives his
ten-year service emblem from
C. E. Tuason, Finance vice president, Present at the simple ce

remonies were (from left) W. T.
Kho, general sales manager, and
G. L. Quijano, operations manager. Others in photo are: E.
Escarilla, Bacolod sales represen

(Photo B) R. D. Facundo,
Bacolod branch mechanic, is
shown receiving his fifteen-year
service pin from Bacolod branch
manager M. J. Jamili. A dinner in
his honor was tendered by the
Bacolod branch personnel.
tative; R. Francisco, manager of
Roxas Distributing Plant; P. Jinon, Bacolod branch cashier; and
P Valenzuela, Bacolod branch
secretary.


HETIRE—
Catalino de Jesus who was
featured in last quarter’s issue of
Flying A News has retired from
the company after completing
thirty-eight years of dedicated
service. He is shown in photo
receiving his retirement gratuity
check from Getty Oil President
and Chairman of the Board O.
Soriano. Others in photo are:
S. O. Abellera, senior vice president, G. C. Herrera,, vice president-operations, and the de
Jesus children.


ELHINE


LENS


EADSTPIOEMTOOSIOHON
OITIOIALOEEEPOTVIO


Four key officials, three of
them from the Getty Oil Company office in Los Angeles, USA
and one from Mitsubishi Oil Company in Tokyo, Japan, were in
town recently for a series of
business talks with Getty Oil
(Philippines) executives.
They were: A. J. Wohlmut,
marketing manager, international
marketing and manufacturing
operations; J. C. Sample, Jr.,
attorney, international supply
and transportation 8 international marketing and manufacturing operations; R. N. Binkow,
tax representative and M. Covey,
vice president, Mitsubishi Oil
Company.
The four visitors met with
local Getty Oil executives led by
O. Soriano, president. Except for
A. J. Wohlmut who had previously visited the Philippines, all
three executives are first timers
in the country.


At left, M. Covey, vice president
of Mitsubishi Oil Company, is
shown during a coffee conference
with Getty Oil (Philippines) President O. Soriano.
Top Photo, Senior Vice President
S. O. Abellera makes the introductions between the executive
committee members’ ladies and
the visitors during a dinner party
tendered by President O. Soriano
at his residence in honor of the
visiting officials. Shown in photo
are, from left, O. Soriano, A. J.
Wohlmut, M. Covey, R. N.
Binkow, J. C. Sample, Jr., S. O.


Abellera and Mrs. Soriano.
Above, "Balut, anyone? " seems
to be the daring question posedby legal services manager M. C.
Mendoza to the guests, as operations vice president G. C. Herrera
tries to put up a convincing talk
to urge one of them to eat the
native delicacy. It was a futile
effort on the part of the Filipinos
thougti, since their foreign guests
could only afford to give the
“balut" a cautious look and a
resounding "Oh no, thank you"
reply.


HI


GETTYEXPANDS TOMINDORO


NEW:
OPERAIOR
Joaquin Uy has been named
new operator of Service Station
No. 1126 in Bacolod City. Under
new management, the service
station is now called "Negros
Flying A Super Station"
The new operator had the
station blessed to formally mark
the opening of business to the
motoring public of Bacolod. A
sumptous merienda for the operator’s guests and friends was
served after the blessing ceremony.
The affair was also attended
by Getty Oil Bacolod branch
personnel headed by M. J. Jamili,
branch manager.


Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc.
now actively serves the energy
requirements of the provinces of
Oriental and Occidental Mindoro
with the recent opening of its
distributing plant in Balite, Calapan, Oriental Mindoro. With
this latest addition in its marketing program, Getty Oil now
counts a total of 20 distributing
plants operating throughout the
whole archipelago.
The whole day festivities which
marked the formal opening of
the Calapan distributing plant
was attended by notable officials
of the province led by the governor of Mindoro and the municipal mayor of Calapan. Getty
executives headed by President
O. Soriano and the executive


committee members together
with their ladies graced the affair.
Calapan distributing plant is
headed and managed by Julian
Mercado, Jr. It is presently implementing an aggressive marketing program to promote the
sale of Getty and Veedol products in the province.
Another special event which
marked the opening of the new
plant was the formal inauguration
of the new company-owned
service station in the province -
S5 1697 operated by Abraham
Gines.
With these new developments,
Getty Oil helps the province of
Mindoro ensure a faster pace of
growth and development for ire
constituents.


MARTININSTALLED AS MASONMASTER


G.C. Martin, Getty Oil finance
manager was recently installed as
worshipful master of the Corregidor-Southern Cross Lodge
No. 3 Free and Accepted Masons
during the public installation of
its officers held at the Blue Hall
of the Scottish Rite Temple,
Manila. He took over C.C. Veneracion, Getty Oil distributor in
Talavera, Nueva Ecija as master
of the lodge.
Martin was senior warden prior
to his assumption of this number
one post.
Most Worshipful Damaso C.
Tria, past grand master of the
Grand Lodge of the Philippines
acted as the installing officer.
Secretary of Labor, Blas F. Ople
was the guest speaker during the
affair.


Arecord crowd whichattended
the ceremonies also witnessed the
installation of Getty Oil finance
vice president C.E. Tuason who
was similarly elected junior
warden of the lodge. Other Getty
Oil personnel who were appointed
to official positions in the lodge
were: M.C. Mendoza, marshall;
G.L. Quijano, senior deacon; R.P.
Merza, auditor; and L.T. Mateum,
tvler


Dinner followed the installation ceremonies.
Above, G. C. Martin addresses
his fellow masons during his recent installation as worshipful
master of Corregidor-Southern
Cross Lodge No. 3, F. 8. A.M.
Seated behind him are (from
left), Secretary of Labor Blas F
Ople; Grand Lodge Inspector,
Teotimo G. Juan; and immediate
past master C. C. Veneracion.


20


A PEEK INTO
PHILIPPINE PROGRESS
P.I.


GETTY OIL IN THE
SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
P.5


MEETA
BRANCH MANAGER
P.8


OIL AND MACHINES
P.9


GETTY OIL
ON THE SCENE
P.11


ALSO IN THIS ISSUE


O. SORIANO
President 8: Chairman
of the Board
S. O. ABELLERA
Executive Editor


A. BATARA
V. B. LAINEZ
Editorial Assistant Business Manager
CORRESPONDENTS: L.MATEUM,
Apalit; A. C. EMATA, Manila; M. J.
JAMILI, Bacolod; S. Y. VILLACIN
Cebu, M. R. CORLETO, Davao,
A. L. JIMOGA-ON, Iloilo; E. B.
BARIA, Legaspi; A. TOLENTINO,
Batangas; C. S. ANCHETA, Poro;
C. E. TUASON, Finance; G. C.
HERRERA, Operations: G. L.
QUIJANO and A. V. AMAGNA,
Pandacan Plant
Flying "A” News is a quarterly
publication of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc, and is duly registered
as a third class mail matter with
the Bureau of Posts under permit
No. 153.
Please address all communications
to P. O. Box 2258, Manila.


Design &: Layout: Narciso Rodriguez, Jr.
Publications Consultants: Corporate Communications
Services


Philippine Council of Industrial
Communicators


International Association of Business
Communicators


YOUNG MAN IN BUSINESS
.₱. 10
Business is something for
the old fogeys. But not
for Julian N. Mercado, Or.
LET JOB SECURITY WORK FOR YOU
.P. 15
Job security is to keep dishing
out good results in your job.
NEWS."
P. 16
Getty Oil Donates Seeds, Welcome,
Service Awards, Mitsubishi Officials
here for Visit





R
N
 DADEDE PIOTN
Pa




1
DE

E



2

PEC 




N
N
a8 4
ng



E
ON
OS


3


S
a

A
EEN
A




S 
a L






4



2





SUE THREE





I
PIAR
LRAdSIISNIPIO
I



A
A
NI
N
MA
M
A
N
t
MHN
R

PO
PA
P

V
A


RA

E

EAAAA
N
AAIM
AA
ME
HBLIGEEAA PUINGNA

N AGNDRO



ROS
PAAADAD
 AP
 ABGI
A



E

EIER
AD




HIR

PAN

0
PRA
AITRNEIN

E

PANAOA

IOE
PAN
R
A

PON
ONDIN

EAIAN
E
ANOANGANPN

MA
A
IMAIPS
PEP H

A


Visit Victorias Milling Company, the
largest integrated sugar mill and refinery in the world. Or Villadolid town, where
you can see houses made of sea shells,
and Victorias chapel, which features the
"Angry Christ" with outspread arms, modern art, religious murals and mosaics
with saints in Filipino attire. Don’t miss
Patag National Park in Silay City or the
Sta. Fe and Taytay Beach resorts in Bacolod.
Bacolod City, the capital, is accessible
by plane or boat from Manila.
The City of Cathedrals
lloilo City, has been the home of datus and ilustrados. For several years,
she stood unchallenged as the Queen City
of the South, until Cebu emerged to
claim the distinction.
But she remains as regal as ever To
this day, she rivals Manila in the number of stately mansions and century-old
churches.
lloilo City is the center of learning
for Western Visayas. Students from neighboring provinces, and even from far down
Mindanao, come to this city to pursue
higher studies. Three big universities, several exclusive schools for girls, and a
number of private colleges are found in
the city.
lloilo City is also the homeplace of
the great Filipino hero Lopez Jaena.
Tourist attractions to add to your list
are: Islas De Siete Pescados (Isles of Seven Sins), a picturesque group of seven
rock-islands which are ideal for picnics
and excursions; La Roca Incantada (The
Enchanted Rock) which has a magnificent castle built on its top elevation;
and Guimaras Island, where you can see
the "floating" barrio of lgay, and Daliran
Cave, a popular spot among picnickers.
Anhawan Beach in Oton is one of the


best in the Visayas. Miagao Church has
an artistic facade and twin towers with
different belfries.
Iloilo City, the provincial capital, can
be reached from Manila either by boat
or plane. It is two hours away from
Bacolod by ferry and ten minutes by
plane. Hotels in this city offer good accommodations and serve international
cuisine.
Homebase of the Ati-atihan
Aklan, which used to be a part of Capiz until 1956, was the homeplace of Kalantiso, the legendary Filipino lawgiver.
The Aklanos, who understand Hiligaynon,
also speak a distinct dialect which according to historians has its origin in
Borneo.
An ideal time to visit Aklan is during
the third week of January. This is the
time for the famous Ati-atihan Festival.
This festivity, observed in Kalibo, Makato, lbajay and Altavas, is held to celebrate the feast day of the Holy Child Jesus
(Sto. Nino), and commemorates the
peace pact between the Negritoes and the
early fair-skinned settlers of Panay. The
most hilarious celebration, of course, is
the one in Kalibo. For this occasion, partakers paint their faces, wear colorful costumes and masks, and parade around the
city singing, dancing, beating drums and
breaking into riotous noise. Anybody can
join the revelry. As part of the fun, partakers run after well-dressed onlookers
to smear them with soot.
You may also visit Aklan anytime of
the year Here you may have fun in the
beaches in Kalibo, New Washington and
Numancia, or in the falls in Makato, Malinao, Tangalan and lbajay.
Tulington Point in Tangalan is a favorite of excursionists. Boracay Island,
off the coast of Ibajay, has fine white
beaches.


2


Below: Ati-atihan, the natives’ last stand against Christianity, is an annual lenten festivitiy in Kalibo, Aklan.


At left: Miagao Church
in Iloilo, records one period
in Philippine architectural
evolution. Above: Anhawan
beach in lloilo is ideal
for beach lovers.


Don’t miss to visit the hermitage in
Quinalay Viejo, some seven kilometers
west of Malinao town. (Malinao is 11
kilometers southwest of Kalibo.)
Kalibo, the capital, is easily accessible
by plane from Manila. Passenger ships
also dock at New Washington and Batan.
The Puzzling Chocolate Hills
A potato-shaped island-province, Bohol has gained prominence among tourists and sight-seers because of its Chocolate Hills.
Sprawled over miles and miles of
plains like huge chocolate drops, these
hills remain unexplained even up to this
day. (A German geologist after studying
the phenomenon recently said that Bohol was under water several years ago.
When the water subsided, bulky sediments were formed— and these hills
came about.)
Beaches which rim the province are
ideal for excursionists.
Historical landmarks can also be


found in the province. They are the Punta Cruz Watchtower in Maribojoc and
the site of the Blood Compact (between
Legaspi and Sikatuna) in Bool, Tagbilaran.
Tagbilaran, the capital, can be reached
by plane or boat from Manila or Cebu.
Threshold of Philippine Liberation
Leyte was recently divided into Northern Leyte and Southern Leyte.
Northern Leyte has Tacloban for its
capital. Red Beach, in this city, is famous for the beachhead of MacArthur’s
Liberation forces in 1942. Fairy Castle
of Tacloban City Amusement Park affords a breathtaking view of the beaches
in Maasin, Southern Leyte. San Juanico
Strait which separates Leyte from Samar
is a beautiful site to see. The strait is
dotted with scores of small uninhabited
islets.
Southern Leyte can boast of its beautiful Canturing and lbarra beaches in
Maasin. Maasin, the capital, can be
reached by bus from Hilongos.


Above: Pacific San Juanico
strait on a clear, sunny day.
At right: A historical spot
in Tagbilaran, Bohol where
the famous blood compact
between Datu Sikatuna and
Captain General Legaspi
took place.


A


A


Above: Red Beach in
Palo, Leyte is
famons for the
beachead of General
MacArthor's Liberation forces on
October 19, 1944.
Below: The mysteriously-formed Chocolate Hills in Bohol.


At right: Famous Blanca
Aurora Falls in Gandara,
Samar offers a weekend
of fun to pienickers.


"Niagara” in the Philippines
The big island-province of Samar has
already been subdivided into three provinces: Northern Samar Eastern Samar,
and Western Samar
Catarman is the capital of Northern
Samar Borongan of Eastern Samar and
Catbalogan of Western Samar.
Catbalogan can be reached from Manila by plane or boat. From there Catarman or Borongan can be reached by bus.
Fine beaches, beautiful caves, scenic
landscapes and breathtaking waterfalls
are its main tourist attractions. Most fa
mous of the waterfalls are the Dalusdos
Falls in Calbayog City and Blanca Aurora in the town of Gandara. Named after
two sisters in a favorite local folktale,
Blanca Aurora is said to resemble the
Niagara Falls of the United States. Sohotan and Panhulugan caves are in the town
of Basey. Fr. Karl Hutterer a noted Austrian archaeologist, explored the two


caves for six months and remarked tha
'they are among the world’s most beau
tiful caves.
Beauty in Peacefulness
Dumagvete City, the capital of Ne
gros Oriental, is reputed to be the mos
peaceful city in the Philippines.
Piapi Beach, Silliman Beach, Matiac
Beach and Duran Beach in Dumagvet.
are ideal for picnickers and excursionists
Also Camp Lookout in Valencia. Minalu
han Beach and the San Juan Natura
Swimming Pool are tourist attraction.
in the Siquijor sub-province.
Visit the most beautiful boulevard in
the country in Dumaguete — the Riza
Boulevard. Here, late afternoon and earh
evening strollers gather for an enjoyabli
sight of ships and fishermen’s boats ir
the gentle-surfed Tanon Strait.
Visit the campus of Silliman Univer
sity, punctuated with tall stately rair
trees, and meet its friendly people, ma


rity of whom live in cormitories just
thin the campus spread.
Other Visayan provinces to visit are:
Capiz. Suhot Spring in the town of
malag and Baybay Beach in Roxas City
xas City, the capital, can be reached
plane or boat from Manila. Hotels
accommodations can be found here.
Antique. Maybato Beach and MadranBeach are ideal places for excursions and picnickers. San Jose, the capital,
n be reached by plane from Manila,
d by bus from lloilo, Roxas City and
ilibo. Hotels are available in the capital.
Romblon. Composed of three major
ands — Romblon, Tablas, and Sibuyan.
is province is known for its marble
posits, and its beautiful beaches. Planes
om Manila have regular trips to Tablas.
issenger ships regularly dock at Odiojan (in Tablas Island). Hotels can be
und in Romblon, the capital, and in
iongan. 8


Abova: Sohotan Cave in
Basey, Samar offers
interesting stalactites to
the surious tourists.


SLO
SMINEK.
A
VI
AVVAR

Let the sunshine in — is the
plea of the "now” people. Getty
Oil did just that by launching
"Operation Sunshine”
In recognition of this project,
the Public Relations Society of the
Philippines in its annual PR competition declared "Operation Sunshine-1970" the best in the com
munity relations category.
The project was launched at
the start of the school year 1970-
7I. Each Saturday, Getty employees gathered ten indigent elementary school pupils and treated
them to movies, lunch and a tour
of historical places in Greater Manila. In the afternoon, the recipients went home with school sup
plies and a promise — that if they
study hard, a bigger treat is in
store for them.
Some 300 boys and girls participated in this project. Near the
end of the school year the participants took a written examination and the 30 topnotchers were
awarded a free tour of Visayas
and Mindanao. 8


The Public Relations Society of the Philppines Anvil Award for community relations is shown here being presented by
PRSP President F. Dipasupil (left) to H.
S. Pettit and S. O. Abellera, senior vice


president and vice president-marketing, respectively. The Anvil Award was given to
Getty Oil for its "well-thought, well-executed" community relations project for 1970
code-named Operation Sunshine.


3


PUBLICRELATIONS SOCIBTY OF THE PHILIPPINES
"
SP


Operation Sunshine was a modest project with modest aims,
but it was carried out with care on a personalized basis with rewarding results.
In the project, Getty Oil executives and employees brought
public school children to the Manila Zoo, Rizal Park and other
points of historical interest. Underprivileged school children
were thus able to learn something about their city and country ---
an opportunity they would not normally have been able to avail
themselves of. Letters from parents to Getty Oil reflect heartfelt appreciation for the project.
Small though the project was, it was generously endowed
with a P30, 000 budget.
The person-to-person handling made all the difference between
indifference and success as a public relations project.
For this wel!-thought out and wel!-executed project, GETTY
OIL deserves the Anvil Award for Community Relations for 1970.
Done in the City of Manila this 29th day of September, 1971.


BANIIZ
SIRA


*
PA
VAI
C DCAN


A
CE


IISSING
AG
S
GEIP.



BO
EROLPERANSAND CSPOIAN,
REESUCAIO..


MEE
A SALES
MANAGER:
ESTO
ERN
D. BARIA


SALES REPRESENTATIVES
Engineering or Business Administration graduates with selling experience of
at least two years, licensed driver and
willing to travel, not over 35 years old.
Send handwritten application, with passport size photo.
Most job hunters would not even give the
above-mentioned ad a second pause. Being a
salesman is not their bag. They would want
something bigger — a job which could propel
them instantly into top management. Bot Ernesto B. Baria, sales manager-branghes, was one
of those who paid heed to such an ad.
Born in Bacacay, Albay, on July 19, 1934, he
joined Getty Oil as salesman C eight years ago.
His successive promotions break the aura that
a person reaches the top management echelon
without going through the bottom rung of the
rank-and-file.
Jjust take a look: He started as salesman
Cin 1963 and moved on as salesman B. Afterwards, he became plant manager for Naga and
Masbate where he was a trailblazer and then
back to Legaspi as salesman A. He was also
assigned acting branch manager for Davao.
A holder of a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration degree from Luzon Colleges
in Dagupan City, Ernie believes in constant
education. Thus, he takes time out to attend
various seminars that are in line with his
chosen career So far, he has attended three
different marketing and management courses
which were offered by De La Salle College, the
Economie Development Foundation and Letran
College.
Would he change jobs if given the opportunity? No, says our sales manager who welcomes challenges and believes that Getty’s challenges would increase further as the years go
by.
Happily married to Josefina Ranar with
whom he has six boys and one girl, our 37-
year-old Baria leaves three key words to the
country'’s striving young men and women who
may be interested in a sales career: industry,
perseverance and constant re-ducation. 6e
15


FIYING  LENS


GETTPELLCTS NEW BOARD CHARRMAN


Edgar L. Shepley was elected
to the chairmanship of the board
of directors of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. at a special board meeting held October 1. He replaced
William F. Hagans who retired
from company service, September
30.
A native of Sparks, Nevada, Shepley joined Tidewater Associated
Oil Company in 1934. In 1951 he
was assigned to Tidewater Oil Company in the Philippines, predeccessor of Getty Oil (Philippines)
Inc. He has since then assumed
various responsible positions in
the company. Until recently, he
held the position of Vice President
for Operations and Assistant General Manager.
The new Chairman of the Board
holds a degree in business administration, from University of Ne

vada. An active civic leader, he
is the immediate past grand master of the Grand Lodge of Free
and Accepted Masons of the Philippines, a member of the Manila
Polo Club, the Army & Navy Club
and the Baguio Country Club.
Shepley has been actively associated with the oil industry for
the past 37 years.
Meanwhile, effective October 1,
the following shall compose the
senior executive staff of Getty Oil
(Philippines) Inc.: O. Soriano,
president and chief operating officer; H. S. Pettit, senior vice president; S. O. Abellera, vice president-marketing; G. C. Herrera, vice
president-operations; C. E. Tuason,
vice president-finance; A. F. Jeanjaquet, general sales manager; G.
L. Quijano, operations manager;
and G. C. Martin, finance manager.


MASONS HEAR GETTYS SIDE


Mirardo C. Mendoza, legal services manager, was guest speaker
during a weekly luncheon and
open forum sponsored by the Supreme Council of Scottish Rite
Masons.
Mendoza talked on The Oil Commission Bill before an audience
composed of masons and their
guests at the Scottish Rite Temple
on Taft Avenue, Manila. An open
forum immediately followed his
speech.
Chairman of the Scottish Rite
luncheon forum C. S. Cervantes extended the formal invitation to
Getty’s legal services manager.
In a spirit of goodwill, Getty
Oil distributed its Veedol Motor
Oil products to the audience. A.
V. Amagna, Getty Oil operations
superintendent and himself a mason, acted as master of ceremonies.


M. C. Mendoza discusses the Oil Commission Bill and its implications. Shown
in photo are (l-r): Damaso Tria, grand


master; Don Camilo Osias, grand sovereign
commander; the guest speaker; C. S. Cervantes; George Reid; and Don Sixto Orosa.


16


FIYING


LENS


MANNAOLRO DIOTDOTONNO
TEIND DOSINESO CONNTAD
To keep up with the corrent
business trends, Getty Oil conducted another management conference for the company’s branch
managers, supervisors, distributors and members of the executive
committee at the Hotel Inter-Continental in Makati.
The conference sought to acquaint the participants on the application of modern techniques in
business operation. Emphasis was
also laid in directing company objectives as dictated by national
and international events.
The two-day conference was
capped with a dinner given by
Getty Oil branch managers and
distributors in honor of Mr. and
Mrs. W. F. Hagans.
P—


Former Chairman of the Board W. F. Haference participants and their ladies during
gans drives home a point before the cona dinner break.


President O. Soriano delivers the closing remarks for the two-day conference.


17


FIYING LENS


TIERRERA, GOLANC JOIN
SENIOR LALCOTVE SIAFl


QULJANO


Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc, recently annouced the promotion of
Guillermo C. Herrera and G. L.
Qvijano to vice president-operations and operations manager, respectively, effective October L
1971. With their new positions,
the two become official members
of the senior executive staff of
the company.
Herrera holds a degree in Bachelor of Science in Mechanical
Engineering from the University of
the Philippines. Prior to his promotion, he held the position of
operations superintendent. He also
held various responsible positions,
including that of plant superintendent and branch plant advisor
since he joined the company in
1963.
Until recently, Qvijano was engineering and construction supervisor of Getty Oil. Other positions
he held since he joined the company in 1956 include those of operations clerk, construction inspector, and repair and maintenance
supervisor. He holds a degree in
Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering from the Mapua Institute of Technology.


AlTEK
LATEARS
It takes perseverance, industry
and a lot of patience to stay continuously for 24 years in any company, but Anastacio Tanudtanud
did it.
After 24 years and four months,
Anastacio, Cebu branch mechanic,
finally bade goodbye to Getty Oil.
Photo shows the retiree receiving his gratuity check from Personnel Manager V. B. Lainez.


AlNOfIEKBIOREL
ONADLELLRA


"For outstanding and dedicated
services rendered to the club as
president for 1970-71,” Vice President-Marketing S. O. Abellera
(right) was honored with a presidential award by Wes H. Bartlett (left), president of Kiwanis
International, du r in g Bartlett’s


working trip to the Philippines.
One of the more recent accomplishments of S. O. Abellera, together with the Kiwanis Club of
Makati, was the launching of the
Elsie Gaches Rehabilitation Center
(phase 1) for handicapped children. (see photo on page 21)


18


FIYINGA


LENNS


CLBNEINBOO PO BOSNEOO


Competing against five other
service station operators in Pagadian City, Philip Gerenia of SS
1624 bagged the first place in the
National Beautification and Cleanliness Contest for Public Service
Stations — Provincial Level.
After an exhaustive inspection
of the service stations’ facilities
—with emphasis on the cleanliness of the sales rooms, storerooms and the comfort rooms
Gettyman Gerenia was adjudged winner and awarded a
plaque of honor by the judges.
The board of judges for the provincial level was composed of Dra.
Patroceno Arao, wife of Pagadian
city mayor; Estellita Ebarle, wife
of Zamboanga del Sur governor,
Maximo Balbin, Pagadian city auditor; Luz Pajares, civic leader;
and Lavreano Madarang of the
Bureau of Public Schools.


The National Beautification and
Cleanliness Contest is chairmanned
by the First Lady, Mrs. Imelda R.
Marcos. It was launched in April
197.
The Getty station is now vying


for an award in the Regional level.
Gerenia is highly optimistic of
winning this contest. To win this
event will automatically qualify
him to compete in the national
level.


FREWORKS SAY: MABUHAY!


Some people do it with a smile;
others with a loudspeaker and an
amplifier. But Miguel Hernaez did
it with fireworks.
Kerosene dealer Hernaez devised
s novel way of advertising his
wares during Anini-y’s (Antique
province’s southernmost town)
fiesta by spending one hundred
pesos for the construction of an
indigenous display of fireworks.
(see photo)
The fireworks which began before the proclamation and coronation of the fiesta queen made
the townspeople ery: MABUHAY.
And according to Antique distributor Serafin G. Gustilo, the whole
idea greatly boosted the Company’s image in southern Antique.


19


FLYING  DENS


SISON GETS
SPECIAL TOP
BRANCH AWARD
The Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc.
Executive Committee recently
awarded the special Top Branch
Performance Award to Davao
Branch Manager Ruben S. Sison.
Sison was given a cash award
of P500 for his outstanding performance in sales, operations and
credit management in his branch.
The Executive Committee also
gave a gift of P500 cash to Mrs.
Sison, for her inspiration and valvable assistance in the accomplishment of her husband.
Photos show (A) Personnel
Manager V B. Lainez presenting
R. S. Sison his special cash award
and (B) Mrs. Sison receiving her
share of the award from Credit
Manager N. C. Livelo.


Pete W. Gverzon, Getty Oil distributor
in Cagayan de Oro, was recently elected
president of the Cagayan de Oro Lions
Club. He is shown in photo delivering his


inaugural address before club members during the induction of officers held at Vista
Hermosa Hotel in Cagayan de Oro.


FIYING  LENS

O



Isie Gaches Rehabilitation Center project. Shown in photo is Social Welfare
The Kiwanis Club of Makati recently launched
Secretary Estefania Aldaba-Lim congratulating Kiwanis President S. O. Abellera during the cornerstone-laying ceremonies. The affair was
also attended by Norman Certeza, Philippines Kiwanis District Governor.


For their long and tireless efforts for Getty Oil, Sisinio Y. Villacin, Cebu branch manager; Pe¬-
tronillo B. Laurente, Cebu branch
mechanic; Serafin Guacena, Jr.,
Bacolod branch salesman; and Rogelio M. Tubalado, Cebu branch
secretary were awarded the Company service emblems.


Villacin and Laurente, I0-year
service awardees, and Tubalado,
S-year service awardee received
their awards from Getty Oil President O. Soriano (A).
On the other hand, S. O. Abellera, vice president-marketing,
awards Guacena, Jr, a five-year
service emblem (B).


SER
AVVARDO


21


AEANBE


Mr. Wohlmut on his arrival at the Manila International Airport being welcomed by President O. Soriano.


Arthur J. Wohlmut, marketing
manager for international supply,
transportation, manufacturing anc
marketing operations of Getty Oil
Company in Los Angeles, California,
was in town recently for a conference with Getty Oil (Philippines)
officials.
During his brief stay in the country, Wohlmut visited Getty offices
and facilities. Part of his itinerary
was a trip to the Getty branch in
Davao where he made observation
and inspection tour of the branch
operations.
He returned to the U.S.A. via
Hongkong and Taipei accompanied
by H. S. Pettit, senior vice president
and C. K. Chan, Getty Oil Company
(Philippine Branch) marketing manager.


Bobby Montemayor, a noted radio-TV commentator in Davao, is shown exchanging views
with Mr. Wohlmut, while Mr. Pettit listens.


Mr. Wohlmut meets with N. F. de Guzmar
former Davao branch manager and presentl
Getty Oil dealer in Tagum, Davao del Norte.


At the Davao branch compound, Branch Manager R. Sison (extreme left) shows Mr. Wohlmut the branch stock of BD drums. Others
in photo are (from left) H. S. Pettit, senior
vice president; O. Soriano, president; and E.
L. Shepley, chairman of the board.


Mr. Wohlmut poses for a souvenir photo, wit
typical rural scene serving as backgroune


Photo shows Mr. Wohlmut with H. S. Pettit,
C. K. Chan and Peter Cheng posing for a
souvenir photo.


Mr. Wohlmut and H. S. Pettit with K.
Wang of Petroleum Industrial Company,
are shown touring a fishing village in Ho
Kong.


CAN
YOL
NAME THESE


JOB FRE
HAZARDS?
1 Stock piled so near sprinklers, water could not
reach fire.
2 Industrial truck refveled
in storage area.
3 Smoking where not permitted.
4 Motor sparking — needs
servicing.
5 Makeshift and emergency
wiring.
6 Fire door blocked — won’t
close if needed.
7 No protection against flying welding sparks.
8 Cigarette disposed of in
washroom trash container.
9 Access to fire extinguisher
and hose blocked.
10 Leaking faucet on drum.
11 Trash not removed from
building.
12 Gasoline used as cleaner
danger!
DONT LET FRE
BURN L





THIS ISSUE
In this third issue of Flying-A-News, we feature the Visayas. One
will be reminded of the historical significance of this group of islands, having been the cradle of Christendom in this country. Places
like Mactan, Limasawa, Leyte, Tagbilaran, Panay will bring back memories of the country’s beginnings and will add color to the glorious
cultural heritage of the Filipinos.
As we take the Southern route of our tour of the country’s tourist spots, we are linked once again to the distant Filipinos of the Viyas in the spirit of oneness, and self-knowledge of the things our
own. The language barrier, the geographical locations and cultural differences that clearly separate us Filipinos from one another will be
cracked in the appreciation of "Beautiful Philippines”
Also in this issue is a feature on the Cultural Center of the Philippines, the country’s place for art. The Center provides an expression
of the Filipinos’ love for the "ultimate valve of the things of the
heart and the longings of the spirit" Indeed, a tourist can not, and
should not, miss this important tourist landmark, for here are housed
the cultural valves of the Filipino nation.
CONTENTS


IER
GETTYS SH
CRADLE OF PHILIPPINE
P. E
CHRISTENDOM/P.


CHECKLIST FOR
SUPERVISORS/P. 10


CULTURAL CENTER OF THE
PHILIPPINES/P. 12


MANAGERS, DISTRIBUTORS
CONFAB/P. 17


FIREWORKS SAY:
MABUHAY/P. 19


MEET A SALES MANAGER
P. 15


GETTY ELECTS NEW
BOARD CHAIRMAN/P. 16


HERRERA, QULJANO JOIN
SENIOR EXECS/P. 18


SERVICE AWARDS/P. 21


WOHLMUT VISITS
PHILIPPINESJP. 22


CLEANLINESS IS
BUSINESS/P. 19


KAMUTARATAA


NEEP



Aa
M
Y
ta



A


Design & Layovt: Nareiso Rodriguez, r
Tourism Photos: Courtesy of BIrl
Cuktural Center Photos: M. S. Domingo
Publicatiens Consultants; Corporate Communicstions services
Philippine Council of indostria
 conmntateor


Internstional Associetion of Business
Haboe communicators


e
For voU, We have o few
9
minutes fo spare.


Buf no more than a few minutes.


Because, frankly, we want vour business.


How fast can we put you back on the road
after you drive into one of our service
stations?
pretty fast. In a couple of minutes, we'ill fill
your gas tank. Check your engine oil level.
Checkyour radiator. Clean your windshield.
And give you your change and your receipt.
Add 3 more minutes and we’ll check your
battery to see if it has enough distilled
water.. And if the acid is strong enough.
We’ll even check your battery cells to make
sure your car starts when you start it.


We’ll check your tire pressures, too. And
adjust them, if necessary.
All in a couple of minutes.
We figured the less time we keep you in
our stations, the more times you'll do business with us.
Which is most welcome. Because, frankly,
we want your business. More than anybody
else does.
Getty Oil


atherein
AN
AUALe DROVIMIORL O HACNSELS UMAA
nt of in
and principal, and such obligations shall be a first lien on all ta
gollected.
(4) The Government of the Philippines will assume all con
tinuing obligations of the United States under the Treaty of Pead
with Spain ceding the Philippine Islands to the United States.
(5) The Government of the Philippines will embody the for
going provisions of this Article Lexcept subsection (2)l in a treat
Rith the United States.


ARTICLE XVIII—THE COMMONWEALTH AND
THE REPUBLIC
SECTION 1. The government established by the Constitution s
be known as the Commonwealth of the Philippines. Upon the fir
ind complete withdrawal of the sovereignty of the United Sates:
yoclamation of the Philippine independence, the Commonwealth
e Philippines shall thenceforth be known as the Republic of
hilippines.


 ORDINANCE APPENDED TO THE CONSTITUTION
 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section One, Article Thirteen,
and Section Eight, Article Fourteen, of the foregoing Constitution
during the effectivity of the Executive Agreement entered into


the President of the Philippines with the President of the Unitec
States on the fourth of July, nineteen hundred and forty-six, pursuant
ito the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered seven hundre
Kand thirty-three, but in no case to extend beyond the third of Juli
Nineteen hundred and seventy-four, the disposition, exploitation, deve
pment, and utilization of all agricultural, timber, and mineral lane,
 the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, petroleum, and othe"
3


ineral oils, all forces and sources of potential energy, and othel
itural resources of the Philippines, and the operation of the United


ates and to all forms of business enterprises owned or controlled,
Tectly or indirectly, by citizens of the United States in the same
anner as to, and under the same conditions imposed upon, citizenz
the Philippines or corporations or associations owned or controlle
citizens of the Philippines.


FeTmla la the secaled Parie
Amendmen
proposed in a resolutior
Ithe Philippines adonted on
SEBISDLSR 19, 1
ved 
l aD1
"4
E MISRIS


F-45258


OUR COVERS:
Our front cover illustrates the various phases
in the otilization and exploration of the country's
natural resources, the same privileges and rights
which have been extended to American citizens and
corporations by an ordinance, otherwise known as
the Parity Amendment, appended to the Philippine
Constitution.
Christmas is Love as symbolized by the giving
of material tokens. A watercolor study for our
back cover depicts the Three Wisemen offering
their symbols of love to the child Jesus.
IN THIS ISSUE
A MESSAGE FOR
CHRISTMAS/P. 1


GETTY OIL ELECTS
FIRST FILIPINO
PRESIDENT/P. 2


THE STORY OF PARITY/P. 4


NAYONG PILIPINO/P. 10
MEET A BRANCH
MANAGERJP 13


P. 15


ARE YOU A DEFENSIVE DRIVERY/P. 20
A CHRISTMAS PARTY HAGANS HONORS
GETTY OIL OFFICIALS
FOR HOSPICIO DE
P. 24
SAN JOSEJP. 23


PROMOTIONS/P. 18


FLYING VAS NEWS


W. F. HAGANS
Chairman of the Board
O. SORIANO
President
S. O. Abellera
Editor
V. B. LAINEZ
N. G. PRIMAVERA
Editorial Assistant Business Manager
CORRESPONDENTS: M. ALTAMIRANO, JR., Apalit;: A. C. EMATA,
Manila; M. J. JAMILL, Bacolod; S.
Y. VILLACIN, CebU; E. B. BARIA,
Davao; A. L. JIMOGA-ON; Iloilo;
W. T. KHO, Legaspi; E. A. PUNZA
LAN, Batangas; R. B. SERAFICA,
Poro' C. E. TUASON, Finance: R.
B. ABAD, Operations; G. C. HERRERA and A.V. AMAGNA, Pandacan Plant,
Flying "A" News is a quarterly
publication of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc, and is duly registered
as a third class mail matter with
the Bureau of Posts under permit
Ne, 153.
Please address all commuhications
te P. O. Box 2258, Manila.
EDITOR'S NOTE:
Flying -ANews’ third and fourth issues for 1970 have been
combined in this number due to unavoidable circumstances
caused by typhoon "Yoling".


BRIPRINS CSUnel
beeingustrisl
FNO
internstiensl ceone
ot InaCeresl
RNES


Cover Photo:
M. S. Domingo
Layout:
Roger P. Morota
Printer:
journal Press
Publication Consultants:
Corporate Communication
Services


nce again, we come to that time of year when we celebrate the Christmas holiday, and
wish all People Peace on Earth and Good Will to Men. It is also a time of year to review the happenings, good and bad, and to ask ourselves how much we have done to
make the world a bit better place to live in. Are we worthwhile citizens? Have we
tried to help others less fortunate than we?
As we sit in the comfort of our homes, let us consider the following comments which
were scribbled almost a century ago by an anonymous soldier —
"I asked God for strength, that I might achieve —! was made weak, that I might
learn humbly to obey. I asked for help that ! might do greater things —I was given infirmity, that !. might do better things. I asked for riches, that I might be happy —I was given
poverty, that I might be wise. I asked for all things, that I might enjoy life —I was given
life, that I might enjoy all things. I got nothing that I asked for —but everything! had
hoped for. Despite myself, my prayers were answered. I am, among all men, most richly
blessed!"
If you have learned humility, the will to achieve, obedience, ambition and obstacles to
overcome, poverty and wisdom, a true sense of valves and a realization of hope, you have
been a good citizen, compassionate and charitable. You have learned the true meaning of
Christmas! You have learned the Spirit of Christmas, which is Peace, the Gladness of Christmas which is Hope and the Heart of Christmas which is Love.


W. F. Hagans
Chairman of the Board


EON


W. F. HAGANS


ONESIMO SORIANO


ithout the usual blasts of trumpets that
herald a king’s birth or a Pope’s election, Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. plunged into a bold and meaningful gesture
by reorganizing itself and by electing the
first Filipino president.
The general public would have missed this
significant event if the dailies’ business sec

tions had not disclosed that
Onesimo Soriano has been elected company president together
with Samuel O. Abellera and
Clemente E. Tuason as vicepresidents, respectively.
Meanwhile, W. F. Hagans, former president and general manager was elevated as chairman
of the board together with
E. L. Shepley, vice president and assistant
general manager, as vice chairman.
Company President Onesimo Soriano
oined Getty Oil as chief accountant in 1958.
mmediately, he introduced novel control
and financial management systems; improved
customer-company relations and initiated a
Profit Improvement Program.


His 20 years’ experience in the oil business has enabled him to rise to the company’s executive level, Prior to his election,
Mr. Soriano was vice president-finance and
treasurer.
Samuel O. Abellera, vice president-marketing and corporate secretary, was general
sales, advertising, and public relations manager prior to his election.
He joined the company in 1955 as an
order clerk. Seven years later at age 35, he
became the youngest member of the Operating Committee, the company's policy-making
body. The new vice president has been the
Flying -ANews editor since 1964.
Vice President-Finance Clemente E. Tuason
is another Getty Oil man who rose from
the ranks. In 1947 he joined the lloilo office as janitor-messenger while taking night
classes. A certified public accountant, the
former chief accountant is presently taking
business graduate studies.
Meanwhile, the company'’s Executive Committee is presently headed by O. Soriano
as Chairman. The other members are: W.
F Hagans, E. L. Shepley, S. O. Abellera, C.
E. Tuason, R. B. Abad, A. F. Jeanjaquet,
G. C. Martin, M. C. Mendoza, V. B. Lainez,
G. C. Herrera, and N. C. Livelo.


CLEMENTE E. TUASON


4


ECONOMIC
ENCOUNTER
WITH THE
WESTIII


NA
MEO
yA
CALI
CCuA




AAA

NVIAG
SC
A



DA
Y
EGA D

PA.
P

APN
EA
N

DE
POI
PPA
ADN
A
A AVA


MDRRMLS


ACAINEN
MLST
PO
N

N
PATIPA
PA


 


THE STORY OF PARITY


eduipment while the latter provided for preferential trade relations between the Philippines and the United States for 28 years.
Having been assured by their chief executive
of the importance of these laws, the Filipino
legislators accepted the two American Acts.
On July 4, 1946, the day the US government granted independence to the Filipinos.
an executive trade agreement embodying the
terms of the Philippine Trade Act was con
cluded between the Philippines and US government in which each government vowed to
phold the provisions and terms of the agree

ment including the Trade Act’s provision; the
Parity Clause.
The Philippine Constitution (Article XIll,
sections one and eight) states that the disbosition, exploitation, development or utilization of all the country’s natural resources,
and the operation of public utilities shall be
limited to Filipino citizens or to corporations
or associations where such citizens own at
east 60 percent of the capital. Thus, every
law which gave citizens of other countries the
same privileges as the Filipinos could be declared unconstitutional, null and void, by the
Supreme Court.


o


Parity clause seeks equality
To attain the proper legal perspective, the
American legislators felt that the Trade Act
should contain a provision which required the
amendment of the Philippine Constitution -
an amendment which would establish national treatment for Americans in the exploitation
of Philippine natural resources and the operation of publie utilities to make the Trade
Act constitutional.
The Philippine Congress and the Republic’s
second President, Manuel A. Roxas, worked
for the amendment. President Roxas explained


to the people of his nation the importance
and necessity of the amendment. Thus, on
March 11 1947, the Filipino people by a
majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite ratified the proposed amendment.
Filipinos Accept Parity Amendment
Article Xill, section one, and Article XIV,
section eight of the Philippine Constitution
remained intact while an Ordinance, now
known as the Parity Amendment, was appended to the constitution. This ordinance
gave Us citizens and business enterprises
owned or controlled, directly or indirectly,
(Please turn to next page)


THE STORY OF


by US citizens, the same rights and privileges
as Filipino citizens in the exploitation and
utilization of the natural resources and the
operation of public utilities. This took effect
during the promulgation of the Executive
Agreement between the Philippines and US
governments but was not to take effect beyond July 3, 1974.
Thus, from 1946-1950, the Filipinos began
to rebuild their homes and factories with war
damage payments as provided for by the Philippine Rehabilitation Act. Business activities
continued. American investors opened new
industries which gave employment to the war

ravaged Filipinos. Philippine tariff-free raw
materials and products entered the United
States and vice-versa. Preferential trade relations was to continue for 28 years. Thus,
the reborn Republic was on the road to economic stability.
The Filipinos accepted the Parity Amendment but not before a long and careful study.
They saw that the amendment was but a
triangle’s apex. The Trade Act, and the Philippine Rehabilitation Act were the other two
apexes of the same triangle. Each apex’ existence was essential to complete a particular
geometric figure. During those times, they
needed the triangle.


3


Effects of Parity Amendment
The country’s economic growth through
the postwar period has been sound by all criteria. The national income following the year
1950 increased by 5o percent while the per
capita income by about one-third. The increase
in per capita equalled the increase in real
income since the prices during the period
were stable. Foreign investments and savings
which were made available to the Philippines
boosted the government’s coffers. Conseguently, American companies which had already
been established in the country long before
Philippine Independence, continued their production and exportation of Filipino crops
such as: banana, pineapple, sugar, tobacco,


and abaca. American businessmen loaned capital, technical know-how, and equipment to
the country’s mining industry to be used in
gold, manganese, copper, and other mineral
resources exploitation.
Moreover, this economic growth accelerated social changes in attitudes and valves and
gave birth to a new breed of Filipino entrepreneurs.
The Parity Amendment automatically ceases after July 3, 1974. In the years to come,
we will realize its real valve in our economy.
In the meantime, suffice it to say that the
Parity Amendment, as an apex, was essential
in rehabilitating the war-torn Philippine economy. .


ake a country’'s treasures — her arts, culture,
handicrafts and heritage and what would you
have? Probably a museum. Gather her lakes,
rivers and plains together and you have beauty.
Roll beauty and a museum into one and you’ll come
out with Nayong Pilipino — a place which brings you
into a totally different world far from the city lights,
noise, and smog.


Enter a Muslim-inspired restaurant. Sit on its
terrace and feast on nothing but native delicacies.
Marvel at the beautiful man-made lagoon before you;
at the perfect-coned volcano nearby and the mountains far beyond. Inhale the clean air and you feel
that you're in a totally different world.


Nayon guards
in typical
Filipino motif


Sprawled on 35 hectares of land and lying next
to the Manila International Airport in Pasay City.
Ang Nayong Pilipino is a miniaturized facsimile of
some six regions of the Philippines. It serves as a
showcase for the country’s culture, arts and crafts,
providing tourists an over-all view of the country.
There, one travels from Northern Luzon to Mindanao in colorfully decorated jeepneys. In a matter of
minutes, you can visit the sun-tanned lgorots and
the lovely ladies of Lanao in their ankle-length sarongs
or compare a mosque with a church.
But let’s go back a hundred years and what do
we see? A white Spanish municipio where barrio
lieutenants flocked to lay their problems before the
alcalde mayor. Today, people still crowd into it to
ask the help of the beautiful and young Nayon guides.
To the townhall’s right stands a miniscule church,
silent and forlorn. No masses are offered within
her hallowed walls anymore but her cross can still
be seen over the islands.
In front of the church, across a lamp be-decked
plaza, is an outhuilding or a garden house. It could
have been the guardia civil quarters or even a stable.
But today, it houses various native products such as
straw bags, sculptured anitos, shell necklaces, and
handwoven fabrics.
A pretty guide will tell you that these buildings are symbols of Spain’s contributions to the
Philippines.
Let’s go back to the present and continve our
journey into the Nayon proper.
Step into any of the six regions and you will
be provided a wealth of information on the kind
(Please turn to next page)


A Moslem shrine captured


n


Nayong Pilipino


of culture or way of life that prevails in each
locality.
The buildings disclose totally different types of
architecture: the stilt-houses, the Igorot huts, the
Spanish stone-mansion, the nipa and bamboo huts
and the wooden and semi-concrete houses. Or take
the indigenous handicrafts sold in each building —


Paete’s woodcarvings, the Batangas balisongs, the
Marikina shoes, the guitars of Cebu, the pina and
jusi fabrics of Bulacan, Mindanao’s brassware and
Romblon’s marble works.
You can have your picture taken right beside
towering Mayon Volcano or climb the famous
rice terraces of the Mountain Province or better yet
run through Bohol's Chocolate Hills. And this is
not all. The Nayon will even entertain you with dance
troupes, rondallas, and singers on special occasions.
Yes, you can be in a totally different world in
Nayong Pilipino. 


Man-made Mayon Volcano.


The rice granaries.





The influence of Spanish culture.


Meet
A Branch
Manager


SISINIO YAP VILLACIN


an confronted with life’s complexities becomes more aggressive. Thus,
to provide something better not only for himself but also for his family,
a young married man struggles harder than he would, if unmarried.
His carefree days being over, he becomes more mature in his thoughts
and actions.
Sisinio Yap Villacin, Cebu branch manager, found himself in such a
predicament. At an early age, he took Leni lcamen for a life-time companion. Fortunately, he was already employed as an accounting clerk at
the Provincial Capitol of Cebu. Other men would have been contented but
not this young man. With complete determination, and encouragement from
his wife, he burned the midnight oil to attend night school until he earned
his BSC degree.
Mountain-climbers reach the summit not by accident. They plan for the
journey and equip themselves properly. Sining never set foot on Bukidnon’s summit but he, nevertheless, belongs to a unique breed of mountainclimbers.
From the provincial capitol, he transferred to the Seven-Up Bottling
Co., where he started as a casual in the accounting department. But as
expected, management recognized his abilities and promoted him to Branch
and Dealers Section Head. This was just the beginning. Subsequently, he became plant accountant and moved on to become office manager.
But why did he leave all this to join Getty Oil and start all over again?
Villacin did so because of "better opportunity, a more challenging job,
and a bright prospect for advancement" in the Company. With his experience, he was all ready to assume his role in Getty Oil.
(Please turn to next page)


Meet A
Branch
Manager


On Sept. 26, 1960, his appointment as chief clerk for the Company
came through. Next, he accepted the position of salesman to gain a new
experience in a totally different job. Having left the sanctuary of the office
to deal with people from all walks of life, Sining was considered ready to
become Cebu assistant manager. But he has not yet reached the top. Instead of
merely floating with the tide or of congratulating himself over the new
position, he worked on ardently. This paid off when Getty Oil gave him
the responsibility to manage the Cebu branch.
Finally, Sining reached the top. But like a climber, the top did not
scare him.! have 'a big job with big responsibilities but one which is
very interesting because of the challenges involved.
Later on, he found out that he was not merely working for a company
but was the Company. The Cebuanos watched his every move and deportment in or out of the office. Any error or shortcomings on his part
was the Company’s error. He was not Sining but Mr. Villacin of Getty Oil.
You must realize that if you are a Company official in a certain locality,
your actions and behaviour are also those of the Company so you have
to give a proper and honorable image. One can only do this through correct, and responsible decisions and actions.
Managing a fine family of seven children: Dorothy, Barbara, Sherry Ann,
Elbert, Danny, Stanley, and Sisinio, Jr. has been a full and fruitful job.
Management of a household such as his, requires good harmony and understanding. Just so— in his business, he practices, successfully, a harmonious relationship between labor and management. Regarding mutual
respect, he says, "Each should realize the importance of the other. Management depends on labor to carry out plans and objectives; just as labor
should look up to management for guidance."


Notwithstanding his busy schedule, Sining still gives his precious hours
to the community as a Cebu Queen City Lion and as a board director of
the Cebu Association of Credit Men. Our forty-year old branch manager
also goes for swimming, basketball, bowling and enjoys updating his tape
and record collections.


he first Christmas story which was more of a prophecy was written even before
the birth of Christ. However, a vivid and detailed accounting of the Nativity was
written almost a hundred years later by four men — Mark, Luke, Matthew, and
John — none of whom was an eyewitness.


Since then, various stories, novels, and even songs have been written revolving
around Christmas. A great number of these stories, however, have been totally devoid
of any religious significance. Most of them speak of the irony of life.


One of the memorable Christmas stories which you have probably read is the
Gift of the Magi by O. Henry whom literary critics considers the American master of
short story writers.


The Gift introduces us to a young married couple who just make ends meet in
their daily lives. It was the Christmas season and like the Filipino barrio folks and
their cherished fiesta, the young couple was not about to let the season pass without giving a gift to each other.


On Christmas eve the young wife presented a gold chain for her husband’s inherited golden pocket watch while, the young husband gave a luxurious hairdresser set
to his wife. But where did they both get the money?


We found that the wife had sold her long golden tresses to a wigmaker while the
husband had pawned his gold watch.


15


Christmas is one season of the year which has inspired writers and composers
to create unforgettable characters and melodies. Take for instance, Santa Claus — the
American version of Holland’s St. Nicholas. Or Charles Dickens’ Uncle Scrooge of A
Christmas Carol. Transcribed for children’s comic books, Dickens character appears
laughable but the novel presents a view of England’s sociological ills.


Ebenezzer Scrooge, a miser who never kept a well-lit fireplace even during winter
and who underpaid his office clerk, was visited on Christmas night by his long dead
business partner and by three Christmas spirits: the Ghost of Christmas Past, the Ghost
of Christmas Present, and the Ghost of Christmas Future. After this harrowing experience, Ebenezzer Scrooge finally shared his wealth and love with the world.


But sometimes, Christmas is merely used as a setting. Its message is left to the
readers. Take the story of a family in Dr. Jose Rizal’s Noli Me Tangere.


A crippled boy, Basilio, finally meets his father for the first time, and also find
his already demented mother, only to see them dying in the forest.


But Christmas will never be complete without the songs and melodies such as the
ever popular "Jingle Bells” which can be heard even in tropical Philippines. The everlasting Silent Night or Song from Heaven which is sung around the world in almost
every language, has an interesting background. Its words were written by an inspired
Father Joseph Mohr in 1818 in Oberndorf, Austria. He asked his friend Franz Gruber,
an organ instructor, to compose the melody. This was accomplished within the hour.
That same year, the song was introduced in the town’s Christmas service. This international Christmas carol was first accompanied by Father Mohr’s Italian guitar since
the church organ was out-of-order. The song was first published in 1834 in Leipzig without credit to the composers. It was only in 1854 that the composers were known when
an investigation led to the son of Gruber in a monastery in Salzburg.


Take Rudolf the Red-Nosed Reindeer written from a storybook which had earlier


16


been commissioned by America’s Montgomery Ward for the company’s mail-order sales
promotions.
But the more memorable Christmas stories are the ones we write year after year;
the time when our wishes came true; the day two persons in love said "I do"; and
the moments in our lives when we shared our blessings with our fellowman.
All this leads us to the first Christmas story:
"Now it came to pass in those days, that there went forth a decree from Caesar
Augustus that a census of the whole world should be taken. . .. And Joseph also went
from Galilee out of the town of Nazareth into Judea to the town of David, which is
called Betlehem ... to register, together with Mary his espoused wife, who was with
child.


"And it came to pass while they were there, that the days for her to be delivered
were fulfilled. And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the
inn.


"And there were shepherds in the same district living in the fields and keeping
watch over their flock by night. And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by them and
the glory of God shone around about them, and they feared exceedingly.
"And the angel said to them, Do not be afraid, for behold,! bring you good
news of great joy which shall be to all the people; for there has been born to you today in the town of David a Savior, who is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign
to you: you will find an infant wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger!
And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God
and saying.
"“Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth among men of goodwill.”
(Luke: 2, 1-14).


17


A major re-organization was effectec
recently with the promption of 13 personnel in the sales and finance departments, respectively.
Leading the list of promotions in
sales, A. F. leanjaqvet is now general
sales manager. Jeanjaquet, former
sales manager-branches, succeeds S. O.
Abellera who is now vice president-marketing.
E. B. Baria, former Davao Branch
manager is now sales manager-branches. He is joined by R. P. Merza who
assumes the position of sales managerDDD. Prior to his elevation as sales manager Merza was salesman B in-charge
of distributor and dealer development
in the Mindanao area. Both personnel
will report directly to the general sales
manager.
Other appointments included: R. S.
Sison as Davao Branch manager; J. S.
Marasigan as Wholesales and Technical


18


R. A. DONIDA


Services supervisor: V. P Viray as Manila assistant branch manager and R. A.
Donida as Service Station Training and
Development assistant.
Sison who replaced N. F. de Guzman,
a retiree, was formerly salesman B
handling service station training and
development in the Cebu Branch. Marasigan took over the position vacated
by D. Abella who left for the U.S.A.,
while Viray and Donida were SSTD assistant and salesman B, respectively.
On the other hand, the finance department has: G. C. Martin as finance
manager; S. R. Tan as chief accountant;
N. C. Livelo as credit manager; R. B.
Cruz as chief auditor: R. Z. Cosme and
A. Alejandro as accounting supervisors.


G. C. MARTIN


S. R. TAN


N. C. LIVELO


R. B. CRUZ


A. ALEJANDRO


R. Z. COSME


Martin and Tan were formerly credit
manager and chief auditor respectively; Livelo and Cruz were both accounting supervisors, while Cosme and Alejandro were both accounting clerks A.


19


AO POO
  BOrOOOO
BVO


he defensive driver drives as though his life
depends on it. He’s observant; his eyes move
to the left, to the right, scanning the traffic,
noting its pattern. He watches the cars far
ahead. He glances at the rearview mirror often, watching the cars behind him, noting which are getting
ready to pass and which are not. He watches the
side streets, the cars entering the flow of traffic and
those leaving it. He is super-alert, always ready for
the unexpected.
A good defensive driver knows that there is
more to driving than just following the rules. He
knows that defensive driving is driving in a manner
to avoid accidents caused by other drivers or by
pedestrians. He also knows that if more people drove
defensively, there would be fewer accidents.
A defensive driver minds not only his own driving, but the driving of the other motorists around
him. And he never takes chances. If a defensive
driver sees a possible accident situation developing,
he takes the initiative and executes the necessary
evasive action to prevent it from happening.


Although defensive driving can be a competitive
game in which you make' sure that, no matter what
the other driver does, he won’t involve you in an
accident, it involves much more than that. It means
using your eyes, ears and your driving skills to
protect yourself and other motorists from the careless driver. If a reckless motorist pushes for the
right-of-way, the defensive driver lets him have it.
He doesn’t want to run the risk of an accident.
Although a good defensive driver tries to guess
where the other driver will be in the next few seconds, he also tries to let the other driver know
where he will be. Being seen is as important as
seeing in defensive driving. Here are a few ways
you can guarantee being seen by the other motorist:
a. Keep all lights in operable condition.
b. Use low beam headlights during dusk and
dawn. Remember, it is illegal to drive with only the
parking lights on.
c. Get into the proper lane well in advance of
a turn, and use correct signals before making the
turn.


20


d. Flash brake lights to warn the driver behind
you of your intention to stop or slow down, and
check his actions in your mirror.
e. When necessary sound horn to warn other
drivers or pedestrians of your presence.
No matter how careful he is, a driver can fall
into a dangerous traffic trap not of his doing. Here
are some cases where the other driver was at fault,
but YOU as a good defensive driver could have
avoided the accident.


1. The light turns green, you start across an
intersection and are hit by a driver going through
on the red. Even though you had the green light,
you should have made sure the cross traffic hac
stopped before you proceeded.


2. In heavy traffic you make a sudden stop and
are hit by the car behind you. You could have
avoided being hit from behind by making sure that


you kept a comfortable stopping distance between
you and the car ahead; then in an emergency you
would have had plenty of time to give the car behind you warning that you planned to stop. If possible, never allow a car to tailgate you; if he gets
too close, slow down, move over and let him pass.


3. You nearly hit a driver who steps out of a
parked car into your path. You could have avoided
this situation by having watched closely for a door
slightly open or persons in the cars.


4. You are crowded off the road by a driver
passing your car because he did not have sufficient
time to get around you. When you noticed that the
car behind you was getting ready to pass, you
should have checked oncoming traffic and slowed
down to allow the driver to complete his pass safely.


21


Are You
A Detensive
DrIVer:


5. You are on a through street when a driver
ignores a stop sign on a side street and pulls in
front of you. Never assume that a stop sign on a
side street gives you 100 percent protection. Stay
alert and always drive at speeds that allow you to
stop safely.


6. You are on a freeway and are sideswiped
by a car entering the freeway. When you became
aware that the car was planning to merge into
traffic, you should have moved left into the next
lane or changed your speed to leave a gap for the
entering driver.


7 While driving through an intersection you
collide with an oncoming car which tries to make
a left turn in front of you. When approaching an
intersection always be on the lookout for the unexpected. If an oncoming car has left turn signals
on or has already begun to make a turn, slow down
and let him complete it, then proceed.


Sometimes in spite of all you can do, a collision
is unavoidable. To lessen the damage as much as
possible, apply the brakes to reduce your speed before the collision. Also try to steer your car so that
you avoid a head-on collision with either another
car or a fixed object.
Quick thinking and cooperation are the earmarks
of a good defensive driver — a smart driver Are
you a defensive driver?
(From Motorland, California State
Automobile Association).


22


A Cnristmas, arty
For HOSpICIo
De oan JOse


The yearly Christmas party for the children at
the Hospicio de San Jose, given by Mr, and Mrs.
W. FHagans is eagerly awaited by the children
and the Hagans.
The time draws near, and the children grow more
excited at the prospect of Christmas and the party
to celebrate itl
THe Big Day finally arrives and the children,
dressed in their "very best” file into the gymnasium
to watch the professionals perform.
This year the appearance of Hilda Koronel and
Jay llagan created quite a stir among the teenagers
and if the excitement and appreciation were to be
judged by the continuous applause — the performance could be called a complete success.
When the performance ended, Miss Rosa Rosal,
who emceed the show, announced that refreshments
were to be served. The children were taken to an
outside area which was set for a picnic. Pancit,
cake, ice cream, soft drinks and candies were served.
Gifts, bags of candies and balloons for each child,
were distributed, after which games were played.
Even the older men and women, workers and
teachers of the Hospicio de San Jose joined in the
merriment of the occasion.
A good time was had by all — and the Hagans
had the comforting and rewarding feeling which
comes with making so many less fortunate people
so very happy at Christmas time.


23


Hagans Honors Getty Officials


n honor of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc.'s new
set of officers, W. F. Hagans, chairman of the
board, tendered cocktails at the Manila Polo
Club. The affair was graced by business, government, and press luminaries.
Consequently, the Getty Oil hierarchy is now composed of: W. F. Hagans, chairman of the board; EL. Shepley, vice chairman; O. Soriano, president; S.
O. Abellera, vice president-marketing, and C. E.
Tuason, vice president-finance.


Photos show the new set of officers and their
respective wives (L-R): Mr. & Mrs. W. F. Hagans,
Mr. & Mrs. E. L. Shepley, Mr. & Mrs. O. Soriano,
Mr. &. Mrs. S. O. Abellera, and Mr. & Mrs. C. E.
Tuason (1).
David Sycip of Northern Motors is welcomed by
Mrs. C. E. Tuason (2).
Senator Rene Espina (left) and A. F. Jeanjaquet
exchange pleasantries (3).


24


FIYING  LENS


Davao Head
Retres After
15 Years


Nestor F de Guzman, Davao
branch manager, retired from the
Company after 15 years of continuous service.
The retiree started as a Manila
branch salesman and was promoted as Poro’s branch manager prior
to his Davao appointment.
In recognition of his loyalty, de
Guzman was presented a 15-years
award pin by W. F. Hagans, chair

man of the board, and a retirement check from President O. Soriano during a luncheon in honor
of the retiree.


Boquiren Tops
Lubricants
Sales Contest
Go into the fields and sell. Like
the biblical disciples, Getty Oil
salesmen, armed with lubes and
greases infiltrate their respective
territories; their minds with only
one common thought: meet that
sales target.
Knowing the hardships and the
difficulties encountered by these
salesmen, General Sales put up the
Lubricants Sales Incentives Plan.
Every member of the sales force
who meets his respective target for
a certain period of time is given
an incentive cash bonus commensurate with the products sold.
For the July and August evalvation, General Sales awarded the
incentive bonuses to 11 lucky recipients. V. T. Boquiren (Bacolod)
topped the list; second placer
was E. C. Ovano (Davao) who
was followed closely by A. L. Tolentino (Batangas).
The other eight salesmen, according to the bonuses received,
were: A. F. Baker (Davao), M. N.
Sandoval (Manila), E. A. Punzalan (Batangas), A. Q. Valenciano,
C. A. Alcala (Manila), J. M. Reyes,
C. R. Rebancos (Legaspi), and Jun
B. Gay-ya (Poro).


Sanchez
Is Class Director
An employee studying under
the Getty Oil educational assistance program, Isabelo Sanchez,
Jr. was elected as one of De La
Salle’s MBA Saturday Class student directors.


25


FLYING  NEWS


Sanchez, a national and government accounts supervisor, is but
one of the many employees who
have received educational assistance from the Company as early
as 1955.


Getty Oil Joins Anti-Polution Drive


Adhering to this principle, the
Legaspi branch employees undertook in their own small way the
task of initiating a fund drive
among themselves to help a poor
but deserving student finish his
studies at the United Institute
High School. However, the school's
Board of Trustees would select the
scholarship recipient.
Aurora Tabios, high school principal, received the scholarship
fund from Legaspi Branch Manager W. T. Kho.


Alarmed with the imminent
danger of ecological disturbances,
the national and local governments
came out with laws and ordinances
against water and air pollution.
As a contribution to the government’s anti-water pollution program, Getty Oil solicited a contractor’s services to collect the garbage
and waste oil refuse at her Greater Manila service stations.


The contractor was given the
task of collecting, on a daily basis
the mud, silt, and sandy materials
accumulated in the washbay and
the dirty oil and grease, drained
from vehicles, which are collected
in the grease trap so that these
waste materials may not pollute
the country’s canals, rivers, and
lakes.


Legaspi lnitiates
Scholars Fund


San Nicolas Gets
BL No. 9647 in San Nicolas, Ilocos Norte was recently inaugurated to better serve Getty customers
in the area. Operated by Vicente
Lo Coloma, BL 9647 boasts of be

Service Station
ing the biggest service station in
llocos Norte. Photo shows the station and the ribbon cutting ceremonies during the inauguration.


Craft-Buff Co. Atmar's Successor


Who will be Atmar’s successor?
Craft-Buff Company that's who.
For the second time, Getty Oil
is extending its advisory help to
another Junior Achievement of the
Philippines company, the CraftBuff Co. which is composed of La
Sallians, Ateneans, Maryknollers
and UP students.


For the second time this year,
Flying — A— News editor, S. O.
Abellera received a special award
for outstanding performance as
an industrial communicator from
the Philippine Council of Industrial
Editors. The other award was the
1970 Achievement for Management
plaque from the International
Council of Industrial Editors.
Philippine President Ferdinand
E. Marcos bestowed the Unique


The new company which will
produce tabletop perpetval wood
calendars will meet every Friday
with Getty oilmen: Gene Quijano,
Rudy Chan, and Dick Bustamante
for production, sales, and account

'Order of the Long Story” to S.
O. Abellera during the PCIE's First
Presidents Dinner which was held
in honor of the heads of the various business establishments, industrial firms, and associations represented in the Council.
Photo shows (clockwise): President Marcos, Bonifacio Amor,
PCIE president, W. F. Hagans, the
awardee, and Getty President O.
Soriano.


Getty Oil ls 100th
PANA Member


Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. was
recently inducted as the Philippine
Association of National Advertiser’s 100th member during PANA's
regular membership meeting held
at the Elks Club.
As a "centenarian," Getty Oil
was given a commemorative plague
by PANA President Francisco R.
Floro. S. O. Abellera and A. F.
Jeanjaquet received the award for
the Company.


Kiwamans
Elect Abellera
Prexy
Samuel O. Abellera, vice president-marketing, after three years
of active membership was finally
elected president of the Makati
Kiwanis.
Abellera, who took the reins
from Kiwanian Fernando Delgado,
Jr. was first vice president prior
to his election.
The induction ceremonies were
held at the Architectural Center
in Makati with Comelec Chairman
Jaime Ferrer as guest speaker.


ing and management help.


PCi Honors Flying A


27


FIYING WS LENS


Company Sponsors
Sports Event


Two Getty Oil sponsored events
-a golf tournament and a motorcycle race combined with Go-kart
slaloms were held in Zamboanga
and San Carlos cities.


The Zamboanga Golf and Country Club played host to the golfers who putted for the Class A,
B, and C titles. Getty Oil provided
the trophies while its Zamboanga


distributor donated Veedol and
Flying — A—products to the winners.
In San Carlos City, the First National Roadrace and Dragrace for
motorcycles combined with go-kart
slaloms was held in cooperation
with the San Carlos City Motorcycle Sports Promotions, Inc. All
participants used Getty Oil products.


Renato San Agustin A
of San Agustin
Enterprises, Zam;
boanga distributor,
awards a trophy
to ene of the ju

bilant winners.


Getty prodvcts and
trophies for the
golf tournament


winners,


Mecharics Receive
Service Awards
Loyalty is something worth
raising
Thus, Vicente Aviso and Isaac
Jallorina, Jr., Iloilo branch mechanics for 15 and 10 years respectively, were given their cherished
emblem awards by Getty Oil
through Personnel Manager V. B.
Lainez.
Photo shows (L-R): Iloilo
Branch Manager A. L. Jimoga-on,
Aviso, Jallorina, and Lainez.


PAGEA


The Financlal Journal


NOVEMBER 2, 1970


DOOOOBARAUDOOOOOOOOOOODARAN
LAD OF THE WEEK


We cont afford
tokeepyou
iwaiting.
 *



Because.
frankly we want your business.




2
EE
E 


Ceuyol


he
BALPN
E
The stories and men behind the
MOOOOOOOOOAOOOOOOOO
The straightforwardness of Ei message on yout papar, tadio & TV
this ad impresses us veryg syJ. G. MAPA S. J. P.CIGA
much-enough for us to picka
it as this week’s best.
Note the simple layout and g
the big, wide white space that 3
makes the whole ad so easy 
on the eyes.
Note the singular message
of the ad: fast and efficient 3
service.
Note the openness of the 3
headline: "We can’t afford to 8
keep you waiting. Because, g
frankly we want your
- business.
The copy does not really
matter.
The illustrations and the
headline are enough.
In fact, there’s not much
we can say about this ad.
After all, what else can you
say except that it’s very
good?
BOBRROUOOOODOOOOODORMDOOCOOODOOS


NEED
WE SAY
MORE?


The editors of Advertising Age,
a no-holds barred analytic column
on visual messages of The Financial Journal picked out a Getty
Oil advertisement as the week’s
best
The ad’s (see back cover this
issue) illustrations, straightfor

ward message and overall layout
have greatly impressed the editors.
.. . there’s not much more we
can say about this ad. After all,
what else can you say except that
it’s very good?"
Need we add more?


29


FIYING VS LENS


Severino F Dionisio, blending
plant helper operations department, ended his stint with the
company after 30 years and 8
months of continuous service. In
recognition of his proven loyalty
to the company, W. F Hagans,


Pandacan Tops
Bowlfest '70
The Pandacan bowlers won 18
games to dethrone defending champion Finance-B in the 1970 Getty Bowling Tournament. The 1970
titleholder also won another trophy for the highest team total pinfalls (10,157) while the Manila
branch came in second with 9,712
pinfalls.
Meanwhile, four bowlers garnered individual prizes at stake
with Q. Carlos winning in three
events.
For the highest triple, Q. Carlos landed first with 329 while
Mir Mendoza’s 322 won the second berth. For the highest single,
Gami Cunada with a 139 score
took the first slot as Q. Carlos
with 135 took the second slot.


chairman of the board, presented
to Dionisio, his retirement check
and a 30-year service award pin.
Witnessing the awarding were Mrs.
Dionisio and R. S. Bustamante of
Getty Oil.


For the second time, G. Carlos
has been declared champion, this
time for the highest average of
102.8 while Ric B. Abad got the
highest pinning score.
Eight teams from Manila, Makati and Pandacan branches participated in this bowlfest which
commenced in October.


PICPA Hails
O. Soriano


The "Most Outstanding CPA in
Management" award was recently
presented to O. Soriano, Getty Oil
president, by the Philippine Institote of Certified Public Accountants during its Bacolod annual
convention.
Other Getty Oil officers who
attended the PICPA convention
were R. B. Cruz, chief auditor; S.
R. Tan, chief accountant; N. C.
Livelo, credit manager; R. S. Bustamante, T. M. Maaliw, and B. P.
Calantuan all accounting supervisors.
Photo shows the awardee (right)
receiving the plaque from PICPA
President L. Cabanero. Looking on
is T. G. Mapa, awards committee
chairman.


Service Station inauguration


Blessing of the newly opened service station.


Makati mayor, Jose Luciano (middle) cuts
the ceremonial ribbon during the inauguration of 55-1640. Flanking him are Mr. and
Mrs. Felipe Dato, operators.


30


BL. 9656 in Tagum, Davao del
Norte was recently opened to
serve the area. Rev. Fr James
Kalchthaler, parish priest of Tagum, blessed the station while


Councilor Hermogenes Misa cut
he ceremonial ribbon. Dealer
Nestor F de Guzman attended to
his first customer


Abellera Elected
VP Of PCIC
Samuel O. Abellera, vice president-marketing, was recently elected vice president for the term
1971 of the Philippine Council of
Industrial Communicators, formerly Philippine Council of Industrial Editors, He represents Getty
Oil as editor of Flying-A-News.
Abellera, at the same time, will
head PCIC’s Finance Committee
which will undertake fund-raising
projects to fund professional development programs of the Council.
Meanwhile, he was appointed
Chairman of the Council’s Industion Program for 1971.
Operation
Sunshine
Begins Anew
"Operation Sunshine" 1970-71,
a public community relations project of Getty Oil (Phils.) Inc. has
began. Once again, ten deserving
elementary students from a public
school in the Greater Manila area
will be treated to a Saturday of
fun and frolic: a guided sight-seeing tour to historical and scenic
spots like Nayong Pilipino (see
photo), a sumptuous luncheon and
meriendas, and an entertaining
movie in a first-run theatre.
The project, made possible by
Getty Oil and its dealers would
have given happiness to 360 children from 30 different public
schools by March, 1971 Of the
360, thirty top students would be
treated to an all-expense paid
Southern Island cruise during the
summer vacation.


31


DIUO


ALTEA


ESO


Angelo D. Almeyda, accounting
clerk C-Makati, is a BSC accounting major graduate of De La Salle
College. He had been a researcher for the Center for Research and
Communication and an assistant
analyst for the Board of Investments.
Cecil L. Altea, salesman C trainee
Pandacan, had been a salesman
for Philippine Refining Company
He is a Bachelor of Science in
Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering graduate.
Francisco R. Bustamante, janitorPandacan, finished his schooling
at the San Isidro Elementary
School in Pasay City.
Rolando M. Catena, person n e!
clerk-Makati, earned his BSC major in banking and finance degree
from the Far Eastern University.
He was formerly a personnel assistant for Radiowealth Trading
Corporation.


Teodoro F. Cruz, stenographer/
clerk-Makati, is majoring in Economics at the Philippine College
of Commerce. He had been employed by Elizalde &. Co. as stenotypist.
Reynaldo B. Diaz, pump assembler
D-Pandacan, took up an electrical
course at the Eulogio Rodriguez
Memorial School of Arts and
Trades, He finished his secondary
schooling at the Roxas High School
Lope B. San Diego, accounting
clerk C-Makati, is a Bachelor of
Commercial Science major in accounting graduate of Jose Rizal
College. He had worked as rice
clerk-bookkeeper for FACOMA.
Benjamin G. Edic, secretary B-Makati, is a UE commerce student.
He had been a stenographer, personnel assistant, sales clerk and
clerk/typist for various business
firms prior to his present position.
Emmanvel C. Jose, accounting
clerk C-Makati, is a BBA graduate
of UE and has had no previous
employment.
Gerardo A. Palomo, branch clerk
Manila, had been with Radiowealth


as sales clerk and with Norpacor
Marketing Corporation as accounting clerk. He earned his BSBA
degree from the Mapua Institute
of Technology.
Arturo Wilfrido S. Polintan, salesman C. trainee-Apalit, is a BSBA
graduate of the University of the
Philippines. He had been a flight
operation officer for Air Manila,
and a shop supervisor for the AgroIndustrial Sales (Phil.).
Edmundo V. Quebral, salesman C
trainee-Poro, had been a personnel aide for the Philippine Tobacco Administration and is a UE
BBA gradvate.
Benito R. Raymundo, messengerMakati, is a BSC graduate of FEU
who has had no previous employment.
Reynaldo P. Santos, accounting
clerk C-Makati, earned his BSC
degree from PCC.
Raulito G. Villena, pump assembler D-Pandacan, is the son of
Timoteo, a Getty Oil retiree. He
took up a course in refrigeration
and air-conditioning at the E. Rodriguez Memorial School of Arts
and Trades.


Because,
franklv. we want vour business.


vOSerrCrrore
fo keeo vou


woifinG.


How fast can we get you back on the road offer you
drive into one of our service stations?
Pretty fast. A couple of minutes, if all you want is a
fast gas fill-up.
But if you have time to spore, stick around.
In 5 minutes, we’ll fill your gas tank. Check your engine
oil level. Check your radiator. Clean your windshield.
And give you your change and your receipt.
Give us 3 more minutes and we’ll give you even more
We’ll check your battery to ses if it has enough distilled


water in it. And if the acid is strong enough. Wa’ll even
check your battery cells to make sure your cor storts
when you start it.
We’ll check your tire pressures, too. And adiust them,
if necessary.


Yes, we put more service into each minute you leave
your cor with us.
Why? Simple. We want your business. More than anybody else doss.


Getty Oil


NEWS
1971


ENCHANTING
SCENES
SOUTHERN
LUZON


See page 2


COVER
The Southern Luzon region is red-dotted with
beautiful scenes and historical places which will be
of interest to local and foreign tovrists. Our cover
this issue depicts seven of
the popular ones: 1. Manila City Hall 2. Rizal
Monument at Rizal Park 3.
Taal Lake and Volcano 4.
A replica of Mayon Volcano
in Nayong Pilipino S. Manila Bay Sunset 6. Manila
Cathedral 7. Armadahan,
Cardona, Rizal.


W. F HAGANS
Chairman of the Board
O. SORIANO
President
S. O. Abellera
Editor
V. B. LAINEZ
N. G. PRIMAVERA
Editorial Assistant Business Manager
CORRESPONDENTS: M. ALTAMIRANO, JR., Apalit; A. C. EMATA,
Manila; M. J. JAMILI, Bacolod; S.
Y. VILLACIN, CebU; R. S. SISON.
Davao; A. L. JIMOGA-ON, Iloilo;
W. T KHO, Legaspi; J. REYES,
Batangas; R. B. SERAFICA, Poro;
C. E. TUASON, Finance; R. B.
ABAD, Operations; G. C. HERRERA and A. V. AMAGNA, Pandacan Plant.
Flying "A” News is a quarterly
publication of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc, and is duly registered
as a third class mail matter with
the Bureau of Posts under permit
Ne. 183.
Please address all communications
to P. O. Box 2258, Manila.


ABOUT THIS ISSUE


"Discover the Philippines”" is the call behind this year’s
series of tourism stories of Flying-A-News. As a people, we
need to fully know what we have, and what we are if we
are to claim love for the Philippines.
In our last issue, we visited the important tourist landmarks in Northern Luzon. That set us off on the track to local
tourism whose patronage we appeal to both local and foreign
tourists.
In this issue, Flying-A-News continves to lead you to your
imaginary tour of the country’s beautiful places. This time
the focus is on the Southern Luzon region with its charms
and virgin beauty. While we do this, we also pursue our visit
to the southern islands through the Operation Sunshine. With
us in this southern cruise are Manila’s young ambassadors
of goodwill who are overwhelmed by the spell and beauty
of Cebu, Davao and the emerald country of Mindanao.
We also feature in this issue a special supplement entitled
"Farewell, Mr. Filipino" which spotlights on the person of
Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. Chairman of the Board William
F Hagans. His efforts and dedication to the quest for progress
have earned him the respect of those with whom he worked
to bring about the Filipino identity in the industry. To him
and his endeared wife, Blanche, who is his inspiration, we
say "Mabuhay.
These are some of the important stories which we believe
would be of interest to you. With sustained enthusiasm, we
will continue to inform you events relating to you as a member of the Getty Oil family.


CONTENTS


THE SOUTHERN
ENCHANTING SCENES OF
SOUTHERN LUZON/P.
CRUISEJP. 9


GETTY OIL 1972
CALENDAR MODELS/P. 13


MEET A BRANCH
MANAGER/P. 14


WHAT WOULD
LIFE BE WITHOUT
OIL OR GASIP.15


SHOOTING
SUMMER
FIL 'ER
UP" AD/P. 16
TRAININGJP.I


AEANAMONAL GPRICIALS
GETTY OIL CO-SPONSORS
SORIANO ATTENDS
2ND MANILA KARTING
CONFAB IN MEXICO/P.19 ARRIVE HEREJP. 22
PRIXIP. 24


COVER PHOTOS
M. S. DOMINGO
ART & LAYOUT
NARCISO RODRIGUEZ, JR.
OTHER PHOTOS
COURTESY OF PTTA
PUBLICATION CONSULTANTS
CORPORATE COMMUNICATION


Bame


HILIPPINE COUNCIL OF
DUSTRIAL COMMIUNUICATONS


INTERNATIONAL ASSGCIATION
OF RUSINESS CPMMUNICATORS


SERVICES


SOU THERN
LUZON


Center of Sophistication
he cultural capital of the Philippines is Manila.
Here the East comes in perfect blend with the West.
It is a city of churches, of noisy and fast-pacing
jeepneys, of tall buildings, and of people of different nationalities. It is the nerve-center of governmental operations, of business, and of industry.
Manila is easily accessible from almost all points
of the country: by land or air from Luzon, and by
sea and air from the Visayas and Mindanao.
This bustling metropolis has a population of over
a million and a half, and a land area of 14.78 square
miles. Evident are the many historic spots that have
become hallmarks of the Filipinos’ past.
Places of interest in Manila and suburbs include:
Rizal National Park. Located on a 53-hectare
spread, this place enshrines the spot where Dr. Jose
Rizal, the country’s national hero, paid the full price
of national dignity with his life. Well-cultivated and
well-equipped, this park has become a top promenade of Manilans. Here, the people converge during
weekends —for a walk, fresh air music, and the
sight of dancing waters which shoot up geyser-like
from the many piracles.


VDA PAEINGA
P
EVA
P


NIINAI IS TAAS
T
8
CA


MADENERRACIDANVIEAN
O


M

6


Intramuros. Built in 1571 by the Spaniards, it
was originally called the city within the city, surrounded by walls with seven gates. Cobbled streets,
Romanesque churches and tile roofed houses with
balconies were the outstanding features of this quaint
city, once the heart of Manila. It thrived thus until
World War II.
Of the 12 churches ruined by war only St.
Agustine Cathedral has been rebuilt. The two and
a half miles of water-filled moat which once protected the walls are now a vast expanse of green
for golfers.
Malacanan Palace. Sprawled magnificently beside the Pasig River this is the official residence
of the Philippine presidents. You can get a closer
look at this place by joining any of the various city
tours.
Escolta. This old commercial artery of Manila is
still one of the foremost shopping and banking centers around. At the north end of this avenue is Plaza
Sta. Cruz, which swarms with tiendas and vendors.
Here stands the Sta. Cruz Church, which continves
to attract many devotees. From here, you can stroll
down to Rizal Avenve, the busiest street in town,


which is lined with moviehouses, department stores,
panciterias and coffee shops.
Crossing the MacArthur Bridge southward, one
sees the Manila Post Office, the City Hall and then
Congress.
Along Taft Avenve, are the Jai-Alai, the WHO
Headquarters in Manila, the National Museum and
the National Science Development Board Center.
Within this vicinity is Ermita district, a fashionable
commercial center which boasts of curio shops where
native handicrafts can be found.
Proceeding southward, one comes upon the Manila Zoo, with its collection of tropical birds, reptiles, mammals, fish and animals from all over the
world.
Along Roxas Boulevard, where one can see on
a clear afternoon the famous Manila Bay sunset,
can be found the best of Manila’s nightspots. The
Cultural Center, an edifice of majesty and elegance,
which shows the best of the Filipino arts, stands
adjacent to the Philippine Navy Headquarters.
Around Manila, you can ride to Makati and Pasay
to the south, Mandaluyong to the east, and Quezon
City and Caloocan City to the north.
Makati. Foremost of all Philippine towns in
terms of income, Makati is a growing residential
and business complex. Located here are subdivisions:
Forbes Park, Urdaneta, San Lorenzo, Dasmarinas and
Bel Air villages. Also located in this town, along
Ayala Avenve particularly, are numerous offices of
the country’s big business concerns.
Qvezon City. Still undergoing changes, this is
the official capital of the Philippines, In the Diliman
vicinity, the University of the Philippines is located.
Araneta Coliseum, one of the biggest in the world,
is in Cubao, a brisk commercial center about 20
minutes away from Manila.
Nayong Pilipino. A stone’s throw from the Manila International Airport is the Nayong Pilipino,
a facsimile of the different regions and the known
spots in Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao.
Las Pinas. The ancient Bamboo Organ built in
1794 is the main attraction of this town. It has
950 pipes, all made of bamboo. Today visitors can
still try their fingers on the keys and enjoy the
resounding music of the bamboo organ.


3


SOLTHERN
LUZON


Pagsanjan Falls is always filled
with fun. Here, visitors come
almost daily, "shooting
the rapids?
then bathing beside the
perpetual bellows of the falls.


This church steeple is the only
thing that remains of the
village of Cagsawa when
Mayon, in the background,
erupted in 1814


(Above) Mouth of a sea cave in
Batangas.
(Above, right) Rizal’s House,
in Calamba.
Laguna. Remodeled and wellkept, it is now a national
shrine.
(At right) A view of Mt.
Makiling National Park from
the paddies of Los Banos.


Corregidor. A narrow strip of rock-island on th
Manila Bay, this was the last headquarters of th
besieged US Army during World War II. Easily ac
cessible by boat from Manila.
A Lake Within a Lake
Tagaytay and Lian are tops in the list in ou
Batangas tour. Perched on a mountain ridge 2,250
feet above sea level, the delightfully cool city c
Tagaytay is only an hour’s drive south of Manila
From the ridge, you can look down into one of th
lowest volcanoes in the world, Taal Volcanoes, sai
to be the craters of a larger volcano.
Because the two craters of Taal Volcano are als
tiny lakes, we have here a unique phenomenon o
two craters within a crater, two lakes within a laka
Taal Vista Lodge, a first class hotel built on
portion of the ridge, offers excellent accommod
tions. From here one can view the lake, the vol
canoes, China Sea and the Manila Bay.
Two hours away from Manila by bus, is Mata
bungkay Beach in Lian. Its sparkling blue water
and white sand assure one of a wonderful time
in swimming, skin diving and fishing. Other beache
are in Nasugbu, Taal, Batangas, San Juan, Mabin
San Nicolas, Lipa and Talisay. Hot springs can b
found in San Juan and Mabini. The capital tow
has subterranean caves in Pulang Saya, Kamantigu
and Matoco Hills.
Batangas, the capital, is easily accessible by bu
from Manila.
Nursery of Philippine Independence
Just like many other provinces, Cavite assure
itself of a place in tourism map because of it
beaches, Most popular of these is Lido Beach, 20
kilometers away from Manila.


Kawit, a small town, is popular among tovrists
because of its historical significance. Gen. Emilio
Aguinaldo, first president of the Philippine Republic,
declared the Philippines’ Independence from Spain
to a handful of revolutionaries from the balcony of
his house in Kawit. This house is now an important
historical shrine.
By bus, Trece Martires, the capital, is only 46
kilometers away from Manila.
Land of Legends
Laguna is a many splendored province. Aside from
being the birthplace of Dr. Jose Rizal, national hero
of the Philippines, it, is also a land of legends.
Examples are the legends of Maria Makiling and the
transforming of the lanzones from a poisonous froit
into an edible delicacy.
Laguna also has a lot of beauty spots to offer
visitors. These places include:
Calamba. Birthplace of Dr. Jose Rizal. The house
where he was born is now a national shrine, and
serves as a Rizaliana Museum.
Pansol Hot Springs. Here sulphuric waters with
medicinal valve can be found. It is complete with
modern facilities such as swimming pool, bathhouses
and restaurants.
Los Banos. Site of the sprawling UP College of
Agriculture and College of Forestry, and the International Rice Research Institute (IRRl) experimental
farms.
Pila. Here, archaeological diggings produced jars
and porcelain wares. The better finds are housed
in the museum while other prices are being sold in
makeshift shops.
Mt. Makiling. Site of the Boy Scouts' T0th World
Jamboree in 1959, this place was made a national


park thereafter Overlooking the placid Laguna de
Bay, this mountain is surrounded by the mist of
the legend of Maria Makiling. Some 3,000 varieties
of plant life and numerous hot springs can be
found here.
Pagsanjan Falls. One of the country’s premier
attractions, Pagsanjan Falls is only two hours ride
from Manila. Here, visitors are invited to "shoot
the rapids.” Expert boatmen take you to the falls
upstream in native bancas. The boat trip gives you
Pagsanjan’s exciting scenery — palm-fringed river
banks, lush vegetation, verdant gorges, boulders, several waterfalls and rapids.
Hotels, resorts and lodges can be found in Pagsanjan.
The Abaca Country
Albay is known for Mayon Volcano with its perfect cone. Fine beaches, hot springs, abaca plantations
and native handicrafts add up to its fame.
Soaring 8,000 feet above sea level, Mt. Mayon
either stands serenely majestic or in eruptions, unfurls all its fury. From the Legaspi pier, Mt. Mayon
is a spectacular view to behold.
Other places of interest in Albay include Cagsawa Ruins, Tiwi Hot Springs and Daraga Church.
Cagsawa Ruins reveals a church steeple, the only
thing that remains of a town which was buried
under twenty feet of rocks and lava after Mayon
erupted in 1814.
At Tiwi Hot Springs, the sulphuric water is
medicinal and an effective curative for rheumatism
and all forms of skin diseases.
Daraga Church is unique. Built atop a hill, it has
a long flight of stairs dubbed as the "Stairway to
Heaven."
Legaspi, the capital, is accessible either by bus,
train or airplane from Manila. Hotel accommodations can be found in this city.
The Boom That Caused Doom
Camarines Norte was once a booming gold rush
province. In fact, it depends largely on its mining
industry for its living, even up to now.
This province is an ideal first stop in your trip
to the Bicol Region. It is worth visiting for its picturesque mining towns, beach resorts and hunting
grounds.


Talisay Beach in Batangas is a
pleasant place — to see or to
bathe in.


SOUTHERN


Summer resorts with swimming poola
can be found in many parts of the
country. This one is at Carolina
Summer Resort in Naga City.


Here, you can hunt wild ducks in the marshes
of Borabod and Bagasbas, and boars and monkeys
in the forests between Daet and Sipocot. Or you
may swim and fish at Larap, Jose Panganiban, Mercedes and Bagasbas beaches. Or see Matogdon Rapids,
and Paracale, a gold boom municipality which turned
into a doom town when a mine cave-in in 1952
claimed 5o lives.
Daet, the capital, can be reached by bus or airplane from Manila.
The Smallest Fish’s Habitat
Tabius, said to be the smallest fish in the world,
thrives in Lake Buhi, Camarines Sur. Aside from this,
Camarines Sur is also known for its fertile valleys and
lush green abaca plantations.
Penafrancia Festival, which features a fluvial festival, a colorful procession, is held in Naga City on
the third week of September.
Accessible by train, bus or plane from Manila,
Naga City is dotteel with fine hotels, some of which
are Holiday Hotel, Lindez Hotel and Majestic Hotel.
This province also has several beautiful lakes and
summer resorts and beaches.
The Morion's Land
The Holy Week is the best time for you to visit
Marinduque. During this particular time, Marinduque
bursts into a riot of sound and color as townspeople of Boac celebrate the Moriones Festival, For
this occasion, men dressed like Roman soldiers, and
wearing grotesque masks and hairdresses, dance on
the streets — staging scenes from the Holy Bible.
More adventure awaits the visitor at the Bathala
Caves, a series of 24 huge caves about 100 feet above
sea level which are regarded with both fascination
and fear by the townspeople. Only four of these
caves have been actually explored. The biggest is
known as "Simbahan" because its stalagmite and
stalactite formations make it look like the interior
of a church.
There are daily flights from Manila to Boac, the
capital. One can also take a boat from Lucena, Quezon, to reach Boac.
The Tamaraw’s Domain
The tamaraws, the untamed counterpart of our
carabaos, live in the jungles of Mindoro. Mindoro
is divided into two provinces: Mindoro Occidental
and Mindoro Oriental.


San Jose, the capital of Mindoro Occidental, can
be reached by plane from Manila. Here, one can
enjoy the view of Tilik Bay in Lubang, and for the
most part, the almost primitive beauty of its hinterlands.
Mindoro Oriental has Calapan for its capital.
This town is accessible from Manila by plane, on
by ferry from Batangas.
While visiting Mindoro Oriental, one can take
a dip in the beaches in Calapan and Puerta Galera.
A waterfall with a marble-lined swimming pool can
also be found in Puerta Galera.
Special for Archaeologists
Sorsogon, the capital of the province by the same
name, is accessible either by train or plane from
Manila. Located at the southern tip of Luzon, this
province is a special spot for archaeological expedi
tionists. Caves honeycomb the province.
Burial jars, some dating back to 2,000 years
have been found in Barrio Bato in Bacon town,
eight kilometers away from the capital. Nagsarok
Cave is believed to be the longest in the province
Galleon relics have also been found in Tagdon, Barcelona, and the waters of San Bernardino Strait.
Bulusan Lake on the hilltop and Bulusan Volcano are ideal tourist sights. So are the falls anc
springs which are plentiful in the province. Gubat
town has Rizal Beach, reputed to be the most beau
tiful in the country.


6


Some strange feelin;
may confront one
enters this famous
Bathala Cave in Bo
Marinduque. But this
feeling will soon give
to excitement as one
eyes get used to the
dim, and begin to sca
the beauty of the inte


Thrill
Lake.


in Sorsogon is boating in beautiful Bulusan


A Mangyan couple in their native attire. This cultural
minority group still live in semi-primitive ways in
the mountains of Mindoro.


A Wildlife Territory
Palawan is a frontier island province and one
of the Philippines’ tourist outposts. It is known for
its fishing ground and wildlife.
Snipe, boar deer and the ferocious jungle fowl
known as the "labuyo" abound in this province.
Scientific and archaeological expeditions are often
made to this province. One can explore all its natural
beauties for mere pleasure only. Here, one may try
a banca ride along the Underground River swim
at Canigaran Beach, visit Iwahig Penal Colony or
explore the multi-chambered lgay Cave.
Lipuon Point has a number of caves, the most
famous of which is Tabon. Lately, archaeological diggings unearthed skulls and tools which date back to
20,000 to 30,000 years.
Pverto Princesa, the capital, is accessible by plane
and boat from Manila.
Other places in one’s Southern Luzon itinerary
are:
BULACAN. Known for its sweet mangoes and beautiful women. Malolos, the capital, is easily accessible
by bus from Manila. Here, one can see the landmarks of two historical events: Barasoain Church,


where the Malolos Constitution was enacted; and
Biak-na-Bato, where the Pact of Biak-na-Bato was
made. Santol town has a spring with mineral waters.
Sibul Springs is in San Miguel.
BATAAN. The "Dambana ng Kagitingan" at Mt
Samat, a monument to the defenders of Bataan, is
an attraction. Mariveles, Limay and Orion have fine
beach resorts. Balong Bato Hot Springs is in Mariveles. Balanga, the capital, is a few hours’ ride from
Manila.
QUEZON. Famous for its coconuts. Beaches and
parks are some of its best tourist attractions. Off
the coast of Mauban are two privately owned islands
with bay resorts: Balesin and Jomalig.
CATANDUANES. This province has pictvresque
coves, caves, falls and beaches.
Caves at Luyang are places to explore. Or one
can enjoy Binauhan and Balonglong Falls with their
beautiful natural surroundings. And those who enjoy
sun, sea and sand, visit Egang, Marilima, Lourdes
and Palawig beach resorts. There are daily flights
from Manila to Virac, the capital.
MASBATE. This is a land of sprawling cattle
ranches and fine beaches. Dacu, Valencia and Tinago
beach resorts are some of the best places to stay 6


8


OPERATION SUNSHINE


THE
SOUTHERN
CROrOl
-MEMORIES
FOR A
LIFETIME


n 1970, 20 indigent students sponsored by Getty
Oil (Philippines) Inc, sailed for the southern islands.
The South is beautiful!" they exclaimed.
This year, 30 indigent students again sailed for
the southern islands. "The South is beautifull" they
echoed. "We will never forget it. Thanks to Getty Oil."
Such is Operation Sunshine’s southern island
cruise — beautiful, enchanting, unforgettable.
Much had been said about last year’s southern
cruise. More could still be said for this year. For
every crvise was a different experience; every group
and the children composing it, a different personality.
They had some things in common though. They were
all indigent public elementary school students. All
were participants in Getty Oil’s project — Operation
Sunshine.
This year’s young tourists were composed of 30
boys and girls from various public elementary schools
in Greater Manila. They were the topnotchers in
the examination given by Getty for the 300 boys
and girls who participated in Operation Sunshine
during the school year 1970-1971. The cruise was
their big reward.


On the Saturday of May 14, Pier 4 was somewhat
different. Thirty bright-eyed children, donned in their
bright-red jackets were all over the place. Even
the crew of the MV Legaspi — the ship that would
be carrying the group — seemed extraordinarily busy
loading its cargo, as though too eager to sail for


this special voyage.


mong those who were present to see the party
off was the moving spirit behind Operation Sunshine — Mr and Mrs. William F Hagans. Together
with parents, friends and Getty Oil personnel, they
all bade the group a fun-filled journey.
And indeed, a fun-filled journey it was!
A very special feature of this group was that
the frolickers had the taste of night life in most of
the places they visited. Dve to unavoidable circumstancies, there were times when the ship had to arrive at port late in the afternoon — to sail again the
following morning. This should be a big disappointment to the children.
But children are unique. They have that strange
capacity to enjoy themselves wherever they are, any
time of the day. The local customers of family pavilions in lloilo (Ledesma Hotel) and Davao (DGarden) were surprised to see 30 youngsters monopolizing the dance floor swinging energetically with
the music. It was a complete change of atmosphere
in these pavilions — much to the amusement of the
owners and customers who could not help but inquire on the project Operation Sunshine.
And then there was Dadiangas. Due to lack of
docking space at the pier the MV Legaspi had to
drop anchor at a distance from the pier. The touring group then had to take what turned out into
an exciting ten-minute banca ride towards land. The
sea was quite disturbed that time and most of the
children got a splash of salt water on their faces.
But instead of drenching their spirits, this experience only heightened their fun and enjoyment. The
trip to Polomolok, Cotabato, where Dole Pineapple
is located, took place late in the afternoon. This trip
gave the children a taste of wild country life as
they sped along the vast rolling hills, the view of
which was accentuated by the sun slowly setting on


the horizon. After touring the Dole cannery, and
having paid a courtesy call on Mayor Barney French
of Polomolok, the group returned to the Veneracion residence (Getty Oil distributor in the province)
for a hearty supper They returned to the boat -
which luckily had docked already — that same evening, and got set for Davao.
Aside from that exciting evening at "D'Garden
in this biggest city in Asia, the children were also
treated to lunch at the plush Davao Insular Hotel,
followed by a courtesy call on city officials and
swimming in the afternoon. The young tourists also
appeared in an exclusive full-hour TV show on Chan

nel 13 where they showed their talents before the
Davao television audience.
Cebu was equally exciting with its famous guitars
and that exhausting trek to the mystical Taoist Temple in Beverly Hills. Lunch was served informally
beside a pool. Merienda was served at the Villacin
residence.
There was never a dull moment in this cruise.
Rest time was spent on board the MV Legaspi. And
rest time here means playing games like "hide-andseek" and "tug-of-war"; singing and again, dancing.
The chaperons could hardly match the inexhaustible
energies of these youngsters — energies which found
full release during this two-week cruise.
Harmony prevailed all throughout. There were
petty quarrels — which were expected of them anyway — but children have their ways of mending their
own fights — only to make their relationship more
sweet and closer. They also tasted their first baptism
of waves that caused seasicknes, much to their discomfort, but a new experience as well. Some of them
got brvised as they ran along the deck trying to
outdo each other during game time. But they all
overcame. When somebody got sea-sick, or nursed
a bruise or a fever they would just mutter — "part
of the game!"
Birthday celebrations marked this cruise. One was
celebrated on sea. There was no special food nor
place to celebrate on that occasion. But there were
plenty of mangoes . green mangoes. So they had
a birthday party and served mangoes to everybody
as they sang that familiar "Happy Birthday” tune.
The other was celebrated in lloilo with a birthday
cake complete with candles. But none of the celebrants would say that one party was happier than
the other For as we said, children are unique.
They have that strange affinity with fun and laughter
everywhere, anytime, and with any kind of food.
The cruise has once more shown how sensitive
children are towards good things. They know when
something beautiful has occurred to their lives; and
they know how to be grateful. In response, they
laugh, they cheer and sing... and they cry
Heavy rains poured during this trip causing delay
to the boat’s arrival in Manila. But were the children
worried? Not a bit. They would even shout in gay
abandon, "So what? The longer the better!"
This expression, although made in a carefree
manner only drives to point the one universal truth
in man — his quest for happiness, Getty Oil, through
Operation Sunshine and other more similar projects,
seeks to make this quest a reality. 88


12


THIS P


UINIVERSEL
m
T.R.P

FLYIN

RAR
:
AA.
3.

MMA
Sr
NORE

MILEAGE G
MORE
ARONER
E


Marilen, Lyn, Zen. That’s the beauty of this year’s Getty Oil wall
calendar issve. The threesome who are known in fashion circles
will model for the different oil produets of the company, and
will modify this year’s theme: tourism.
A high school graduate of St. Paul’s College, 18-year old Marilen
Ojeda has appeared as fashion model for two nationally-circulated
weeklies. She has a "fresh, unadulterated face” typical of a
girl still on the blooming side of life. Marilen is scheduled to
leave for Japan this month for a modeling contract with a professional Japanese photographer.
Twenty-two-year old Lyn Umali is petite, and can very well be a
perfect object for the camera. She is an AB-Social Science graduate
from St. Paul’s College. She models Christian Espiritu’s fashion
creations. Her experience includes one-year study at a Finishing
School in Switzerland, television fashion modeling, and onetime guest model for the Pacifica '70 during her tour of the
United States.
Known as the "Fill 'er Up Girl" of Getty Oil (she models in
the current Getty Oil TV commercial), Ien is 22 and an ABEnglish graduate of Stella Maris College in Qvezon City. She
manages a lady’s and men’s boutique in Quezon City and works
every Thursday as TV Ad Girl for Channel 4. Her other experiences include ramp modeling for some covtouriers and vonnel
women knit products. Very recently, she finished a print
commercial with Philippine Airlines.
With this year’s model combination, there’s nothing to expect but a warm response to Getty Oil’s 1972 tourism
calendar. After all "nothing sells like a pretty face, ain’ it?"


13


hat he is and what he does give us the clue
that he is headed for great achievement.
This is Jaime M. Reyes. At 25, an age when many
still grope to find their bearings, he is already manager of the Getty Oil branch in Batangas.
A degree holder of BSME from Mapua Institute of
Technology and a BSlE from Adamson University,
this young executive hopes to enroll in a Flying
School "if he finds the proper time.” He wants to
fly an airplane and have the fulfillment of conquering space, giving us another hint he really aims for
the stars; for heights in achievements, that is.
Reyes has been with Getty Oil for two and a
*
half years. He started as Salesman o in 1968. As
such, he rolled drums and carried packages and
delivered them to customers. His hard work did not
go unnoticed. Soon he was promoted to Salesman
"g" and then to Branch Manager.
Previous to his employment at Getty Oil, he was
Sales Engineer at the Atlantic Gulf & Pacific Co.
Then he applied for a position with Getty Oil. He
was immediately taken in. Today, indications show
that he has made a good choice. He has found
Getty Oil his home and life. Says he: “The employee
relationship is ideal. The company is just like one
big family.
Responsibility, to a large degree, makes for man’s
personality. It develops his tact and generates his
enthusiasm, and makes him conficient to tackle big
problems. Reyes discovered this m his being a branch
manager.
Says Reyes: "I feel the challenge of my job. It
is terrific, and interesting. Terrific — in that there is
always that tall goal (sales) to reach. Interesting —
in that accomplishment and/or achievement is always recognized and rewarded (as in the Credit
Contest).
For Reyes, improvement is unending. (Today is
always better than yesterday, and tomorrow has
more promise! Nevertheless, this truism must be
caused, or else it becomes a mere illusion which may
bring about frustration.) Thus he wields his responsibility with discrimination, as he opts to give his
customers the best. For him, "people easily forget
how fast you did a job— but they will always remember how well you did it.
The years ahead hold many promises for the
young Batangas Branch Manager. He still hopes for
better sales coverage of his branch, and for a better and more improved syster of collection. For
him, an enterprising branch manager, these things
are near-approaching realities.
Our man hails from Pasig, Rizal. But he now
keeps his home in Batangas with his wife and only
son.
A sports lover he finds enjoyment in the calculating game of bowling, in the body-conditioning
exercise of swimming, and in the rough and tumble
basketball game.
Mark him. He’s the man to watch. 6


MEET
ABRANCH
MANAGER:
JAIME M. REYES


14


WHAT WOULD
Eo E Dr
WIIOS
SIL OKGAS.


he problem of providing enough energy to the
world becomes more and more critical with the
passing of each day. For energy has the ability to
provide heat and light, and to make things move
and produce work. It is the foundation of our existence. Without it, we no longer would have the comforts we now enjoy, nor the economic progress that
we have attained. Nor the security of our country,
nor the prosperity of our industries.
The use of energy has steadily increased with
the passing of time. And the need will continue to
increase.
Do you know what energy is composed of? Oil
and gas, the main concern of Getty Oil. These two
elements constitute the most portion of the total
energy requiremens of our homes and jobs.
The use of petroleum and natural gas are not
strictly limited to providing fuel. Through the process
of chemical synthesis, fermentation or refinement,
they also form the bases of thousands of petrochemical products which have become so important
and necessary to the comforts of life.
For example, petroleum is used in the making
of plastics — plastics, which has thousands of uses,
from toys to luggage to handy polyethylene bags. It
is also used for vinyl or styrene. For anti-biotics
such as penicillin and tetracycline, For hypnotics,
barbiturates or tranquilizers. For vitamins, hormones,
or anti-infective agents and other therapeutic drugs.
For nylon, orlon, acrylic or synthetic fibers for car

peting, tires, clothes or furniture, Fori medern pers
fumes, shampoos, polishes or toothpaste, For hew
food preservatives or gelatin. For advanced achesives,
For modern cigarettes, kleenex, wrapping paper, of
candles, For advanced lacquers, enamels or paints,
For modern insecticides fertilizers, fire extinguishers,
hair sprays or other aromatics. For improved
bleaches, soaps, detergents or cosmetics, For modern
plexiglass or safety glass. For advanced film or printing ink. For new printed electronic circuits or explosives. For asphalt, For teflon. And for myriad of
other items which modern man uses in his daily
life. It is also used for improved lube oil additives
or fuel for buildings, homes and transportation facilities.
Now can you imagine living without oil and
gas? This would be an impossibility in today’s modern standard. Yet, such impossibility seems coming,
because we tend to use our resources considerably
faster than new resources are being found.
At this stage, then, it is a must for the oil
industry of the world to make every possible effort
to increase and/or improve its oil exploration and
development. In this drive, the economic incentives
must provide stimulus.
We’ve got a long time to live. And our need for
petroleum is there to stay. Therefore, let us work
closely together to improve the oil and gas industry.
And this world will be a better place to live in.


* Condensed from Getty News, Vol. 5, May


M
EA


16


Be
FIRST LINE O
TIY
JINGLE - UNDER FOR


Oh, fill erup, please.
GIRL


ATTENDANT: Also ... water in radiator -
check.


GIRL
And all I said was fill 'er up!


Because, frankly, we want your business.


ATTENDANT: Rigbt away! Tire pressure ...
e air


GIRI
Hey, wait ....I ...
ADAN:
indshield wipe ...
here, Ma'am,


ANNCR. When you drive into a Getty Station,


GIRL : And all I said was fill 'er up!


SEX
SAR COMING TO A STOP


ATTENDAN
Morning, Ma'am.
Anything for yau?


GIRI
Hey, what are you doing?...


ATTENDANT:
Here's your receipt
ror gas, Ma'am.
he rest are on the house.


you get e lot more than gas


BG : TINGLE UP THEN OUT


LSL
hen Ma. Victoria Ruiz returns to Maryknoil
College this school year, she will be equipped with
new skills, a new outlook, and an experience.
D

For two months last summer, Miss Ruiz, or Peachy
to her friends, worked as a secretary at Getty Oil’s
Finance Department where she was exposed to actual
OLU
office practices.
O
BO
Peachy is only one of the 24 undergraduates
tapped by Getty Oil this year to undergo summer
training in its different offices in the Philippines.
They came from various colleges in the country:
Bicol Technical Institute, De La Salle, Ateneo, FEU,
Tomas Claudio Memorial College, University of Negros Occidental-Recolletos, University of the Visayas,
St. Lovis University, and University of Mindanao.
The summer training program is geared towards
preparing today’s college students for life after graduation. It is also designed to help them realize
their particular fields of interests, by exposing them
to the different facets of company operations.
At the start of summer this year, ten students
were taken in for apprenticeship at the Makati and
Pandacan district offices. They were given a tour
of the company offices, plants and facilities, and
were briefed on the various departmental functions.
Later on they were assigned to specific departments
such as, finance, auditing, advertising and public
relations, operations and sales. Fourteen students
were also selected to work in seven company
branches.
The trainees were honored by the executive committee with a luncheon at the close of their summer
stint. They were also awarded certificates of attendance to the summer training program. 6


18


SORIANO
ATTENDS
CONFAB
IN MEXICO


Getty Oil (Philippines) president, O. Soriano recently attended the Worldwide Congress of Financial
Executives held in Mexico City. He represented the
Financial Executives Institute of the Philippines together with FINEX president, Miguel L. Guerrero.
At the close of the congress proceedings, Soriano
flew to the Getty Oil office in Los Angeles, U.S.A.
where he conferred with home office officials on the
present Philippine operations of the company, Part
of his itinerary included trips to San Francisco,
Tokyo and Hong Kong.


JEANJAQUET WINS
TOURNAMENT
Alfredo Jeanjaquet, Getty Oil general sales manager, bagged another trophy when he took the low
net with a 72 at the 22nd Anniversary Golf Tournament recently held at the west course of the Wack
Wack Golf & Country Club.
Jeanjaquet is member of the Manila Lions Club,
sponsor of the tournament.


LOBERIZA


LORENZO


ARABIA


AYROSO
MIGRINO


PARANTAR


VVEECOML POT
OETAMIL.
OLY


CASTILLO


VILLANUEVA, JR.


DIAZ


To keep pace with its expanding operations, Getty
Oil (Philippines) Inc, recently took in eleven new
employees.
The following are the latest additions to the Getty
Oil roster of personnel:
Ananias M. Ayroso, construction inspector, E&C,
Pandacan; Reynaldo H. Loberiza, clerk C— Accounting, Makati Main office; Victorio M. Migrino, clerk
C— Accounting, Makati Main office; Enrico S. G.
Lorenzo, stock control clerk, P&.SC, Pandacan; Grande
O. Castillo, messenger, Makati Main office; Eriberto
R. Parantar, salesman C (trainee), Davao Branch;
Jusalito V. Arabia, Branch clerk, Legaspi Branch;
Valeriano V. Cadampog, salesman C (trainee),
Davao Branch; Ernesto Q. Villanveva, salesman C
(trainee), Wholesale Sales and Technical Services,
Pandacan; Wilfredo M. Galang, salesman C (trainee),
TDY, Batangas Branch; and Domingo P Diaz, materials control clerk, RgM, Pandacan.


19


DAVAO BRANCH
EMPLOYEES GET
AARLO
Davao Branch Manager Ruben S. Sison and Cesario S. Soledad, a clerk, were recently awarded
service emblems for having served Getty Oil for five
years.
Getty Oil President O. Soriano presented the
awards at a simple ceremony attended by other
personnel of Davao branch.
Photos show Getty Oil President O. Soriano presenting the five-year service award emblem to (A)
Davao Branch Manager Ruben S. Sison, and (B)
Cesario S. Soledad.


Photo shows Mr.
Rudy Chan (right),
marketing manager of
Getty Oil Co. (Philip"
pine Branch), together with Mr. T. J. Li,

Veedol distributor in
Taiwan, during their
visit to the Giant
Travel Service.
VEEDOL PROMOTES TOURISM
IN THEREPUBLIC OF CHINA
The Giant Travel Service, Taiwan branch of the
Kokusal Motor Cars of Japan, has set a new pace in
the tourist industry in the Republic of China. It
has 15 units of luxurious air-conditioned Nissan
buses complete with all traveling facilities such as
air suspension, declining seats, stereo music, and all
the comforts of a jetliner. It is a member of IATA,
PATA and ASTA.
Giant Travel provides their customers comfort
and safety through the proper maintenance of their
units.
Since the start of its operations way back in 1968,
Veedol has been a trusted partner of Giant Travel
Service by providing the car units with the best
Veedol lubricants. It is not bragging, therefore, to
say that Veedol helps a lot in the promotion of
tourism in the Republic of China.


BUS COMPANY LAUDS
GETTY OL
Getty Oil Company has been commended as "partner in progress" by United Transport Co., Sdn. Bhd.,
a $1.7 million bus company operating in the northern
states of West Malaysia.
Khoo Kay Sean, director and assistant manager
of UTC, made the commendation in the presence
of Getty Oil’s C. K. Chan and Mr. Kho Leong
Hun, Veedol distributor in Penang, when the two
visited UTC recently.
Said Mr. Sean: "Veedol Motor Oil has been a
faithful partner of UTC during its first twenty-five
years of operation. We look forward to a continuous
close relationship in the years to come."
UTC was organized in 1946. Presently, it is considered the biggest bus company in the northern
states of West Malaysia, with some 160 dieselized
40-seater Bedford and Mercedes units in operation.


Craft Buff Co., a Junior Achievement company,
was cited for its outstanding performance in 1970
at a dinner tendered by Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc.,
Craft Boff Co, won the following awards: Vice
President-Manufacturing of the Year: runner-up, President of the Year; and Best Annual Report of the
Year.
Photo taken during the dinner shows some members of the company posing for a souvenir picture
with their Getty Oil advisers, Ric Bustamante and
Gene Quijano. Another Getty Oil adviser, Rudy Chan,
is not shown in the picture.


Mr. E. L. Shepley, vice
president-operations of
Getty Oil (Philippines)
Inc., recently arrived
with his wife Elva from
a month-long leave in
the United States. Photo
shows the couple posing
for a souvenir picture at
the Manila International
Airport.


2


INTERNATIONAL
OFFICIALS ARRIVE HERE
Three international officials of Getty Oil were in
town recently for a brief visit and tour of Getty
offices and facilities in the Philippines. They were
B. E. Williams, C. A. Phillips and H. S. Pettit.
Williams is Getty Oil vice president and general
manager — International Supply, Transportation, Manufacturing and Marketing Division, while Phillips
is marketing manager (later appointed as Director
of Air Conservation Projects at the Delaware Refinery). Pettit, on the other hand, is fuel oil sales
manager in the North American Marketing and Manufacturing Division.
During their stay in the Philippines, the three
executives conferred with local Getty officials and
distributors. They also visited various service stations
in the country.
Pettit is to later on return to the Philippines to
assume the position of senior vice president of
Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. He reports directly to
O. Soriano, president.


The visitors with W. F. Hagans, Getty
Oil (Philippines) Inc. chairman of the
board, chat with Norma Bonus, station
manager of SS 1586 in Del Monte Ave.,
Quezon City.


H. S. Pettit (second from right) confers
with Dr. and Mrs. Canos, operators of
SS 1496 in Digos, Davao del Sur. With
them are M. C. Mendoza (extreme left).
legal services manager, and S. O. Abellera vice president-marketing.


C. A. Phillips (second from left) gives
out a hearty laugh during a light moment at the Metropolitan Training Center. With him are (from left) M. Corleto, SSTD supervisor; H. S. Pettit; S.
O. Abellera (partly hidden): and R. S.
Abad, operations manager.


BACOLOD MECHANIC
GETS SERVICE AWARD
They do it to inspire loyalty. At
Getty Oil, that is. Photo shows
Cruz V. Billones, a mechanic at
the Bacolod branch, receiving a
service award from Personnel
Manager V. B. Lainez. He has
served Getty Oil for ten years.
Looking on is Bacolod Branch Manager M. J. Jamili.


RETIREE RECEIVES CHECK
Getty Oil management is human, and
often goes out of its ways to give importance
to and care for the welfare of its employees.
Excellence and loyalty in service are given
recognition. And even when one leaves the
company, after years of faithful service, he
is not left out in the cold. Getty Oil still
comes to him with something he will not
easily forget.
Such company spirit has been proven true,
once more, in the case of A. F. Baker, a
former Davao Branch salesman who retired
last May after 15 years of service.
In photo, the retiree (left) receives his
retirement check from Davao Branch Manager Ruben S. Sison.


SU V MA RALLY
EEDOL PACING OR
HE WINNER
etty On (Phili Inc.


Getty Oil donated Veedol Racing Oil and Veedol Outhoard Motor Oil to the 5th
Visayan Motorcycle Association rally.
The donation formed part of the prizes for the winners in the rally which recently
reeled off at Fort San Pedro racing circvit in Iloilo.
Shown in photo are some of the front-running motorists in the rally posing for a
souvenir picture with the Veedol products.


DISTRIBUTORS TEAM
BAGS CHAMPIONSHIP


Veneracion Enterprises, Getty Oil Dadiangas Distributor, bagged the championship trophy
in the mini category of the recent 1971 Open Summer Leagve Tournament held in
General Santos City. Shown in photo are (kneeling, from left to right) Emy Tablizo, Butch
Cavestany, Romy Bayani, Pol Torrijos (Captain Ball), Allen Lumanta, Rizal Olarte and Jeff
Pasco. (Standing, same order) Geronimo Veneracion Jr. (Team Manager), Jun Peleno, Pete
Animas, Rolly Aquino, Mabini Maduedoo (Getty Oil Plant Manager, General Santos City), Mr.
Geronimo C. Veneracion Sr., Bing Tablizo, Yoyi Animas, Dan Posadas, Bob Salcedo, and
Romy Ponce (Coach).


23


EI


GETTY OL CO-SPONSORS
2ND MANILA KARTING PRIX
The second Manila International Karting
Prix reeled off successfully at the Luneta
Karting Circuit, May 29-30.
Held under the auspices of the Philippine
Karting Federation, the classic racing event
was sponsored by major business companies
operating in the Philippines which include
Getty Oil.
The two-day karting prix featured the
slalom stars of Hong Kong, Laos, Singapore,
Japan, Malaysia, Brunei, Indonesia, and the
Philippines.


Gene Britzius of Laos topped the individual pointmakers as he registered 850 points
for first place. Runner-up was Albert Poon
of Hong Kong, with 825 points. Sakuma
Yoshiyoki (Japan), Boy Barretto (Philippines), and Harold Lee (Hong Kong), ran
away with third, fourth and fifth places,
respectively
In the team championship, winners were
the following. First place, Singapore (850
points); second place, Japan, 769 points);
third place, Philippines (637.5 points);
and fourth place, Hong Kong (380.5 points).


The Singapore team, winner of the 2nd
MIKP team championship race pose for
a souvenir photo, during the awarding
ceremonies held at the Hyatt Philippines
Hotel.


Gene Britzuis of Laos gets a start for the
2nd MIKP championship which he won.
Albert Poon of Hong Kong and Sakuna
Yosiyuki of Japan came in 2nd and 3rd
place respectively.


SORIANO CITED MOST OUTSTANDING
SON OF MORONG


Getty Oil President O. Soriano
was proclaimed Most Outstanding
Son of Morong, Rizal at ceremonies
held at the municipal social hall.
Morong, his native town, gave
Mr. Soriano the award in recognition of his outstanding achievement and his being the first Filipino to become president of Getty
Oil.
Photo shows Mr. Soriano (extreme left) receiving the plaque
of recognition from Morong Mayor
Bernardo San Juan. Looking on
are Mrs. Soriano and some members of the municipal board.


What looks like an astronaut on a gokart is actually Henkie Iriawan of Indonesia, Ist MIKP defending champion.
asking to be started.


S. O. Abellera, vice president for marketing of Getty Oil, is shown awarding
the Ist place trophy to the Singapore
team, winner of the 2nd MIKP team
championship event. To his left, doing
the introduction is Joey R, Bundalian,
secretary of the Philippine Karting Federation.


24


Electricity, like water fire and other would-be
servants of man, has its wild side. Tamed, it gives
us all the chance for a better life. But once out of
control, electricity is a killer, even in small doses.
Think, for example, what a small amount of
electricity it takes to power a seven and a half
watt Christmas tree bulb. That same amount of
current passing through the chest of a healthy
adult can kill him. About one-tenth that much electricity can "freeze” a man to the circvit, unable
to let go. If the victim is sickly, or is a child, he
can be killed by even less electricity.
Electrical current from a harnessed power source
or from bolts of lightning always tries to get to the
ground. When electrical tools, appliance and wiring
are in good condition, electricity is safely carried
back to the ground. Sometimes electricity takes an
unexpected path through a pipe system water light
bulbs or even through people. It will take not only
the easiest path but every path it can find to get
to the ground. Fires, shocks, burns and electrocutions
happen when electrical circuit is overloaded.
It will be better always to bear in mind the
following:
1. Before you use any electrical hand-held tool,
examine it. Is the frame cracked? Are plug
prongs broken? Do not use if it has any of
these defects.
2. Operating a defective electrical appliance
while your body is in contact with an electrical ground or a grounded metallic object,
could kill you. Sometimes a mechanically
defective tool gives a warning; it vibrates.
Remember it is easier to replace a tool
than to replace yourself!


3. When possible, operate electrical tools away
from grounded objects such as pipes and
other metal structures. This reduces the risk
of your body forming a path for stray current to flow through.
4. Water is a terrific conductor of electricity.
For your protection against defective lowvoltage appliances, the key word is DRY.
Your hands, gloves, shoes and the floor must
be dry when you operate any powered tool.
5. If you have to make an adjustment on any
electrical tool or appliance, first throw the
power switch to OfF or pull out the wall
plug. Never insert a wet or metal object
on an energized electrical appliance, or touch
an open wire without being sure the power
is off.
o. Overloaded electrical wiring creates enough
heat to ruin even the best insulation. The
result can be fire burning inside a wall where
you can’t get at it easily, fire that could
destroy your plant, your home, your future,
even your life. Do not overload circuits!
7. In case of an electric shock accident, do not
touch the victim, wiring, metal or water in
the area until the power is off. If you cannot turn it off or pull the plug, use a dry
wooden stick, dry rope or dry clothing to
separate the victim from the power conductor.
8. After moving either the victim or the conductor it may be necessary to give artificial
respiration. Start mouth-to-mouth resuscitation FAST and don’t stop until medical help
arrives, or until the victim recovers the power to breathe for himself.
9 If a high voltage power line falls across
the top of your car while you are inside,
stay put. A utility service man must be called
to shut off the power You’re safe from
electrical shock inside an energized car as
long as you don’t touch the ground outside.
10. IN CONCLUSION: To prevent shock accidents in the job or at home, use electric
hand tools with:
a, a three prong plug (get an adapter for
a two prong outlet) or separate grounding wire which must be attached to a
grounded object, or
b. a frame that has double insulation
and does not require a ground for
most uses.


From Delaware Refinery Safety Huddle Bulletin, Jan
uary 1971


All I said was'Fill er Uo!


Because, frankly we want your business.


When you buy somebody's gasoline, you
expect two simple things. You expect him
to check your radiator for water. And your
engine’s oil level. You can be sure of
getting these things from Getty.
But if you think we'll stop there like the
rest of them, think again. We’ll see to it
that you have enough distilled water in
your battery. We’ll check your tire pressure, too. And finally, if you drive in with
a dirty windshield, we’ll make sure that
you drive out with a clean one.


“But will your servicemen do it right?'
you may ask. Our servicemen will do it
right. Because we send them to Getty
Training Centers. There they learn how to
service a car, or they don't get to service
a car at all.
Yes, we’ll give you a lot more than gasoline fill-up. Why? Simple. We want your
business. More than anybody else does.
Getty Oil


AA


H

E


COVER
"Standing Room
Only" as seen
through the
camera.
Photo: M. S. Do


ABOUT THIS ISSUE
"Not enjoyment, and not sorrow is our destined
end or way; but to act, that each tomorrow brings
us farther than today."
These are the words of a great American, poet,
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, that put into sharp
focus the spirit that have brought the world on the
brink of momentous change. Today, we experience
changes in many areas: space exploration, biological
and medical sciences, electronics, religion etc. These
have transformed our world into a "paradise" of
the new.
This year we have chosen for our FLYING A
NEWS issues the theme “Getty Oil and the Environment of Change. This captures, we believe, the
mood and pace of the changing fabric of our times.
Population is a vital subject in our environment
of change. Thus in our cover story this issue,
"Standing Room Only" we review the worldwide
population problem, and telescope it in the light of
modern day conditions.
In the succeeding issues, we will discuss in depth
and in breadth the progress in the field of communications. As a growing field of interest, it will play,
as it has, an influential role in business and industry.
Other topics we will highlight for later issues include
the influence and impact brought in by the socalled "new technology" or the computer; and the
changing social values of our times as affected by
our achievements this century.


CONTENT


STANDI
ONLYIP.2


EXECUTIVE
PROFILEJP.6


OPERATION


GETTY OIL


SUNSHINEIP.7


STORYIP.IT


THE BUSINESS
OF OILJP.14


MEN AT THE
HELMIP.12


PROFITIPIS
PROGRESS: A
JA'S VIEWIP. 15


SAFETY
TIPSIP.19


NEW SALES
EXECUTIVESIP.23


SERVICE AWARDSJP.24


SERVICE
STATION/D.24


EDITORIAL


Change as a worldwide phenomenon has
perhaps its greatest impact on business. Under
the pressures of change, many companies
have adopted sophisticated systems in the
conduct of their business. Some have yielded
to the miracles of electronics, while others
have taken positive steps towards greater
growth and expansion.
In the Philippine scene, the torrents of
change is sweeping over companies whether
big or small. We view this as a healthy sign
for the future of business and the industry.


OE! TPOIL
AND I—
ENVIRONMEN.
Or CTANGE


Getty Oil is very much an active participant in this environmental drama where new
ideas are hatched almost as fast as babies are
born elsewhere in the world, or as mstantaneous as space communications can get.
Over the past fifty years, Getty Oil went
through the pangs of growth. From a small
agency of the Associated Oil Company, it
flowered into what is now a Filipino managed
multi-million corporation operating nationwide.
Keeping its growth in our environment of
change, the company has taken fruitful and
beneficial steps towards the fulfillment of
its goals by undertaking personnel and executive development programs, progress-oriented
activities like the Operation Sunshine, Junior
Achievement Company, and last year’s tour
ism features project in the issues of FLYING
A NEWS.
As things grow and develop in our so-called
global village , Getty Oil never stands still
but keeps its forward drive silently. Responding but never fazed, it maintains its adaptability to the changing needs and demands of the
times. G


an’s life experience in this
world is somewhat like seeing
a movie in a downtown theater
n Manila. People enter through
he entrance door and come
ut through the exit door.
uring the running hours of the
ilm, many flood in through
the first door, and only a
rickle come out of the second.
Because the movie is exciting,
many would rather stay for a
ittle longer than leave the moviehouse despite the fact that all
seats are occupied.
Standing Room Only" reads
the sign at the ticket's counter.
Yet, many do not even bother
to take note of it, and still
insist on entering the movie
house.
This example is a microcosm of
the global problem, population
explosion. Every second many are
entering the entrance door of life,
and only a few depart through
the exit door. Thus, we find little
room to move around, and
little to see of the beauty of
life.


Population Growth in the World
Today, the extent and rapidity
of population growth has become
a critical world problem. There
are now over 3.5 billion human
beings in this globe. Every
second, four babies are born
and two people die. This means
a net population gain of 65
million every year. And the
trend is going up. With two
thirds of the inhabitants of the
world living in poverty and
hunger, this yearly increase in
population is an alarming
phenomenon. If people continue
to produce children at the present
rate, world population will


double by the end of this
century. This means 7 billion more
heads on the demographic chart.
Expert’s View of the Problem
Dr. Philip M. Hauser, director
of Population Research and
Training Center at the University
of Chicago, made this observation: "Duringthe 600,000
years of the Old Stone Age,
population increased at the rate
of 2 per cent per 1,000 years.
Today it is growing at the rate
of 2 per cent per vear...
Another authority on popu
lation Todd Fisher, observed that
the increase in popualtion growth
I
is alarming. He said: it took
man a million years for his
number to increase to one
billion. He reached this mark
around 1850... By 1925,
only 75 years later, 2 billion
people lived on earth. Thus, in
less than four decades, there were
3 billion people in 1962. .. By
1975, man will reach the 4
billion mark...
With these revelations, the
issue raised vis-a-vis the problem
is: How shall the world check
the accelerated population
growth?
Something done today te
control population growth may
avoid more serious problems
in the future. Barring a
nuclear catastrophe, by the
start of the next century over /
billion persons will be making
tremendous demands on the
earth’s resources: air, water, land
etc. Most important of all is
food. Can the world bring
enough food into existence to
feed its inhabitants? If the
turn to page 4, please


IISSING
AG
S
GEIP.



Executive
Profile


ROMEO B. CRUZ


Attention to trifles is not a small matter
for Getty Oil Auditor Romeo B. Cruz. It is
his job.
Details, according to Romy, can add some
interesting information needed in coming up
with a sound analysis. "In my job, I give
a sharp eye to every small detail as I do with
big data," he said. "This is necessary because
an omission of a detail can result in a mistake, and a mistake is costly." This is one
reason, perhaps, why his job ticks.
As head of the auditing staff, he explained
that his main job is to see things done rightly
and on time. "Because our job is to protect
company properties, we cannot do anything


less than accurate and efficient," he snapped
emphatically. From somebody who has been
with the company for almost a decade,
these words are heavy with significance.
One hyphenated word which describes
Romy is: self-starter. According to him,
initiative is the key ingredient in success.
"One should be able to conceive an idea,
a good one, and get this idea to work
profitably.
Romy joined the company in 1963 as an
IBM operator. Later in the same year, he
was transferred to the Auditing department.
After seven years, he moved to the Accounting department to assume the position of
accounting supervisor. In 1970, he received
his appointment as auditor the same position
he holds at present.
About the auditing job, he said that it is
like an iceberg, very silent on the outside, but
inside there is much activity going on. "Some
people say that the job of an auditor is one
of a 'faultfinder' This is not true. In my
experience,! would say that the job is one
of a 'safeguard'," he explained. "In auditing
we look into figures and other pertinent data
which can help us come up with recommendations to management which can prevent faults
in the future.
A native of Teresa, Rizal, Romy holds
a bachelor’s degree in business administration
major in accounting from the University of
the East. After finishing his course in business, he enrolled at the same school for a law
career but did not puruse it when he assumed
the responsibility of a family man.
To the question "What is an ideal employee? ", he gave a one-word answer; selfreliant. He explained that he who works with
a minimum of assistance, especially from his
supervisors, is worthy of everyone’s emulation. "He is an ideal employee and an asset
to the company, he said.
“Trust but not tempt" is not a mere
graffito in his office. It is a motto by which
he and his staff live by seven days a week,
twelve months a year. G


6


"Operation Sunshine started by Getty Oi
(Philippines) Inc. in 1969, is a simple and
direct act of making a child happy. is
primarily focused on giving indigent elemens
tary sehool-children, from Grades IV to Vl.
a whole day of fun. Specifically, this is dome
by taking them on a tour of the scenic and
historical spots in Greater Manila, treating
them to sumptous meals, and bringing them
to a wholesome movie,
For 30 weeks, between August and March of
each schoolvear, ten pupils become GETTY’s
guests every Saturday for these week-end
treats. With Gne Saturday for one schgol,
the proiect is able to cover 30 schools for a
total of 300 indigent children.
"Operation Sunshine,” however does not
end after 30 weeks. A bigger treat is in
store for 30 of the 300 pupils. At the end of
the schoolyear, all participants are given an
examination to determine how the project
has encouragedthemto aspifefor self-improve
ment. As a reward, the top 30 are treated
to an all expenses-paid "Sunshine Cruise" to
the Southern Islands.


turn to page 8, please


7


OPERATION SUNSHINE


CONTINUED


Editor's Note:
(On February 12, 1972, the company,
through its Operation Sunshine, treated some
school children to a wholesome, educational
tour and outing. Following are some of
the feedback letters we received from those
who participated in the activity.)


The Chairman
Operation Sunshine
Getty Oil Company
Makati, Rizal
Sir
We are pleased to inform you of the very
touching recount of the whole day outing of
the eight children from the General Roxas
Elementary School, recipients of the Getty
Cil Operation Sunshine last February 12,
1972.
These children reported to the Office with
beaming faces and saying "Ano ang suwerte
po namin. Based on their tales, it was truly
an Operation Sunshine. They had a glimpse
of something bright outside of their drab
surroundings. You will note the feelings of
each one in their short notes of thanks which
they treid to say in English. Now they are
striving hard in their studies and are looking
forward to qualify in the southern tour at the
end of the school year.
In behalf of their parents and of the school
they represented,! join the group in saying.
"THANK YOU VERY MUCH" for the opportunity you gave our children who are in need
of such experiences. Indeed, it was SUNSHINE to them.


The Chairman
Sunshine Project
Getty Oil Company
Makati, Rizal
Sir:


We are writing to tell you and your group
how tremendously we did enjoy the Operation
Sunshine outing with the pupils of General
Roxas Elementary School, Roxas District,
Quezon City. It was indeed a day to remember
what with the sights and places seen by the
group as well as the entertainment and the
lunch, not forgetting the in-between snacks,
all compliments of GETTY OlL.


We enclosed the children’s own reaction
to the experience. Up to this time they
are still talking of their whole day outing
which ended up with a gift giving all to the
heart’s content of the children who really
needed to see the world.


To some people, what Getty Oil is doing
with the minimum of fuss may not mean
much, if at all, but to us who are committed
to the education of the youth, such benevolence is most welcome for the rewards it
could bring later on. We only hope that
Getty Oil will continue to get involved in
projects meant for the upbringing and education of the indigent youth.
We, as adult companions to the group,
thank you ever so much for sharing with us
too the children’s experiences. We are sincerely grateful.


Truly yours,


Truly yours,


"(rPEar
(Mrs.) GENEROSA M. SORIANO
Principal-in-Charge


Cps) Tawa tageo
(MRS.) MARIA PAYOS


3


would like to thank your company, Getty
Oil, for giving poor deserving students like
me the opportunity to see all the beautiful
spots of Manila last Feb. 12, 1972. All of us
eel fun and we owe it all to your company.
More power to your company!


N VOUVELPeb. 12, 1972
ang may mosteumtelgetable qpes. It was my
PuS me to sert Santiago and the other
Historic placesebenjoyed every moment of it.
Ihope and pray that there will be more
people like you in this world.
Thank you very much and long live Getty
Oil Company!


wish to express my sincere thanks and
appreciation to the Getty Oil Company for
giving me the opportunity to see the beautiful
spots of Manila and for the kind entertainment given us.
nat 
B-a
I thank Getty Oil Company for giving the
poor children like me in Gen. Roxas Elementary School, the privilege and opportunity
to see many beautiful, interesting and historic
places in the City of Manila. The places had
reminded us about the life and heroic deeds
of our great men like Jose Rizal. I enjoyed
also seeing the movie and the wonderful experience eating in different big restaurants
whichI haven’t tried in my life. I did enjoy
the trip and was very happy to receive the
gifts like bag, notebook ball pen, and others,
will help me in my studies.


Movo Clumos
ov-3


dagu Canag
AY

Tuloanao Okalao
Madito Ato,4


Thank you for the wonderful treat you
gave us last Saturday. It was most unforgetable experience for a poor girl like me.
really enjoyed the sights, the movie and the
delicious food one can seldom have at home.
A million thanks again to the Getty Oil.
Mawa Cuslso Ruy
E. DE-8
Ican not tell how happy ! was when
was selected as one of the lucky boys who
were given a chance to go around for free.
Thank you very much for the good things
you have given us. As long as I live your
Company will be Number One in my heart..
Ruwnal o aan -


 wish to thank Getty Oil Company for the
wonderful experience we had last Feb. 12,
1972. It was a rare and unforgetable moment
which a poor girl like me cannot enjoy if not
given the chance. Thanks to Getty Oil Company. I'll never forget this experience and 
hope that the company program will continue
for the good of other school children.
rato atnoP-P
cannot find the right words to express
my thanks to you and your company. My
experience is like a dream to me now that !'m
here in my ordinary surroundings. I can never
forget you.! hope your Operation Sunshine
Project will continue.
Thank you very much!
TOLE Paallla
Radl vi-1


-


OOA


Setty Oil (Philippines) Inc. hasn’t always
been known as GETTY OfL (Philippines) Inc.
It started in 1922 as the Philippine agency of
Associated Oil Company. It was managed by
Col. George Seavers, former Manila Police.
Chief.
Its first service station, equipped with a
hand-operated pump, was put up on Echague
Street in Quiapo, Manila. Its first provincial
dealers were based in Pampanga, Tarlac, and
Pangasinan.
In August, 1924, the agency was made into
a full-fledged Associated Oil Company affiliate, A warehouse was built in Pandacan and
the company began to expand, with three
new service stations in strategic locations in
Manila.
The company was forced to stop operations
when the Japanese invaded the Philippines
during World War II. All the marketing facilities of the firm were either destroyed or
confiscated by the Japanese.
Following the liberation of the Philippines in
1945, the company began to reorganize and
to reconstruct its facilities. It was however
re-established as Tidewater Associated Oil
Company, as a result of a merger between
Associated Oil and Tidewater Oil in the
United States. Under the leadership of William
E. Hagans, the company started its nationwide expansion,
In 1956, the company simplified its name
to lidewater Oil. Ten years later when the
company became a Philippine corporation in
1986 this was formally modified to Tidewater Oil Company (Philippines) Inc. In
1968, Tidewater’s parent company in the
United States merged with GETTY OIL. And
the company acquired its present name:
GETTY OIL (Philippines) Inc.
Getty Oil (Philippines) sells gasoline, kerosene, diesel and bunker fuels under the
Flying-A trademark. Industrial and automotive lubricants and greases carry the
Veedol brand name. Over 600 reseller outlets throughout the country distribute these
products.
In addition, Getty Oil sells in bulk direct to
the country’s vital industries, such as fishing,
shipping mining, logging, manufacturing,
transportation, and agrigulture, as well as the
Philippine Government. 0l


A
A
(FROM BACK COVER)


On April 4, 1972, at the annual stockholders meeting of Getty Oil
(Philippines) Inc., a milestone in Philippine business was attained. An allFilipino board of directors was elected.
With the complete Filipinization of Getty Oil management come to
focus the men who, from now on, shall shoulder the responsibility of
steering Getty Oil’s operations in the country. Led by the very able
O. Soriano, newly elected president and chairman of the board, Getty
Oil looks forward to more progressive years of serving the energy
requirements of Philippine Industry.
To our valued readers, we present The Men At The Helm.


(nesimo Soriano, President and Chairman of the Board. He joined Tidewater Oil Company, predecessor of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc., in 1958
as chief accountant. Two years later he rose to the position of finance manager and after which he became vice president for finance. In September
1970 he was named president of the firm and a year later, assumed the
additional duties and title of chief operating officer. He brings to the presidency and chairmanship of the board a wealth of experience acquired
from over 35 years of active association in the oil industry.
Samuel O. Abellera, Senior Vice President. He joined Getty Oil in 1955
as an order clerk. Within the span of 17 years, he has assumed various
positions which today makes him one of the most well-rounded executives in the firm. From an order clerk, he became a general line salesman
service station development supervisor and later legal services supervisor.


12


In 1962, he was promoted to sales manager for branch operations. In
1964, he became general sales manager and concurrently advertising and
public relations manager. Prior to his appointment as senior vice president, Abellera was vice president for marketing.
Clemente E. Tuason, Vice president for Finance and Treasurer.
He literally rose from the ranks in the company and through sheer determination and hard work, rose to his present position as treasurer and vice
president for finance. His career in the organization started in 1947 when
he was employed as messenger at the Getty Oil branch in lloilo. He was
then a working student taking up commerce at the University of San
Agustin. From messenger, he was promoted to clerk. Upon graduation
with the degree of Bachelor of Science in Commerce, magna cum laude,
he became chief cierk/cashier of the branch. Later he transferred to the
Manila office and became a section head in the Accounting department.
In 1963, he became chief accountant, a position he assumed until he became vice president for finance in September 1970.
Guillermo C. Herrera, Vice President for Operations. He joined the
Company in 1963 as plant superintendent at the Pandacan Terminal
Plant. He later assumed the additional title and responsibilities of branch
advisor, In recognition of his exemplary performance as both plant superintendent and branch advisor, he was then appointed operations superintendent, a position which he held until he was promoted to vice president for operations in October 1971.
Alfredo F. Jeanjaquet, Vice President for Marketing. At 37, he is the
youngest member of Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. Board of Directors, He
came into the Company in 1959 as a lubrication engineer in the Wholesales and Technical Services department. In 1963, he was promoted to
supervisor of the department. In 1966, he became a member of the
Operating Committee. Young and aggressive, he steadily rose to more
responsible positions such as general sales manager in 1970 and now vice
presidenit for marketing.
Mirardo C. Mendoza, Corporate Secretary and Manager for Legal
Services, He came into the company’s folds in September 1956 as salesman handling government accounts. He was doing well in his job when in
1958, the need for a personnel supervisor arose. In recognition of his exceptional qualities, Mendoza was readily chosen to head the department.
To supplement his knowhow, he enrolled at the University of the Philippines for a master’s degree in industrial management majoring both in
personnel management and marketing. As the company expanded its
operations and new departments were created, he was among those considered to occupy responsible positions. In 1962, he was appointed supervisor for legal services. Soon his position was reclassified to the present
title, manager for legal services. In 1969 he became a member of the
Executive Committee. G


The puzzling question about oil in Granny’s kitchen is not really a question mark.
From the match stick, to junior’s birthday
candle, to the napkin paper, oil is found with
valuable use.
The kitchen, Granny’s treasure house of
recipes and food magic, employs in a variety
of forms crude oil — the same oil being used
in heavy industries. The oil content, however, represents in volume less than one
percent of the crude oil we know.
Oil is one natural compound material
without which we can not gain the delight
in living with Granny’s great cooking. Take
the match stick.
Petroleum wax, a petrochemical, is used
industrially in the making of match sticks.
Notice that in the wooden match stick the
petroleum wax impregnates the wood just
below the head. It is visible after the match is
struck as a clear sticky liquid flowing away
from the head as the stick burns. Here the
oil, in a very negligible volume, helps ignite


the stick by supplying the hydrocarbon fuel
necessary in combustion. Thus Granny is able
to light on the cooking range and ready to
have her grandson’s favorite recipe done.
Another is the tiny little candle that is
planted in the cake that she prepares for her
favorite grandson. In the kitchen, it is used
merely to decorate Granny’s special birthday
cake for little junior.
After a meal, big or small in size, we
usually take one of those little colored paper
hankies. Napkin paper.
The paper industry is one of the largest
users of oil. Petroleum wax, a by-product
of oil, is used here extensively. The cherical
purity, low cost, freedom from odor and
taste, and other inert qualities of the material
are some of the significant reasons for its
widespread use in all types of foodhandling.
Thus truly the business of oil in Granny’s
kitchen is something we find to be of great
value in today's modern living. G


WHATS
THE BUSINESS OF OIL
IN GRANNY'S
KITCHEN


14


istory has manifested the never-ending
efforts of men to better the conditions of the
world. Many have taken the path of exploi
tation to advance their vested interests. Yet,
many still have realized that prudent and
selfless investment in human resources inevitably leads to the maximization of personal
profit and satisfaction, and to a nation’s
progress. In this spirit the Junior Achievement
has been established all over the world.
The organization began in 1919 in the
United States. It then spread to the Nether
lands, England, Canada, France, Venezuela,
the Antilles, New Zealand, Aruba, Finland,
Mexico, Hongkong, and since 1969 in the
Philippines. The program was designed to
give practical business and economic education
to young men and women. Consequently, it
further seeks to instill a sense of responsibility on the youth — responsibility to themselves, to the organization, to its members,
advisers, counselling and supporting firms,
stockholders, and ultimately to the community.
Getty Oil (Philippines) Inc. has again
joined hands this year with 20 other
large business concerns to maintain this difficult venture. In its charge were two JA


mini-corporations, AlM-Hi and SUMAS. As a
member of the latter I can certainly assert
that my participation was a rewarding experience.
August, 1971 saw the formation and
incorporation of SUMAS. A peculiar name
indeed to give a company, yet it best designates the 24 diverse talents and potentialities
that came together from St. Scholastica’s
College, the University of the Philippines,
University of Sto. Tomas, Maryknoll College,
Ateneo de Manila University, San Sebastian
College, and the Philippine Women’s University. As usual, there were the initial tensions
of entering into a new experience with people
who were almost total strangers to one another. But the task ahead gradually dissolved
these barriers.
Product proposals were presented and evauated according to the following criteria:
usefulness, participation of each member in
their production, availability of machinery,
facilities, raw materials, and market ease in
storage and packaging, minimum cost, attractiveness of design and price, and potentiality
for profit. Industrial rugs merited serious
consideration primarily because of their ready
market, However difficulties in the acquisition of scrap pieces of T-shirts, which served


15


IISSING
AG
S
GEIP.



discount the human element in any enterprise. A business peopled by individuals concerned only for themselves cannot advance in
the true sense of the word. It regresses, fosters
ntrigues and dissatisfaction, crams the avenues opened to it for profit maximization
and social contribution. But in an organization
driven by responsible men and women, who
look on their work as an expression of themselves, subordinate selfish interests for the
general good, encourage a spirit of cooperation
and camaraderie, there indeed lies the
smoother path.
If we reflect further on the subject, we
might call to mind an accepted fact about
20th century work. It has become so specialized, so mechanical, that people tend to
ook upon it as isolated meaningless functions.
The JA experiment suggests certain roads for
circumventing the problem. As philosopher,
Paul Ricoeur, has put it, "one path corresponds to the role of distraction. Light
chatter informal talks, music, instructive
lectures occupy the mind with something else
and refresh a man for the labors before him.
Job-interchange gives a person a general perception or apprehension of the sequence of
operations which take place in an enterprise,
offers him professional knowledge and training, allows him to see his work in relation
to the whole.
Education in our free enterprise system
and its contribution to the betterment of
society shows a man how he himself is
indirectly benefitting others. This endows his
task with a social meaning. Another way
matches with compensation. Sports, camping,
hobbies restore and renew the lost contact
with nature, life and the raw elements which
the exhausting tempo of modern living tends
to hide. The third trail tallies with creation.
Through literature and the arts is pursued
the invention and the discovery of a sense of
man that innovates the already catalogued
and recognized knowledge of him. Yes, these
roads are quite easy to see from a distance.
But how to arrive at them is the big question.
Prudent and selfless investment in human
resources inevitably leads to the maximization
of personal profit and satisfaction, and to a
nation’s progress—a mere idealism? Perhaps
not.


PEDRO D TANDGGAI
Ateneo de Manila University
3 BS Business Management


ECONOMIC EDUCATION SERIES


A cigarette vendor — call him Temyong
buys a pack of cigarettes from Aling Tinay’s
sari-sari store for one peso. He peddles the
cigarettes to jeepney drivers, using the Filipino tingi system, four sticks for twenty-five
centavos. For the sale of one pack. He
makes an earning of 25 centavos. Ganancia,
he calls this earning.
Profit, or the word ganancia to Temyong,
is the monetary expression of the excess of
revenue over cost during a specific period of
time. In our free enterprise system, profit is
the greatest value earned in the employment
of capital in a business endeavor. Understanding the meaning of the word, however, takes
more than merely defining it. It has to be
made relevant to day-to-day practicalities for
it to be clearly, and meaningfully understood.
Let us express profit, therefore, as money.
Money can be utilized -in a number of ways;
however, in its uses most people get it wrong.
They say that "money is the root of all evil"
But that’s not how the Bible says it. It says


THE
GREATEST
STORY
NEVER TOLD:
ROT

that "love for money is the root of all evil".
and here lies the clear distinction. Thus it all
gets back to the fact that it is not how much
money is made, but how it is used. It is the
question of whether the money is used to
make the world a better, and more comfortable place to live in that counts. Thus, when
it is used to make man’s efforts more productive, there is absolutely no doubt that it is
good.
In a few words, therefore, profit is the
reward for providing something people are
willing to pay for. And this is something
wholesome, ethical and good.
In the light of the corporate organization
like Getty Oil, profit is an important brace
that holds the company together. It is what
makes it stand firm in the turbulent times of
business. Thus, there is the necessity for the
organization to continue to make profit to
stay in business.
Now, the question is: What does profit
do for the Getty Oil employees?
Profit maintains the jobs for those already
employed and open job opportunities for
those unemployed. With it, the company
grows and expands into new areas of business.
This is apportioned into stockholders dividends, investment toward future growth and
expansion of business, increased salaries and
more employee benefits.
One does not have to know the disciplines
of economics and business to see that profit
is necessary for the welfare of the company,
its people and the community in which it
operates. Evidently, it is tied to the efforts
put forth by the employees in their jobs.
Success in generating profits enables the company to expand in its endeavors, develop new
products or services, and significantly contribute to the community.
As one Getty Oil employee puts it in syllogistic simplicity: “If the company can’t make
a profit, it can not continue in business. And
if it can not operate,! would not have my
job. And if I don't have my job, community
has a problem." G


18


SAFETY IIPS


here is a great deal written and spoken
about safety. However much of the information on this subject fails to specifically
spell out exactly what part YOU must play
in controlling accidents.
You see, YOU really are the key. YOU are
the best accident preventer. In order to
successfully play the role of an accident
preventer, it is essential that you understand
and be guided by the following statements:
YOU must possess the knowledge required
to perform every aspect of your job.
YOU must possess and be physically able
to execute all the skills required to fulfill
your job requirements.
YOU must check out the procedure that
governs how the job shall be done, and
if you determine the procedure is correct,
adhere strictly to that procedure. If you
think the procedure is incorrect, discuss this
problem with your supervisor.
YOU must include the following factors
while performing your work requirements:
Attention to detail; Proper allocation of
time—not too fast—not too slow; Never
include shortcuts, guess work, chance
taking, etc., Seek help when necessary; and
Check surroundings for any conditions
that may interfere with your efforts in
completing the job.
YOU must work defensively. Be prepared
to cope with the unexpected—even to the
point of mentally anticipating a sudden
failure and the devising of a plan to cope
with that failure.
YOU must keep your head when the unexpected does happen. Clear thinking
coupled with the necessary knowledge and
skills will enable you to successfully cope
with almost every situation. G


THE BES
AUUIE
FREVETER
nO POO


(From: Delaware Refinery, U. S. A.)


FIYING VE LENS


Mr. &. Mrs. T. J. Li, Getty Oil
distributor in Taiwan, were in
town recently and took time out
to visit Getty Oil offices in


Manila. Photo shows the couple
looking over a test tube at the
quality control laboratory in
Pandacan Terminal.


BRANCHES, SALESMEN
BAG CASH PRIZES
Four branches and five salesmen of Getty Oil (Philippines)
Inc, were recently awarded cash
prizes for winning the March
Sales Contest.
Given P700 cash prize each
are the Batangas, Iloilo, Davao
and Legaspi branches. Fifty peso
cash prize was given each of the
following salesmen: S. R. Delgado
of Legaspi Territory 15, C. L.
Altea of Legaspi Territory 16,
R. D. Furbeyre of Bacolod Special Account, A. L. Tolentino of
Batangas Territory 14, and R. T.
Uytiepo of Cebu Territories 25
and 26


ACHIEVEMENT AWARD FOR S. O ABELLERA


"Frankly, it’s not all business” 4s
what S. R. Tan seems to be telling
his beautiful partner during the despedida socials of the recent Philippine
Institute of Certified Public Accountants held at Magellan Hotel in Cebu
City. Tan was among those from Getty
Oil who participated in the PICPA
conference. (Editor’s Note: Last
issue’s photo of Getty delegates at
the PICPA convention in Cebu did
not show S. R. Tan with the group.
Now,you know why.)


Senior Vice President S. O. Abellera
received the only Achievement Award
for 1971 given by the Philippine CouncilofIndustrial Communicators. TheAA
is the top award given to an individual
member of the council. Shown in
photo is the awardee (holding plaque)


together with (from left) Antonio O.
Vasquez, outgoing Council president;
Aurelio Dacanay, incoming Council
president; Nora Saba, Awards Commit
tee overall chairman; and Bonifacio
Amor, Achievement Award Committee chairman.


20


FIYING


LENS





MUANA


GREGORIO


Seventeen new faces have
joined Getty Oil, making the
manpower strength of the company seventeen people stronger.
The new hirings are:


MOLINA


CAPISTRANO FERNANDEZ GUERZON


PETILOS


Reynaldo E. Acu. Acu has no
previous employment. He joins
the company at the Pandacan
Terminal as pump assembler D.
Juanito A. Amatong. He is
another pump in the company
with a high school degree from
Manuel A. Roxas High School
He has no record of previous
employments.
Ely C. Ardiente. He is an
alumnus of Manila Law College.
Until recently, he was with Food
Masters, Inc. as regional manager.
He is salesman C (trainee) at
Getty Oil.
Rolando C. Caillan. He joins
the company at the Pandacan
Terminal as general utility man.
He is a graduate of the Lakandula
High School.
Eduardo M. Capistrano. He
joins the company as laborer. He
is a commerce student at the
Philippine School of Business
Administration.
Antonio C. Cejalvo. A graduate of Mapua Institute of Tech
nology and a registered mechanical engineer he joins the
company as maintenance inspector.
Manuel S. Fernandez.
He
joins the company as laborer at


SINGH


DE GUZMAN CEJALVO


ACES


PATULIN


TORRALBA


ACU


ARDIENTE


AMATONG


CAILLAN


the Pandacan Terminal. He was
formerly connected with Philippine Refining Company.
Arcadio S. Guerzon. A degree
holder in BBA major in Accounting from the University of
the East joins the company as
clerk. Previously, he was connected with Basic Foods Cor
poration as Accounting clerk
Romeo B. de Guzman. He
holds a degree in BSC major in
marketing from San Sebastian
College, Until recently he was
connected with Silahis Marketing
Corporation. At present he is
training as salesman C in the
company.


at the Accounting Department.
Felipe C. Hipolito. He joins
the company as R & M clerk.
He is presently working for his
Bachelor’s degree in Commerce
at the University of the East.
Jose Molina. He finished BSCE
from the University of Pangasinan, and is a registered civil
engineer. He was formerly connected with Ablaza Construction 8 Finance Corporation and
Amalgamated Services, Inc. as
project engineer and cost project
engineer respectively. He joins
the company as construction inspector.


Corman M. Gregorio. He finished BBA major in Accounting, Management and Economics from Silliman University
He joins the company as clerk C


Ruperto H. Muana. A graduate from the University of
the East (BSC major in Accounting), he joins the company as
clerk C at the Accounting De

FLYING


LENS


WELCOME (continued)
partment. He was formerly connected with Engineering 8 Machinery Corporation as bookkeeper/accountant.
Santiago T. Patulin. He is a
graduate from St. Paul’s College Dumaguete City. He joins
the company as DDD salesman
C (trainee) for Mindanao area.
Marcelino M. Petilos. He joins
the company as laborer at the
Pandacan Terminal. He was formerly connected with La Perla
Biscuit Factory as mechanic.
Rodolfo A. Singh. He joins
the company as laborer at the
Pandacan Terminal.
Alfredo T. Torralba. He joins
the company as secretary A.
Prior to his joining the company
he was employed with the Ateneo
de Manila University as secretary.


A seminar on lubricants wasrecently
conducted by the Wholesales and Sales
Technical Services Departmentat Mariveles, Bataan. Photo shows J. M.
Marasigan Wholesales Sales and Tech

nical Services supervisor explaining
his point before a group of participants. Lecturers in the seminar were
C. P. Nolasco, B. Mabini, and V. P.
Viray.


POLOMOLOK
SERVICE STATION
VIES FOR
AWARD IN
CONTEST
Getty Oil Service Station BL
9468 of Polomolok, South Cotabato is vying for the top award
in the regional level of the 1972
National Beautification and
Cleanliness Contest for Public
Service Stations. The nationwide
contest is chaired by the First
Lady, Mrs. Imelda R. Marcos.
Service Station BL 9468 is
being operated by Mayor Barney
L. French of Polomolok, South
Cotabato.


22





FIYING
   N N 


LENS


NEVY OALES LAECOTVES NAMED


Getty Oil recently announced
the appointment of W. T. Kho as
general sales manager, R. P.
Merza, sales manager-branches,
and R. B. Serafica, sales managerdealer and distributor development.


Kho was Legaspi branch manager prior to his promotion, while
Merza and Serafica were sales
manager-DDD and Poro branch
manager, respectively.
Above photo shows the trio
flanked by President and Chair

man of the Board O. Soriano
and Senior Vice President S. O.
Abellera during a simple celebration marking their recent promotion.


Getty Oil Phippines; Inc.
Batangas Branch


BRANCH
VIOII
A. R. Mendoza (center), personne!
assistant, recently visited Getty Oil’s
branch office in Batangas. Shown with
Mendoza in photo taken during his
visit (from left) are: F. Culla, branch
mechanic; A. L. Tolentino, salesman;
M. R. Corleto, Batangas branch manager; R. B. de Guzman salesman; H.
M. Guico, cashier; and E. C. de los
Reyes, clerk.


23


FIYING VAS LENS


SERVICE AWARDS
A. L. Tolentino (left, top photo)
and F. B. Culla (left, above photo),
salesman and mechanic of the Batangas
branch respectively, receive their serv

ice emblems from A. R. Mendoza of
the Personne! department. The two
completed their fifth year service in
the company this year. The simple
awarding ceremony was attended by
Batangas Branch Manager M. R. Corleto.


Ponciano H. Jinon (second from
left) of Bacolod branch receives
his five-year service emblem from N. C.
Livelo, credit manager. Others in
photo are Melencio J. Jamili and
Rodolfo D. Furbeyre of the Bacolod
Branch Office.


SERVICE
STATION
INAUGURATED
Getty Oil Service Station B. L.
No. 9676 of Pasig, Rizal was recently
inaugurated at a simple ribbon-cutting
ceremony attended by President and
Chairman of the Board O. Soriano
and Senior Vice President S. O.
Abellera. Shown in photo is Service
Station Operator Artemio del Rosario
filling up the car of Mr. Soriano.


24


EE


Design 8 Layout: Narciso Rodriguez, Jr.
Publications Consultants: Corporate Communications Services
Philippine Council of Industrial
Communicators


Daoso


International Association of Business
Communications


ACHIEVERS


THE HELM
MEN AT
CHIEVEMENT is not an aim, but a consequence of efforts made. For our
Filipino executives at Getty Oil, the most recent achievement is the filipinization of the company's management, Indeed, it is a task which is well
marked in the history of Philippine business.
In this issue, we feature in the Achievers department the six men at the helm
of the corporate organization.


CONTINUED ON PAGE 12