AEL


a


ACGUST 28, 1948


9


OMRO


IN THE PHILIPPINES, community leadership is
Y a big potential in sales promotion. A community
woman leader is always the focus of all eyes wherever
she goes and whatever she does, What she wears and
cven what she eats and particularly what she buys
seldom escane notice. She stimulates the buying moods
of the other women in her community. Maybe she does
not know it but she is the living advertisement for
every thing she acquires.
-THERE ARE OVER 160,000 clubwomen in the
la Philippines today. Each is an accepted leader in
Per community. They compose a choice portion of
the Philippine market because theirs are the best
Filipino homes with substantial family income. You
sell to them and you sell to the rest of the women
in their communities.
A THE WOMAN'S HOME JOURNAL is the official
Yorgan of the National Federation of Women’s
Clubs of the Philippines. It has been in existence for
the past twenty four years and it is the only national
woman’s magazine in the Philippines today.


a
KAI


August 28, 1948
Vol. AVI, No.


THIS ISSUE


27 MEN AROUND QUIRINO


by Sol H. Gwekoh 4


During the editorships of Barney E. Sa¬
recky (1929), Agustin C. Fabian (1930-1941).
and Angel C. Anden (1941), the  
successively dropped its bilingual character,
retaining only English for the texts, re-
duced its pictorial display, gave prominence
to feature articles and fiction, and increased
its size. By 1941 the   contained
almost a hundred pages the issue.
As early as 1929 the   had shifted
its day of issue to Wednesday, but with this
issue, Vol. XVI, No. 1, it now returns to its
original day of issue, Saturday. The editor
is Mrs. Soledad Hojilla Leynes.
*


MR. FLORES' PROBLEM (A Short Story), . . . . . . . . . . . .. by Purificacion A. Dagdag 6
FOR CHARITY AND A CHANCE
8


MAN IN DESPAIR (A Short Story)..











.. . . . . by P. C. Carag


10


WOMAN SONGS (A Poem),........





E





.... by Virginia Peralta


11


FILIPINO DIVA MAKES DEBUT


12


MAKE-BELIEVE COMING-OUT PARTY


14


GOVT FIRM BUILDS HOUSES FOR


RENT TO


LOW-INCOME GROUP..........


16


HOUSES COME IN FIVE TYPES ..











 *.. ..........


19


LOW.COST HOUSING PLAN DATES


BACK


TO


QUEZON


21


MANILA SEEKS TO CLEAR SLUMS


Y











22


CASH GAINED US. LOST LIVES


23


GABBING WITH THE STARS,.....











.... by A. B. L. Rosales


24


WHY I DIVORCED MY HUSBAND.











. . . . . . . by Mila del Sol


25


GRAPHTOONS


  * .... * ..*..


26


HARRINGAY QUEST


by Willie Hernandez


28


NEW RECORDS SET ...............














29


HOMEWARD BOUND,


by Lydia V. Arguilla


30


and other features
This Week’s Cover:
TWO NATIVE DAMSELS
Painting by V. MANANSALA
Lay outs by PROCOPIO BORROMEO,
Chief Artist, Saturday Graphic


over.
Facsimile of the


A FTER almost seven years of inactivity, an
old friend of the readers hits the streets
today, bringing with it nostalgic memories of
the long years before the war when every Wed¬
nesday the bright, cheerful cover of the GRA¬
PHIC appeared in every town and city of the
Philippines.
The   is revived amidst the storm
and stress of an editorial strike which has af-
fected a booming younger-sister publication, the


ment dispute which accompany the renewed
birthpangs of the   simulate the terror
of the dark and doomful day in December, 1941
when the shadow of the Japanese invader put
the   into a seven-year eclipse.
But a mission cannot be denied. If the Eve¬
ning News cannot yet discharge its duties of
presenting a picture of the Philippines today
fairly, squarely, and without fear and favor, the
 , an old and proven standby of mil¬
lions before the war, is ready to fill the breach.
The   comes out from retirement in
a new getup which is aimed to satisfy the
pressing need for up-to-the-minute news, news
that is treated more fully and with more ma¬
ture editorial deliberation than one could ex¬
pect had it been rushed to the printer as in a
daily.
The   contains news as fresh as any
that the reader can find in a daily coming out
on the same day and at the same time presents
the cream of the news of the week in a form
attractive to read. All this is given to the reader
without sacrificing space for timely feature ar¬
ticles, pictorial essays, and fiction of the sort
that had distinguished this magazine before the
war.
It is unfortunate, however, that, because of
the protracted strike, only a skeleton staff is
available to put out the  . That, how¬
ever, is only a temporary setback.
Brief History of the “ .” The
  was founded on July 2, 1927 with
Vicente Albano Pacis as editor. The first
issue, whose cover is reproduced on this
page, was a 32-page picture magazine in
English and Tagalog, with a minimum of


Our Contributors: Mrs. Lydia Villanueva Ar¬
guilla, widow of one of the country’s foremost
short-story writers, Manuel Arguilla, is “Home¬
ward Bound" (page 30). In a letter postmarked
from Honolulu, she wrote that she started the
article in San Francisco and finished it in Ho¬
nolulu.
She adds: "I’m stopping in Honolulu till the
next boat, the Gordon which sails for Manila
on Sept. 1, which means I should be home by
the middle of September. I thought it was a
good chance to see somewhat of Honolulu for
the same ticket price as a through trip. I have
given your regards to Ligaya whose house guest
I am."
“The Symphony people arrived—some of them,
and getting very nice publicity in this town,
thanks largely to Ric Labez, Anching Garma’s
husband... America was mostly good to me.
It will be good, though, to lay my head again
on the home pillow."
*


"Im taller than a
Texan tale,” writes P.
C. Carag, author of
the short story, "Man
In Despair," on page
10. Mr. Carag is all of
six feet and one inch.
A freshman in a col¬
lege of law, he says
that there isn’t any¬
thing much to say
about himself except
that he hails from
Tuguegarao, Cagayan,
and has been writing
for more than two
years now: poetry in
the lamented Manila
Post and prose in the
Evening News and the
Midweek Times.


P. C. CARAG


Miss Purificacion A.
Dagdag, who writes
the nostalgic story,
“Mr. Flores’ Problem"
on page 6, was one of
Papa’s three little
gris. The story s Gas T8
about Papa, of course,

and probably that’s

why it sounds so warm
and sincere. Purifica¬
cion herself didn’t
grow up very much—
she’s now 24 but stop-
21
L.
ped growing long ago,
attaining the great
height of 4 ft., 9 inch-
es."
Miss Carag’s Papa did a lot of travelling as
school supervisor. His eldest daughter hasn’t
been a slow-foot either—in schools. She studied
in the Davao high school, then the UP, then
Assumption college, then the UST, then FEU.
She’s now working in the Manila regional office
of the US veterans’ administration as a steno¬
grapher.
On page 16 to 22, we present a pictorial des¬
cription of a new low-cost housing project of
the government. This brings back to mind the
Kamuning project of the defunct People’s Hous¬
ing commission which the old   treated
fully in 1938.
Tomorrow afternoon at about 4:30 o’clock five
ponies will break away from the post at the
San Lazaro race track for another classic race
of the sweepstakes. If you’re one of those who’ve
bought tickets and have yet to see a red cen¬
tavo of vaur manay hano m


P. A. DAGDAG


E 
OSS
SRTO


By SOL H. GWEKOH


His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino


“FHE post of President of the Philippines car¬
ries with it multifarious preoccupations.
Fortunately, for President Elpidio Quirino, there
are 27 men who give their time and efforts to
make life easier and more comfortable for him.
Without this extraordinarily big group of as¬
sociates, Quirino would be helpless in the per¬
formance of his duties and daily chores. These


men put their whole hearts in their work, many
of them rendering 24 hours of daily service
without asking for additional compensation, al¬
lowance, or extra privileges. A few have been
with President Quirino for the last 15 years.
Oldest in the group, in point of service to
the President, are his personal stenographer,
small, dark Teofilo Rivera, and his bulky body¬


guard, Paulino de la Cruz. Rivera started ta¬
king down dictation from Quirino in 1932 when
the latter was still a senator in the bicameral
Philippine Legislature. Rivera has been with
his boss at every step on the ladder to Malaca¬
ñan. Rivera was with the President’s party
when, as foreign affairs secretary, the latter
went on a goodwill trip around the world.


Efficient, faithful assistants and aides make
the President's crowded life less strenuous-- They
know the Chief Executive more than anybody else.


Cruz, who hails from Apalit, Pampanga,
joined Quirino in 1935. The President was sec-
retary of the interior at the time and Cruz
was a sergeant in the Manila police depart-
ment. Quirino was then being threatened by
certain Tondo thugs with bodily harm, follow¬
ing his order suspending the municipal mayor
of Batac, Ilocos Norte, in connection with the
murder of Ilocos Norte’s Representative-elect—
Julio Nalundasan. So he availed himself of the
services of a bodyguard, and 230-pound Cruz
was it.
Closest to Quirino from day to day are his
bodyguard, physicians, and military aides. The
President has five physicians, headed by Dr.
Agerico B. M. Sison, of the UP. Four of them,
all regular resident physicians in the Philip-
pine General Hospital, take turns of 24 hours,
watching the President’s health. Dr. Sison is
called for immediately for a checking up and
conference, when anything serious happens.
Dr. Sison’s assistants are Drs. Jose Silva, Fer-
nando Martirez, Paulo Campos, and Francisco
Tangco.
A colonel and three majors compose the mi¬
litary aides of Quirino. Their principal duty
is to accompany, the President as he goes about
in Malacañan, when he attends state or social
functions outside, and when he goes on provin-
cial trips and world tours. Chief aide is Col.
Alberto M. Ramos, PC chief of staff and Qui¬
rino’s classmate in the Manila high school.
Then there are Major Joaquin B. Hidalgo,
Major Alfredo S. Filart, and Major Carlos Qui¬
rino. Hidalgo was also presidential aide to the
late President Roxas. He is an engineer, and
graduate of the Field Artillery School, of Okla¬
homa, and the Command and General Staff
School in Kansas. Major Filart has been Qui¬
rino's aide since 1946 when he was yet the Vice
President and concurrently secretary of foreign
affairs. Besides being a military man, Carlos
Quirino is a writer of note, being the author of
The Great Malayan", a biography of Rizal.
The President has an efficient and faithful
valet in Jose Quirino (no relation) of Zam¬
boanga. Young Jose entered the Quirino ser¬
vice in 1946. He sleeps with the President in
the presidential room in the palace, attends to
the chief executive’s personal necessities. Like
President’s aides, he accompanies him wherever
he goes and stays awake until the President goes
to sleep.
Within the palace are several ass’stants and
household personnel directly assigned to attend
to the President. There is, for instance, the
cook who knows just what dishes Quirino likes
from day to day. For the President’s breakfast
he prepares pouched eggs, toasted bread, and


fried fish. Fruits in season, especially atis and
mango, are also served. Orange juice is pre¬
pared by his valet for his regular drink. For
lunch and supper, the President is served fish
sinigang and other native courses. The cook
sees to it that any dish intended for Quirino is
not salted—as per doctor’s orders.
When Quirino decides to entertain a distin¬
guished foreign visitor and high ranking gov-
ernment officials or military officers, Mrs. Mary
Yotoko Pardo, beautiful social secretary, takes
charge of the preparations. In the Malacañan
household affairs, Mrs. Sofía R. de Veyra has
to be consulted from time to time. Questions
of protocol are left to good-natured Manuel
Zamora who dictates who should be invited
and how the President should be seated at ta¬
ble or who must form the reception line with
Quirino.
For President’s trips to the suburbs or prov-
inces, five motorcycle escorts, from the Manila
police department, lead the motorcade all the
way through. These mounted police by whose
shrilling sirens the people know the President
is coming, are Marcos Paderon, Alberto Kessel,
Pedro Sioco, Victor Hangar, and James Beltran.
Driving the presidential Packard is Teodulfo
Felisidario who regulates the speed of his car
in accordance with the wishes of Quirino. Fe¬
lisidario was driver of the car of the Quezon
family before the war.
In the efficient and smooth performance of
his official duties, Quirino has three secretaries,
four stenographers, two special attendants, and
a press secretary. In charge of the executive
office, which is entrusted with the work coming
to the President from officials and government
agencies, are Executive Secretary Emilio Abello
and two assistant secretaries —Nicanor Roxas
and Jose P. de Leon. De Leon has the added
duty of giving out recommendations to jobseek¬
ers in government offices and corporations, and
of arranging the daily appointments of Quirino.
The four stenographers undergo an eight-
hour daily schedule of duty with the President
so that somebody is on hand when he decides
to dictate a letter or a speech. These steno¬
graphers, whose positions are highly confiden¬
tial, are Teofillo Rivera, Juanito C. Gella, Agui¬
naldo Maaba, and Ramon Encarnacion. Their
work starts at six in the morning and ends
when the President retires for the night, usually
about midnight.
Vicente Albano Pacis, journalist and educa¬
tor, is the Malacañan press secretary and head
of the public relations office which gives the
local and foreign press information on the daily
official activities of the President; activities of
interest to the country and people.


Ivgu


Mrs. Mary Yotoko Pardo, Malacañan social
secretary


Major Joaquin B. Hidalgo, Military aide





Teofilo Riverz
Stenograr


the well-trodden trail. From a treetop,
a kalaw called to its mate hoarsely. Up the
slope came Mr. Flores, academic supervisor,
humming the scout song, "It’s a Long Way to
Tipperary.” Mr. Flores was compactly built and
all of five feet. A kind of quiet dignity sat on
him well.
Following Mr. Flores at a snail’s pace was a
bullcart. The man who was guiding it conti¬
nuously urged the carabao to make better speed.
Glancing back at the cart, Mr. Flores fingered his
posterior gingerly and thought that it was bet¬
ter to walk than to have your old bones rattled
in the creaking contraption. It was faster, too.
The government had much to do yet in Minda¬
nao in way of roads and immigrants, Mr. Flores
surmised.
The knotty problem in Mr. Flores’ mind made
him walk fast, out-distancing the bullcart. It
was his habit, when thinking hard, to do what-
ever he was doing faster. Now, he was going at
a good clip as he thought of Mr. Wilson his old
boss, who had resigned his position of division
superintendent to join an office of the United
States government in Manila. Now, Mr. Wilson
wrote him that he had a job for him in the big
city.
The offer was tempting. It meant better pay,
better living conditions, his mental capacity
worked to the limit, his merit recognized. Two
of his three daughters were in Manila studying,
one of them working her way through college.
The youngest would be in high school by the
next term.
It was a chance to think about it very serious¬
ly
“Mr. Flores!” The bullcart driver hailed after
him. “There’s the principal teacher’s house
we’re to stay for the night!
"Oh, yes!” said Mr. Flores. “It is about time
we rested. I’m tired.
In the sparsely settled hinterlands of the pio¬
neer’s country, welcome for unexpected guests is
instant and warm. Mr. Flores had the addition¬
al advantage of being the superior of his unex¬
pecting host. They had roast chicken for sup-
per. Warm beds were prepared for them on
the floor. Everybody settled off to sleep.
But not Mr. Flores
In the front yard of the house, the fire used
to roast the chicken still burned. Mr. Flores plac¬
ed a log in front of the fire and sat on it. In
the velvety darkness he stared into the dying
embers. The eternal forest sounded beyond.
Was it really 27 years since he came to Min¬
danao? Was it so long ago? Something deep,
beyond expression, stirred in Mr. Flores. His
hands gripped his knees tightly.


1917
Davao, at last! Muñoz Agricultural School was
a long way off. He had set out to be a farmer,
but now here he was, a teacher at 17.
The Davao River was at its lowest at that time
of the year. He waded across it that night.
He met his first class in geography for the
fifth grade, the mext morning. He wore tight
trousers and a coat, both a faultless white, and
he thought his attire should put awe in his pupils
if his lack of height did not. Inwardly, he was
dismayed to find that most of his pupils were a
head taller than he. They were older, too. They
looked bold, and they did not seek to hide their
whispering. Now what did “torotoy" mean?
The first 30 minutes were a success. At least
his pupils appeared to understand what he was
saying. They tried hard to look attentive.


tried ome.
“Eduardo, name the seas that surround Bor¬
neo," he asked.
“I do not know,” was the prompt but disres¬
pectful answer.
The gangling youth who answered did not
even look up or stand. The new teacher was
deeply perturbed.
Here’s for discipline, he thought, bracing him-
self.
“We are here to learn geography, but to learn
good manners would be more to your benefit,"
he said, launching into a lecture on the ameni¬
ties.
He turned around to erase the blackboard
when he heard a resounding "pak!" and some¬
thing stung him behind an ear. A finger dis¬
covered a swelling and tender spot. He had been


shot.
Controlling his voice, injured dignity, anger,
and rising panic all at the same time, he asked,
"Who did that?”
The boys in the back row grinned broadly.
Girls and boys in the front turned around to look
at them.
Silence. Impenetrable silence.
With a burning face, he looked at his class
squarely and again asked, as quietly as his emo¬
tions permitted, "Who did that?”
No one moved.
After an eternity of 60 seconds, a sullen and
very defiant voice replied, "I sir.
It was Eduardo.
“Meet me after the class,” the young teacher
said, and proceeded with the lesson without a
hitch.


The Moro espied him and rushed
at him with fiery, bloodshot eyes,
swinging his glistening "kris" which,
Mr. Flores saw, was already stained
with blood at the end.


Ilustrated by V. MANANSALA


ministered with flailing arms, man-to-man style.
The teacher was more than a match for his big¬
ger opponent. He did not care about, what
Eduardo’s parents would say even when told that
they occupied positions of influence in the
community
The next day, the class was quiet and very
respectful.
Never again in 27 years of teaching did Mr.
Flores have an insolent pupil.
1923
In his quiet office, the principal teacher, Mr.
Flores, sat writing, when there came sudden
eruption of sound in the school—screams and
yells of panic, the clatter of falling desks anc
chairs, the thunder of running feet, and the
slamming of doors and windows. Girls were
crying. And then he saw pupils and teachers
flying out of the school through the back exits.
Others, it seemed, had barred themselves in the
rooms.
“Juramentado!" shouted the home economics
teacher running as fast as her fat legs could car¬
ry her to the principal. A trembling finger point-
ed, through the front door, Mr. Flores saw the
berserker Moro. Brows and hair had been shaved
off, it could be seen even at a distance. He was
in white. He brandished a gleaming kris.
"He’s in white and out after Christians!" the
woman teacher sobbed.
Mr. Flores saw that it was Sadani, a young


only a few days ago when Mr. Flores last saw
him in school.
“I never did him wrong but, in his present
mood, he will kill anybody,” observed Mr. Flores.
“Go into the office and stay there,” he ordered
the woman teacher, and closed the door after her.
He was now alone, to face the charging ma¬
niac. The juramentado emitted unearthly cries
as he approached, his stridence sounding very
harsh and brutal in the silence of the school
house
For the life of him, Mr. Flores could not move.
He stood rooted to the spot.
The Moro espied him and rushed at him with
fiery, bloodshot eyes, swinging his glistening kris
which, Mr. Flores saw, was already stained with
blood at the end.
When a few paces from him, the tall, stal¬
wart Moro suddenly stopped, amazement on his
face at sight of the five-foot teacher standing his
ground.
He approached warily to within arm’s reach.
“Sadani, what are you doing out of school?”
asked the teacher. Was it he who had spoken?
The voice was so unlike his.
The Moro growled and made a threatening
gesture. He was frightening to behold. But
somehow, the habit of respect for this one man
who was “Teacher" to him, was too deeply in¬
grained. It triumphed.
He lowered his raised arm and looked sheepish.


made him shiver involuntarily.
"Sir. " he started to say but could not go on.
His anger flamed out in a vein of his forehead
and cooled suddenly. Then slowly, very slowly,
he went away.
1937
“Mr. Flores,” said Mr. Wilson, the division su¬
perintendent, “how does it feel to be principal
teacher of the biggest school in the province
with 40 teachers and 2,000 children to manage?
A heavy responsibility, eh?”
Mr. Flores smiled but did not answer. He
had been a principal teacher for 20 years.
“But that is not what I wanted to say.” The
division superintendent looked around and saw
the adjoining conference room deserted after
the teachers’ morning meeting. Then he lean¬
ed forward confidentially across his glass-topped
table, holding intently in his gaze the face of the
man before him. “You are one of the most in¬
telligent Filipinos I’ve ever worked with,” he
said. “Your record, your activities, everything
show it. But I think,” he lowered his voice,
you’re wasting your time in the bureau of edu¬
cation. Rather disloyal of me, what? You’re
up for promotion, but I do not know if you will
get it."
“I know,” Mr. Flores gestured deprecatingly.
“But I’m happy where I’m. This is my life
work.
Together they stepped out of the office.


LEFT: A doctor and a nurse visit patient at
home. Sweepstakes money makes this possible.


races have been held from 1933 to June this
year, twenty-six before the war and twelve since
liberation.
The total gross sales of tickets since 1933
amounts to P62,773,208.38.
From 1946 to 1948, tomorrow’s draw included,
the sum of P27,691,437.50 has been collected in
gross sales.
The authorized distribution of revenue by Act
of Congress 4130 as amended are as follows: 58.5
per cent for prizes; 25 per cent for charity fund;
10 per cent for operating expenses; and 6.5 per
cent for aid to provinces and chartered cities
except Manila.
Based on the above percentage basis for dis¬
tribution of revenue, the Sweepstakes Office,
since the start, has awarded (37,682,134.64 to
prize winners, horse owners, jockeys and agents;
has collected P15,644,518.19 for charity fund;
₱6,406,119.25 for operating expenses and P3.-
040,436.30 for the provincial and chartered cities
fund.
Out of the money raised the government has


ROlOAMRTAG GSNOE


You may end up with a grimace if Dame
Fortune does not smile at you in tomorrow's
sweepstakes, but you have done a good deed


EVERYTIME sweepstakes day comes around,
 hearts flutter with anticipation. Will Dame
Fortune, in her swift flight, turn areund and,
as the saying goes, smile at you?
It has been 15 years since the first sweeps¬
takes draw and race was first held in this coun¬
try. You have waited that long. Wil Dame
Fortune...
After so many sweepstakes races and draws
during those fifteen years, the word sweepstakes
has become synonymous to hope of sudden
wealth. Little or no thought is given to the
fact that, win or lose, the possessor of a sweep¬
stakes ticket has given to charity and bought
a chance.
Numerous good things have been accomplish-
ed in recent years through the sweepstakes.
Lives have been saved, permanent improve¬
ments have been made in the form of hospitals,
welfare and other charitable institutions. Cities
and provinces have been benefited, clinics for
the poor in remote regions and medical person¬
nel for them having been made possible with
swveepstakes funds.
The Philippine Charity Sweepstakes office


was created by Act of Congress 4130, which was
amended later by Commonwealth Acts 301 and
456, and more recently by Republic Act 72. The
original enacting measure was passed in 1934.
Since then the sweepstakes office has become
one of the principal government revenue-pro¬
ducing entities, without which some important
government projects could not have been real¬
ized and many charitable activities in the Re¬
public today would not have been resumed and
given impetus soon enough.
The well-known landmark in local sports
world, the Jose Rizal Memorial stadium, was
built with funds raised through the sweepstakes.
The first and second sweepstakes races held in
1933 and 1934 were held under the management
of the Philippine Amateur Athletic Federation.
All proceeds accrued to the PAAF exclusively.
When the sweepstakes office was created by
law, charitable institutions, hospitals, and kin¬
dred institutions became direct beneficiaries. So,
from the time it began, it was not all winning
a prize that there is to sweepstakes. There’s
saving a life in addition.
A total of thirty-eight sweepstakes draws and


been able to carry out numerous projects. The
construction of the Rizal Memorial Stadium,
Quezon Institute, the houses for low salaried
government employees at Quezon city, the Th
pavilions in Cebu and Capiz, the Chest Clinic
Center at the San Lazaro hospital compound,
to mention only a few, were constructed out of
sweepstakes money. The North General Hos¬
pital, the Maternity and Children’s hospital, le¬
prosaria and several clinics in many parts of
the Islands and many more welfare and cha¬
ritable institutions are today partly subsidized
with sweepstakes money. The activities of the
Philippine Tuberculosis Society are financed
with sweepstakes money. With the financial
aid it receives from the Sweepstakes Office it
was able to rehabilitate Cebu and Capiz TB
pavilions which were destroyed by war.
A partial list of disbursements made by the
sweepstakes office to welfare and charitable or-
ganizations since 1933 appears below:
Philippine Tuberculosis Society. P4,373,836.54


600,000.00
Quezon City Institute .
Philippine Amateur Athletic Fed-
888,654.66
eration


JOSI


THE SWEEPSTAKES race last June at Santa Ana which was won by a diminutive white mare named "Perla.” Elias is atop. At far left is Byblis.


CEBU TB pavilion built before the war with swecpstakes money.


the procurement of athletic equipment for the
public schools all over the Philippines. It also
contributed a share in the expenses of the
Philippine Athletic Delegation to the London
Olympics. Last year, P50,000.00 of sweepstakes
money helped finance the trip of the Philip-
pine Boy Scouts who participated in the worid
jamboree in Paris, France.
These are only a few of the many things made
possible with sweepstakes money.
Meanwhile, everything is set for the 39th
draw at the San Lazaro hippodrome tomorrow.
Five horses out of the original 11 are scheduled
to run.
Elias, the king of the jockeys will ride Whirl¬
away, probable favorite while Fernandez will
boot Citation, also a strong contender for the
big purse.
The selected horses participating in tomor¬
row’s draw are as follows:


Horse
1. Monarca
2. Fiesta
3. whirlaway
4. Artista
5. Citation


Jockey
Sordan
Mendoza
Elias
Saulog
Fernandez


Owner
C.L. de Cruz
A. de Lopez
E. Panopio
S. Dimaano
A. Flameno


According to information gathered early this
week, Raindrop the sixth horse selected for par¬
ticipation in the sweepstakes race, is not run-
ning.


Associated Charities
1,241,678.77
National Federation of Women’s
Club.
67,275.00
Hospitals .
459,564.60
Associacion de Damas Filipinas. 191,493.80
Bureau of Public Welfare
110,000.00
American Guardian Association.
5,500.00
Mount Arayat Hospital .
39,966.00
Community Health and Nursing
Association...
22,000.00
City of Manila (Puericulture
Center)
28,000.00
Quezon City (Puericulture Cen¬
ter)
33,500.00
Bureau of Health .
93,550.00
Girl Scouts of the Philippines
15,000.00
People’s Homesite and Housing
Corporation .
2,000,000.00
Others .
5,649,577.95


Only recently the sweepstakes office appro¬
priated the sum of P150,000.00 for the depart-
ment of health for the remodelling of a build-
ing in the old Bilibid compound into a mater¬
nity and children’s hospital. Another P100,-
000.00 was set aside for the maintenance of the
Tala Leprosarium. For the construction of the
Chest Clinic Center at the San Lazaro hospital
compound, the sweepstakes office appropriated
₱30.000.00.
But the sweepstakes office does not only help
hospitals, welfare and charitable organizations.


THE HORSES that
will run in the
sweepstakes race to¬
morrow at the San
Lazaro hippodrome;
clockwise from top
left:


left: Citation,
Whirlaway, Monar-
ca, Fiesta. At cen¬
ter is Artista.


I do not wish to advocate armed
aggression, but the worm of a
question squirming in the back of
my mind is: Is it unjust to an¬
ticipate an invasion which you see
irrevocably advancing towards
your shores; must you wait to be
attacked when the expected stab
from any quarter could be of such
a nature as to eliminate the likeli¬
hood of retaliation? After all,
"we” will be doing the fighting
again. It is a question too big
for me to answer — and which is
not given me to answer.
But you have formed your own
vicious answer, you have, I
thought.
And all around me, I see only the
ceaseless war of man against
fellowman, and the individual
against himself. There is the war
of greed and lust against reason,
there is the new upsurge of the
beast in man whose spirit is still
too weak and dazed after the last
siz years of complict.
There is want everywhere, and
the shadow of distrust. Distrust
of the government, distrust of our
leaders, distrust of ourselves. Part
of the country is bathed in a pool
of bad blood. The government
(Continued on page 27)


Illustrated by
EUFEMIO FELIX


* HAD expected no answer from him. In fact, I did not know if
I my letter reached him. I had written him after Mona had written
me several times about him, stating that he was shunning society
and was fast earning a reputation as an “eccentric" or a "shell¬
shocked neurotic
Almost a year passed since my letter. And here was his answer.
I opened the letter, not without excitement, and pounced hungri¬
ly upon the precise, orderly lines of script. He wrote:
I had never been given to much introspection and melancholy..
But I have changed.
First, there was the war. The war touched the lives of all of
us. It will be decades before anyone may pass his wondering hands
over his soul and feel no convolutions of a scar.
Then there was the delusion of a well-earned peace. We who
fought the battles crawled home for the rest and quiet we had
dreamed about in the lines.
But there was no peace — and there is no peace. Rehabilita¬
tion upset us; we quarreled over collaboration; the political sniping
raised again the question of the substance of Democracy; in the
wake of all the chaos, the menace of Communism came marching
in.
I rushed through the succeeding paragraphs with a nudging
feeling
Politicians are warning America to be wary of moves that might
embroil her in another war, forgetting that they had done nothing
to prevent Pearl Harbor, and that it might not be Pearl Harbor this
time. They also seem to forget that the march of events in Europe
again simulate the goose-steps of Hitler’s hordes. History is repe¬
titious, they say—so is human stupidity.
My opinion is that World War III has started.


This is the quiet shaded
Mountain pool that
I have always known.
Why have I wooed the
Sudden brilliant swish of
Comets’ tails?
Why have I reached my hand
For Sunshine?
Why have I sought to know
The fierce passionate melody of
Savage silver rain?
This is the quiet shaded
Mountain pool that


2
Let my lips brush in memory
The whisper of
Your name.
3
I was made to yearn for the
Very echo of an
Unremembering name
Only to turn and find
A stranger call me—softly-
With a gift of quiet love.
This is the paradox of me:
I call you,
And you turn to me
A


So many things I shall never understand.
Why yeu should make me
Learn to need you with the
Deepest depth of me
When I am clay to the
Fine angel-spirit of you.
Why you make to seek me
When I know your heart
Must be leading you elsewhere.
These—
And many other things—
I shall not understand.
6
Tonight, I shall quietly slumber
Through a deep and dreamless sleep
Secure in the assurance
Of your love.
7
The current between us
Flows like the tide.
Sometimes it rises on a
Crescendo of warmth and the
Very soul of me quivers to
The music of you.
Sometimes it ebbs on a
Diminuendo of diffidence and
The solitude of me broods in
Your silence.
8
You say, you show me
Just how much
I mean to you
And yet my heart,
Learning to yearn for you,
Asks me:
Can I believe in you?
Will you not someday look down on me
For believing in the idle bantering
mockery of vou?
If I could only know even a measure of the
Depth of your sincerity with me,
My heart shall ask no questions,
And no words need
Pass between us.
9
You have hurt me
Beyond all caring.
You have pained me
Beyond all feeling
You have numbed me
Beyond yourself.
10
Come pain:
Cold, swift, clean
Knife of pain, and
Cut these bonds that
Hold me to a
Haunting, restless dream.
Come pain.
11
Tonight, I shall
Firm shut the door on
Haunting thoughts of you
In silent pain,
Yet well I know that
Once the curtain of sleep falls,
These thoughts shall flit
Unleashed through my dreams.
12
You burst into my life
With the resplendence
Of a shooting star.
Now that you’re gone
It seems the sky is darker
'or
s kn
e br



atainadl he dena ni manter ot mant bon uis acelny


She


HILIPINO DIVA MAKIS SUCCISSEUL MANLA DEBUT


ala la iana a
sful Manila debut at the Philippine Women’s


AS, ESMERALDA,In, The Bartered Brides another stnde


A PPEARING before a large crowd of Manila
Amusic lovers who braved the rains to hear
her sing in her first iecital since her return from
abroad, Dalisay Aldaba, soprano, did not dis¬
appoint her audience when she sang 18 songs
in various languages with finesse.
Every number, including two by Tagalog com¬
posers, was warmly received by her listeners.
Highlight of the evening, however, was the poig-
nant aria, Un bel di vedremo, from the famous
Puccini opera, Madame Butterfly, in which Miss
Aldaba made a successful debut as an opera
singer while in New York last November.
Miss Aldaba left the Philippines shortly after
liberation when she won a scholarship at the
University of Michigan music school. She ob¬
tained her master of music degree from that
umiversity in February 1946. While a student,
she appeared in two operettas presented by stu¬
dents in the music school as part of their train¬


ing—The Marriage of Figdro in which she sang
the leading role of Susanna, and The Bartered
Bride.
After gradyation, Dalisay went to New York,
bent on an operatic career. It was her good
fortune to meet, while in that city, Dr. Frank
Co Tui, professor in the college of medicine of
New York university who is well-known for his
researches on ulcers. Dr. Tui is a graduate of
the U.P college of medicine and is married to
a Filipina. It was through him that Dalisay
was able to make contacts with well-known fig-
ures of the New York opera world. Dr. Tui
is more br less responsible for the appearance
of Miss Aldaba in Madame Butterfly presented
by the New York Center theater. The petite
prima donna is forever grateful to "Daddy
Frank," as the Filipinos in New York call him.
for paving the way for the fulfillment of her
highest ambition.


Miss Aldaba also acknowledges her indebted¬
ness to these two persons, famous in the opera
world: Madame Estelle Liebling, former opera
star who was her voice coach, and Frantz Pro¬
schouski, dramatic coach. The latter, who has
trained most opera singers for their rolés, is
an old man of about 80 years, but seeing him
enact the different opera characters one would
never realize his age.
After her debut in Madamae Butterily in No¬
vember 1947, Miss Aldaba was in great demand
as singer in radio programs and rotary meet¬
ings. Shortly before her departure for home
she appeared as soloist in a Long Island sym¬
phony concert.
Dalisay plans to go back to the State-for fur¬
ther study and for more experience on the oper¬
atic stage. Her initial success has mot gone to
her head; she still feels that she has a lot more
to learn.


ABOVE: With the director of the New Vork Center
Opera and Suzuki.


RIGHT: This photograph, taken by Murillo, formerly
of Manila, now in New York, shows Miss Aldaba in
costume tor her role of Cho-Cho-San in ‘Madame
Butterfly.' She made her New York debut in this
per:


On the opposite page, the make-believe debutante,
young and pretty Angeles de Leon, wears a deceptively
simple “terno" created by Marina Antonio. The wide, wide
circular skirt is knife-pleated, and the “camisa” sleeves are
adorned with appliqued fans.


At left: Another terno, also by Marina Antonio, worn
by the debutante. This time the pleated skirt is in two
straight tiers, with the long-torso bodice and sleeves em¬
broidered all over. Remove the sleeves, and you have an
European evening gown with a square neckline.
The make-believe mother, Mrs. Adelaida Reyes, of Lu¬
cena, Quezon, is dignified in a black, pencil-slim “terno,"
relieved only by two large clusters of leaves and flowers.
one on top of the left sleeve, the other on the right hip.
Julieta Palermo, supposed to be one of the guests.
wears a Mademoiselle creation of tiered tulle and sequins.
This is another “terno" convertible into an European gown
with the removal of sleeves and “panuelo.


ato


THE MOST SPACIOUS low-cost houses belong to the Dupiex 40-T ty pe. Photo shows the back'view and gives one an idea of the grounas avaii¬
able for yards.


GOVERNMENT FIRM BUILDS HOUSES
FOR RENT TO LOWINCOME GROUP


"HE problem of housing and high rent-
als for Manila, city of a homeless mil¬
lion, will be partly solved before the end
of the year by the first of three low-cost


housing projects being undertaken by the
government-owned People’s Homesite and
Housing corporation.
The sites for these three projects are


in the Diliman estate of the corporation in
Quezon City. About to be completed is
Low-Cost Housing Project No. 1 on Que¬
zon boulevard extension, five kilometers


PALK


 JUAN


MANDALUYONG
DE


INDE


AE


MAP SHOWS how the low-cost housing projects (1, 2, 3) are located from Plaza Goiti. Mayor Manuel de la Fuente’s slum-clearing projects
(see page 20) are also indicated: 'A’ in I
n Batangas extension, ‘C’ on Quiricada extension, and ‘D’ on Juan Luna. Tondo.


THESE are views of Type 40-S simplex houses. The houses on the left are being painted whil
those on the right side are still under construction.


out of Plaza Goiti to the northeast.
Project No. 1 lies atop green, rolling
hills to one’s right as one drives along
Quezon boulevard beyond the España ro¬
tonda. It overlooks the winding San Juan
river. Construction of roads, bridges and
the houses were started last June. Ninety
houses comprise Project No. 1, enough to
accomodate 140 families. The first 60 of
these houses were finished in seven weeks,
complete with modern sanitary conve¬
niences, and painted.
A system of streets, with sites for
schools, hospitals, shopping centers, and
recreation parks are provided for in the
project. The community to spring up
here will be well-knit and compact. Light-
ing will be supplied by Meralco, water by
the Metropolitan Water District, and a
modern sewage system is being construct¬
ed. Drainage is no problem.
These houses will be rented out to low¬
salaried workers in and outside of the gov-
ernment. The rental rates range from P20
to P40 a month.
Because more applicants are expected
than the houses available, leases will be
raffled off. Priorities for the raffle are
given to (1) those who pay rent but have
a small income, (2) those who live in
"barong-barongs," and (3) those facing
eviction.
Altogether, under the three projects,
504 houses are proposed to be built to ac¬
comodate 737 families. Much of the future
activity of the firm depends upon the suc-
cess of Project No. 1, since the corpora-
tion pays its way along.


MOVING SPIRIT behind the government program to place good, sturdy houses within the reach
of the low-income group is Vicente Fragante, mana ger of the People’s Homesite and Housing corpora¬
tion.


elevations shown.


Two more projects similar to this are planned.


ATONED RASPERIAL CASE ARD REL LOY COAF
MOMSIMG PIOMECT A TE PEOPLE'S BOMESTTE S-
MOMSIAG CONPORATIOW.
RESTRICTIONS :
MO LOTS SIALL RA LSTAH KM FRCNLAE
TEL THIN WIT
2. MIMMUM SEE OF LOT FU TME UANTS 200 BA MI3
4 MIMMUM FRONT YARD :AOORDE RET MOL POM JISS
ABEA LELTA
ACANLRM EIBE YALD: E S0 MA
 ALL BOHSES TO BE CEMSTRICTED IH ACC-
ORAREE TO MIVIRR HANDALUI ADOTTUD
AY THE PBORES MOMGEITR  MOSSEIG CORR


 1





2

Vst
tH


ASTIOT
ISANIE IPILAN


SHOu COST HOUSING





RG
E


R MA A


Amadet



MEL
1




ILEEGENID
E 401


TWIN


AREA SENS
 77


P


40-S


SINGLG


AOAM62


S


——- B5-7


TWIN


40saM/an 47


N


'35-S'


SINGLE


34 S0ME 80


EZ


— So-T


TWIN


Masgu- 52


H


-  3o-8


SINGLE


27 SaM maase


H


—251'


TWIN


27 SQM/nar 37


H


—— 25-5


SINGLE


21 SaM. SC7I


yE.


— 207


TWIN


OSoMzo Mo


- SONG
PROEGI ACCOMODATION


SOA DT.
e . V 163
TOR 737 PAMMIES


6lt6l4s
BMA
RER. Q8tZOU CATY


THESE ARE front views of Type 40-S duplex houses. All houses are provided with modern sani¬
tary conveniences and lighting.


IOUSES
ESMN
O MES
FHE houses in Project No. 1 of the Philippine
Homesite and Housing corporation come in
five types, with two-family and one-family sizes,
—to satisfy a wide range of worker income and
family size.
The floor plans and elevations are shown on
page 18.
Type 40-T, a two-family house, has two bed-
rooms, a living room, a dining room, a kitchen
and bath for each family, and rents for P40
a menth for each family apartment.
Type 40-S. for a single family, rents also
for 240, but has only one bedroom, and its
floor area is 40 square imeters, seven square
meters less than the Type 40-T apartment.
Type 35-T apartments have also 40 square
meters of floor area each but rent for only
P35. Type 35-S measures 34 square meters and
rents for P35 also.
Type 30-T (34 square meters) and Type 30-S
(27 square meters) rent for P30.
Type 30-S. Types 25-T and 25-8 (P25 rent-
al), and Type 20-T (20 rental) are all single¬
room houses and should prove attractive to
newly-married couples or bachelors.
The houses are constructed of cement hollow
blocks, manufactured by the People’s Homesite
and have asbestos cement roofs supplied by a
local firm. The floors are of concrete. As built,
they can stand plenty of wear and tear, and
should need only a repainting to freshen them
up after several years of use.
The houses are provided with individual yards.
They have no fences.


These houses are constructed from a fund of
P2,000,000 released from the sweepstakes pbol,
and along with Quezon Institute (visible to one’s
right as one goes to Low-Cost Housing Project
No. 1) Rizal Memorial Stadium, and other en¬
during edifices, demonstrates how the “take" of
the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes office and
its predecessors has been put to account for the
benefit of the people who buy sweepstake tickets.
The corporation intends to build these and
other types of houses in their other two pro¬
jects. House plans for these other types have
already been prepared by the firm. Some of the
houses will be two-story buildings and others


will be chalets. They are all designed along the
modern trend.
To those who are constructing or planning
to build their own houses, the corporation is
now ready to serve with concrete hollow blocks.
They are according to the company, manufac-
tured in mass genuine VIBRAPAC units making
the product extremely compact. Each block has
built-in insulation. The prices are very low,
due to extensive facilities and efficiency of ope¬
ration, and cost lower in the long run than the
plain adobe stones which are preferred by many
home builders.


FIRST undertaking of the housing group after the war was the compound of 55 buildings for personnel of the War Damage commission and the
Joint US-PI military advisory group. These houses will be sold after 1951.


rows of houses and the paved streets which were the pride of Quezon City before the war. Squatters built shacks in the area.


BOPCOBOUSIO N
DATES BACK TO OUEZON


"FHE People’s Homesite and Housing corpora¬
tion is the child of several government hous¬
ing enterprises.
Its precursor was the People’s Housing com¬
mission which was founded on October 14, 1938
when Manuel L. Quezon was president of the
Commonwealth. On October 20, 1938, the com-
mission bought the Diliman estate, with an area
of 1,572 hectares, from the heirs of D. Tuazon,
Inc.
The commission subdivided the estate, built
streets, assigned sites for the Quezon City hall
and for the national capitol which, at that time,
was proposed to be built in Diliman. ((The new
capitol site is much farther to the northeast,
but the capital city site embraces all of Quezon
City, including Diliman, and part of Novaliches,
Rizal.)
The People’s Housing commission’s first proj¬
ect was the model community of Kamuning,
which covers one-fourth of the estate. Before
the outbreak of the war 500 houses were built
in this area and were sold on the installment
plan. A total of 1,600 house lots were also sold
in easy payments.
This was several months before the outbreak
of the war. Two million pesos in installment
payments came in during the occupatiom. It
was in worthless occupation currency.
Before the war. Kamuning was a showplace
of Quezon City, an example of a kindly govern¬
ment aiding low-income workers in the acquisi¬
tion of their own homes. The streets were wide
and well-paved, and the swards were smooth
and green. The houses were trim and neatly-
painted, and were provided with modern sanitary
facilities.


Kamuning today presents a stark contrast.
The streets, destroyed by sun and rain after
neglect during the occupation, are full of ruts.
Many of the buildings are in disrepair. The
paint has fallen in scales. Unauthorized cons¬
tructions destroy the view. The P2,000,000 of
installment payments made in Japanese cur¬
rency during the occupation had apparently
been worthless for use in the repair and upkeep
of Kamuning.
Kamuning shows more traces of faded beauty.
Gradually, the People’s Homesite and Housing
corporation, working against odds, is restoring
Kamuning to the full flower of its prewar beauty.
After liberation, on June 16, 1945, the Na¬
tional Housing commission was created under
Commonwealth Act No. 148. This new commis¬
sion was organized on September 17, 1945, with
the following om the governing council: Dr.
Bienvenido Gonzales, Faustino Aguilar, Tomas
Mapua, Salvador Araneta and C. M. Hoskins.
The latter two resigned from the group.
The merger of the prewar People’s Housing
commission and the postwar National Housing
commission on October 4, 1947, under Executive
Order No. 93, gave birth to the People’s Home-
site and Housing corporation. The following
were named to the executive office: Vicente
Fragante, manager; Faustino Reyes, assistant
manager; Jacobo de Vera, acting secretary, and
Federico S. Ilustre, supervising architect.
First venture of the new corporation was the
compound for officials of the US-Philippine War
Damage commission, consisting of 55 two-story
houses. (See map on page 16 and photo on
nage 20) Thirty-two of the houses are rented


out to the War Damage commission for f
P200 to P300 a month. The rest of the bi
ings are leased to officials of the Joint US-I
ippine military advisory group. These houses
have been leased until 1951 when the War Dam-
age commission expects to complete its work.
To build the compound, the corporation used
funds inherited from the People’s Housing com¬
mission. The housing commission had been al¬
loted P5,000,000, of which P2,000.00 was re-
leased. After its Diliman project, the firm had
still enough money to pay P1.294.616.94 for the
building of 55 houses in the compound, and
₱112,845.43 for the construction of roads, drain¬
age, and fencing.
After the compound was finished, the corpor¬
ation started with its low-cost housing plan.
For this purpose, it was given P2,000,000 by
President Roxas from the sweepstakes fund.
The corporation is a national enterprise, and
may build low-cost houses in any part of the
country where the need for them is felt most.
This assuredly would be in crowded urban areas.
The chain of projects will be financed from
profits of the company.
The company operates g-nollow block factory
acquired from the Unitéd States for P70.000.
It can make 6,000 blocks a day with a mini¬
mum personnel of seven. Everything is done
by push-button apparatus. These blocks are
sold to the public.
The company also sells lots on the installment
plan alóng the Kamias road in Quezon City (see
map). Lots have been subdivided, provided with
roads and drainage, and sell for P3 a square
meter.


THIS IS Quiricada extension where Mayor Manuel de la Fuente proposes to build the model community project called 'Barrio Quirino'.
RNALABELLSOSEEABLOMS


WITH the acquisition of the Nuestra Señora
de Gula hacienda and of Japanese-owned
lands in La Loma and Tondo, Mayor Manuel
de la Fuente has devised plans for his slum¬
clearing project called "Operation Hope."
The construction of two main streets in this
area, the Batangas extension and the Molave
street, will soon start. They are expected to


cost P100,000. The money will come from the
₱1.000.000 aid given by the national govern¬
ment. The newly-acquired lands will be leveled
and subdivided and sold to tenants and new
applicants.
The plans for houses allowed to be built in
the area are being prepared. Tenants, not the
government, will build the houses. Enough space


will be provided between buildings to avoid over¬
crowding. Magazine and newspaper stands will
be placed on street corners so that newsboys
will not crowd the streets and sidewalks while
peddling their papers.
Two model barrios will be built. The first
barrio will be on Batangas extension, covering
three hectares subdivided into 341 lots. Pres¬
ident Quirino has authorized the release of
₱100.000 for the project which will be named
after President Roxas. It was President Roxas
who first conceived the conversion of the area
into a model community.
The next model barrio will be set up on Qui¬
ricada extension. The site consists of four blocks,
The place is so low it looks like the basin of
a lake. These blocks will be gradually filled
with garbage and then, covered with earth. The
place, which was visited by President Quirino
in a recent inspection tour of the city, will be
named "Barrio Quirino."
Side by side with Mayor Fuente’s slum-clear¬
ing endeavor, is his program to clear downtown
Manila of sidewalk vendors and all city proper¬
ty of squatters. The mayor, likewise, has order¬
ed the cancellation of licenses to business estab-
lishments along major residential and scenic
highways like the Dewey boulevard and Taft
avenue.
The beautification of Manila’s parks and
pladyarounds is also part and parcel of the pro¬
gram. After a recent visit to the bureau of
forestry in Los Baños, Mayor Fuente declared
that more than 2,000 seedlings of around 30
varieties of shade trees were being shipped to
Manila for planting in places like the Luneta
where weekenders like to cool off.
The clearing of market vendors was started
last June after the municipal board had un¬
successfully tried to block the vendors transfer
from the streets and sidewalks of Quiapo. The
central market to which these vendors were
transferred has proved a huge success, and there
is a plan to expand it. The ousters of vendors
in Sampaloc and Meisic are next in linc


THIS SLUM area on Batangas extension will be cleared for ‘Barrio Roxas'. The area embraces
Iour blocks.


reanze a halr-million-peso prolit irom the
90,000 tons of live ammumition transferred to
it by the US army from bases in Bauan, Ba¬
tangas, and Rosario, La Union. From this
source, the government has received thousands
of pesos. On the other hand, there were three
disastrous explosions; the last one, occurring
in the Batangas base on August 10, claimed five
lives, injured 23, and destroyed or damaged
some 100 houses.
Some 120,000 tons of ammunition were de¬
clared surplus when the US army and its air
corps vacated these bases. Thirty thousand
tons had been dumped into the sea when the
late President Roxas requested the US army
to halt the destruction of the ammunition and
transfer the remaining 90,000 tons to the Phil-
ippine government.
The purpose: demilitarize the ammunition, sell
the metal parts for scrap, use the TNT for
quarrying and the black powder for fertilizer,
The government expected to make a neat prof¬
it in the deal.
An agreement was entered into between the
Philippine and the US governments, through
the US foreign Liquidation commission, where¬
by the ammunition was soid to the Philippine
government at a price equivalent to 70 per cent
of the highest bid that private individuals of¬
fered, thereby giving the Philippines 30 per cent
of the purchase price.
In addition, the government was to receive
taxes, license fees and royalties upon exporta¬
tion of the scrap metals. All in all, the gov-
ernment expedted to make a profit of P500,000.
The contract for demilitarizing the ammuni¬
tion was awarded to the Johnlo Trading com-
pany, an American firm represented at the bid-
ding on February 24, 1946 by former US Am¬
bassador Paul V. MeNutt. The accepted bid was
P670,000.
The first explosion occurred in April, 1947,
and set fire to 53 houses in the vicinity while
the second was in April, 1948. No serious cas¬
ualties were recorded. These explosions were
in Batangas.
At the time of the third explosion on e gust
10, about 1,000 bombs had already been neu¬
tralized. Only six bomb piles remained to be
demilitarized.
Malacañan probers disclosed that some 20,-
600 more bomhs remain in several bomb bays
in Batangas province. They are in such a de¬
teriorated condition, according to the report
that they constitute a menace. Batangas ele¬
ments have been clamoring for their removal
but Philippine Army officers aver that this
would be no guarantee of safety, since, in the
process of removal, explosions may occur.


Laberers digging victims. Note size of crate.


tesaakti
STTETA


at all
GROCERS


Diatucukad Gy:
ADUIIILSLO..INC.
IS39AZCARRAGA - MANILA


ABOVE: Yoyong Fernandez demonstrating some guaracha
steps before Celia Flor, who prefers to look at the camera, and
Susana C. de Guzman, who seems bored.


BELOW: Oscar Moreno and Olive la Torre in Baguio dur¬
ing a location shooting.


TOP, left: Manuel “Sano” Silos and Monang Carvajal in a “romantic clinch.” Top,
right: Rosa Rosal at a recent party at the Tony Arnaldo-Susana C. de Guzman home.


GADBING WILTIIL BIARS
by
A. B. L. ROSALES


After watching Fernando "Big Boy” Poe in a
kissing scene, we asked him how he felt about
it. “Tastes like lipsticks,” he replied.
You have to play up to Maria Corazon’s mam¬
ma if you want to date Maria Corazon up. Mam¬
ma passes over her dates and she chaperons her.
The stork is expected at the Baguio home of
Rogelio de la Rosa and Lota Delgado in Septem¬
ber, nine months after Hollywood. They already
have three little RDR’s all boys: Ramon, Ru¬
dolph, and Reynaldo. They hope and pray it’s
a girl this time.
For some time, the “cold war" between Lilia Di¬
zon and Resal Rosal was "scorchingly hot.” Re¬
cently, through the mediatiomn of some newspa¬
permen, they kissed and made up. And they
actually went into a clinch — only, the newspa¬
permen-mediators failed to get in between them
for their reward.


Suspected reason for the feud: professional jea¬
lousy. They are among the most luscious of the
post-liberation crop of celluloid favorites.
Ask Ramon A. Estella for his address and his
eyes light up as he proudly announces: Hol¬
lywood!
Before you could recover, however, he smiles
and follows up with: “Hollywood Drive. San
Juan; Rizal."
T. D. Agcaoili says: “Monching acquired a
house on Hollywood Drive just so he could have
a distinguished-sounding address.
Incidentally. Monching is now sporting "r
moustache. It’s a long story, he says. The his¬
sute attachment is not so long, though.
Just so you would know what to do when you
become host to movie stars, here are some dinner
table facts about them:
Manuel Conde is allergic to squids, fresh or
canned.


(Continued on page 27)


ABOVE: At a special counting of the Cin derella contest,  sponsored by the 'Kislap’ and
"Aliwan’ magazines, sister publications of the 'Saturday Graphic.' Left to right: Carman¬
cita Palma, Manuel Silos, Celia Flor, Rogelio de la Rosa, Luningning, Lilia Dizon, Armando
Goyena, and Rosa Rosal. Gil de Leon, another guest, is not in the picture.


MILA DEL SOL very quietly slipped out of
Nthe country one night last January. Soon
after, movie fans heard rumors that she had
been killed!
Of course, the report was finfounded. Mila
had merely taken a sudden trip to America.
Nothing much was heard of her until a few
weeks later, when she wrote friends, including
newspapermen, denying another report that
linked her withr a nasty scandal.
In America, Mila travelled around the coun¬
try, planned a trip to Europe next year. She
featured in a motor accident in Los Angeles.
California, where she spent much of her time.
At the time that the story of her accident
was carried in Manila newspapers, her father.
Mr. Amádo G. Rivera, released the story of her
divorce from Mr. Francisco Tambunting, a
prominent Manila businessman. Mila secured
the divorce last March but divulged it only to
immediate members of her family.
In a letter to your movie gabber, Mila gave
the reasons for the divorce. Excerpts from that
letter follow:
"Why did I divorce my husband?
‘I would rather not say amything about my
husband, because no matter what happened dur¬
ing the five years of our unhappy marriage, he
is still the father of my children, and I won't
want him to be the target of criticism.
‘It is better that I should shoulder all the
blame—after all, I have been the target of gos¬
sips, so one more gossip won’t hurt.
“If my fans condemned me for being a di¬
vorcee, I would not know what to say.
"I only wish they realized my love for them
—I love them so much, in fact, that I devoted
the best years of my life to my career in order
to please them—thus making me a failure as a
wife!
"What my husband and I fought most about
was my career. He wanted me to quit the mo¬
vies which, of course, I-could not do. I am
an actress, acting is in my blood, I want to
act before the cameras, I love my fans.
cannot throw up everything—and my career
which I have so painstakingly struggled to build.
and my career is everything to me!
(Continued on page 27)


MILA DEL SOL in her latest U.S. photo, above; and, below, in a scene from her last picture befors
she left for abroad.


VIFPEE YM RICH. I STROCK OI!"


HEY WHATS THE IDEA..! YOU
FORGOT TO LOCK MY CELL...


I BOUGAT IT FROM A GI!"


Gabbing With The Stars
(Continued from page 24)
Jose Cris Soto could gobble up ten whole fried
chicken at one sitting! He consumes, besides,
two chupas of rice (cooked) and downs all of
it wtih a pitcher of water. Now you know what
that bay window is for.
Director Nardo Vercudia is one reason why
the Metropolitan Water District often announces
a water shortage. He needs a hose, practically
to slake his thirst—for plain H20. He drinks
about a hundred glasses of water a day. At each
mealtime, he has to have a pitcherfull of water
beside him.
If you are partial to sweet things—we mean,
sugared delicacies—drop in on Corazon Noble.
Cooking sweets is her specialty. She has mas-
tered over a hundred recipes, ranging from that
for ordinary sweetened bananas to that for com¬
plicated preserves.
At the age of five, Angel Esmeralda set his
heart on a toy automobile. For some reason
or another, his parents never gave him one. A
toy automobile became an obssession for him.
When he grew up into long pants, he still pined


for one, and couldn’t resist a ride on it.
When Angel got into the movies, one of the
first things he bought was an honest-to-good¬
ness car. Even so, there are times when you see
him getting out of his car to try a toy automo¬
bile!


Why I Divorced
My Husband
(Continued from page 25)
"My busband and I often exchanged heated
words over my career. One discussion led to
another—day in and day out, year after year.
The pattern repeated itself . . . making our lives
miserable . . . until the time came when the
breach widened beyond healing.
"I had to make a decision. I could not have
my career, and marriage too. I had to make
a choice. My husband or my careef?
“I chose m ycareer!
"My husband and I probably could have
patched up things—as we had repeatedly done
before. But what for? To fight again? Sooner
or later, the break was bound to come. So I let


it come now, while we are still young enough
to build new lives separately.
“Besides, we have our childern to consider.
Nothing is so bad for children as to be raised
in an atmosphere of discord. They are still little
now and our separation does ont bother them.
Why wait till they are old enough to be hurt?
"I did not announce my divorce right away
because, knowing that it would create wonder
and scandal again, and having had enough dra¬
ma to last me a lifetime, I decided to keep my
own counsel for a while.
"Now you know the truth!
“I know my frankness may repel my public.
But I cannot help it. I value my freedom of
speech. Freedom is my star. To say what I
want to say, to go where and when I please
to go!
“I know some people will never understand
me. How can they? They are much too happy
with their successful marriages they overlook
the fact that not everybody has their luck. Some
are unfortunate, and I happen to be one of the
unfortunates.
“Behind my laughter, carefree and naughty
performances before the camera, is a lonely, dis¬
consolate heart, for which not all the pancake
and the grease-paint in the world can make up!
“That’s my story . . . Do you blame me?”


Man In Despair
(Continued from page 10)


cannot stop all the killings..
These point up the perennial pro¬
blem of murder breeding murder
and hate breeding hate.
Incisive, I commented, but poi¬
soncus. Poisonous with a bitter¬
ness that is deadlier than mur¬
der, poisonous with the pessimism
that can ferment in the system
of a man to intoxicate his whole
being with the wine of evil.
The man had really changed
and the change was frightening.
Focusing his attention upon the
local scene, particularly upon
"our government polluted by pet¬
tly politicking and a systema¬
tized brand of the cross and dou¬
ble-cross," he said:


We have fought the war in vain
it would seem. There apparent-
ly is no more value to integrity
and the desire to serve. Language,
which man was given to impart
the truth by, has become a facile
tool for deception. Honestly is
the stupidest policy, the common¬
est stigma of social extinction, a
short-cut way to the poor-house.
Truth, because it hurts, provides
quick fuel for enmity.
Man is being judged alone by
the way in which he adapts him¬
self to the present society, which
holds the things of this world
above any other.
Our Democracy has deviated
from the road that the compo¬


sers of the Declaration of Rights
had laid out. It has been reduced
to a ceremonial travesty.
He ended the letter with a
half-formed thought to complete
a theme left hanging in the air.
He asked:
What is there for one to look
forward to, what good is there to
expect of life? - Man will never
profit by his mistakes, because the
call of the flesh is louder than
the spirit’s censure; and his search
for peace and hapiness might be
endless because it could be that
there are no such things.
I lay back against my chair
and shuddered. Hard did the
mind of man work? If on that
way, only two alternatives were
cpen to him—insanity or suicide.
It was staggering how a man
could be correct, entirely correct,
and still be utterly wrong. I was
so worried over his mental state
that I mulled over the letter
throughout the day. I wrote and
rewrote paragraphs of advice, on¬
ly to throw each offort into the
wastebasket.
In the evening, I was finally
able to write a letter without
betraying my letter my grave con¬
cern in my teller, I lied to him.
I told him that I too had changed,
that I had passed through the
same delirium of disappointment
which had left me with bitter¬
ness, too, a bitterness fired with
the flame of hope instead of one
soaked with the rain of Despair.
I mailed the letter with fingers
crossed. As I slipped it into the
slot, I felt that it was only so
many words, meaningless unless
its recipient were in a frame of
mind to believe them. To him, it
could even be ridiculous, as the
missive of a fervent lover read by
an unresponsive maiden could be
ridiculous.
I remembered Mona, my old
reliable, and I lost no time in
writing to her. I appraised her of
my trouble, enclosing our friend’s
letter. I begged her to see what
she could do for him until I could
steal some time from work to see
him for myself.
Although I received no answer
from him, I got one from Mona.
She accompanied me in my con¬
cern and promised to do her best
to retrieve our patient from des¬
pair.


Artist’s Work Attracts President


AT THE opening recently of the second art exhibition
sponsored by the Art Association of the Philippines, President
Quirino, who was the No. 1 guest, was attracted by a caricature
of himself among the exhibits. He therewith informed the asso¬
ciation that he would be very glad to have it. Last week, ac¬
companied by the officers of the association, Procopio Borro¬
st
meo.


them after that, and when, after
a month’s time, I finally sent him
a frantic letter informing him
that I was going to spend my "va¬
cation" with him, he answered
that he had been trying to write
to me for days but had been too
busy (Hallelujah! frem me—at
least the fellow had something to
do).
He joyfully informed me of his
“rebirth," about a month’s time
before, at the discovery of some¬
thing "more eternal than dark¬
ness, bigger than the earth, great¬
er than life."


"I’m glad to know that you're
coming over,” he said, "because
I have been confronted by the
need of a best man—Mona and
I are getting married."


For More Than 35
YEARS ARCHI-
TECTS, ENGI-
NEERS, and CON¬
TRACTORS HAVE
BEEN DEPENDING
ON...


for an
EXTRA FACTOR of
SAFETY and BET-
TER WORKABILI-
TY in CONCRETE!


GO SOC & SONS AND
SY GUI HUAT, INC.
822 Rizal Ave. * Tel. 2-61-69


IT
BRM KOMO
By WILLIE HERNANDEZ
The Philippine Basketball Team Could Have
Made the Championship Bracket in London,
but It Didn't Understand the Scoring System


ents in London erroneously rated Belgium be¬
low the Philippines in team standings (based
on total points scored only by each team) and
tagged our quintet as being still in the running
dependent on the outcome of the now historic
Korea-Chile and China-Irad meetings. The
Korean triumph over Chile assured the Koreans
a title spot together with Chile and merely
served to cold-water Belgium’s hopes of gain¬
ing the elite circle. But in so far as our quin¬
tet was concerned, we were out of the champ-
ionship competition regardless of the fortunes
of Korea and China in their last two qualify-
ing appearances.
THE TEAM started out with a resounding
roar, in its preliminary start ripping Iraq, 102
to 30. Our boys next nosed out Korea, 35 to
33, to make it two in a row.
Front running with Chile in Group B, Fi¬
lipinos and Chileans met on August 3. Chile
won: 68 to 39. That was a man-sized shellack¬
ing.
But the boys came back and on August 4
smothered the Chinese quintet, 51-32. With a
3-wen and 1-lost playing column, the door to
the honor circle was wide open.
Our boys took to the court in théir last pre¬
liminary round appearance on August 5, sorely
needing a win over the Belgians. But it wasn’t
to be.
The Belgians set us back on our heels, 37-35


(a triumph they were to repeat in the rating
competitions) in a rough and rowdy brawl, the
boys almost coming to blows during the hoop
show. The win enabled the Belgian quintet to
deadlock us in games won and lost and their
"goal average” being better than ours they
rated a rung just a step higher than ours.
The Belgian setback was the real blow which
kayoed our hopes but the entire nation still
awaited the outcome of the Korea-Chile and
the China-Irad engagements.
Immediately after Korea slapped Chile, 28-
21, the Olympic officials tagged Chile and Ko¬
rea as one-two in our group and waved them
on into the Honor Group. Using the “goal ave¬
rage" system of breaking ties, the Olympic
officials summarily announced final standings
in Group B and this is how it looked:
The Chinese brush-off was really bad. Chi¬
na’s point advantage topped those of Belgium
and ours; yet China, with a win over the Bel¬
gians, was rated below the Belgian and Phil¬
ippine quintets. The Olympic officials them¬
selves had winked at the “goal average” system,
relegated China to the lowest bracket.
Outside of Group B, the other three preli¬
minary divisions played out their schedules
smoothly enough.
How the 23 nations were bracketed after
the termination of the five-game elimination
(Continued on page 32)


LEFT: Peruvian outjumps Philippines’ Ves til in backboard play, while Gabby Fajardo (ex¬
treme left) is neatly blocked from play by another Peruvian dribbler whose legs are visible
between jumping dribblers. Picture was taken as Peru was attacking the Philippine goal dur¬
ing their meeting at Harringay. The Philippines was beaten by 20 points to 29. (INP Sound¬
photo.)
BELOW: Whistleman (right) plays tune on gadget calling midair foul on Philippines' Mu¬
mar seen in picture in body contact with Argen tine ball carrier. Foul was committed as the
Argentine foiled an attack by the Philippines. The Philippines won by a two-point margin—
close, but enough. (INP Soundphoto.)


1936 CHAMPIONS
1948 CHAMPIONS
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES


PUR diadem dribblers weren’t wise to the
Olympic “goal average” system of rating
teams, and when five quints wound up in a five¬
way tie in our qualifying group, the lame-brain
manner of breaking deadlocks slammed the
title round’s door in their faces.
It all began July 30, London time, when 23
teams representing so many nations, split up
into four groups (three of six nations each and
one of five) and took to the Olympic dribble
trail in quest of eight berths in the tourney’s
title bracket. Winners and runners-up of each
preliminary group were to land a spot in the
select circle and the right to contest for the
cage title including the Hoop Gold Medal.
The qualifying series played to near empty
seats—there were raw decisions and near fist-
fights. A five-way tie in Group B (Chile, Ko-
rea, Belgium, the Philippines and China all
turned in a 3—and—2 playing average), built
up a fog thicker than London’s. There was
confusion as to how the teams would be rated.
The 14th Olympiad’s playing schedule left no
time for extra games to break the deadlock.
The right interpretation of "goal averages”
was a secret zealously guarded by the Olympic
officials. Everyone took it for granted to mean
the total field and foul shots converted by a team
as against its total number of games. As it
eventually turned out, "goal average” was points
scored by and against a team, the difference
being a team’s point advantage. The Olympic
Committee coyly revealed the great secret only
after the Korean and Chinese triumphs on Aug¬
ust 6 had created a five-way tie in Group B.
The
s was eliminated by Belgium
"T


PE RBB
Fifty New Marks Were Hung up in the London
Olympiad; the PI Garnered only Two Points
and Ranked only 41st among 58 Competitors


"PHE 14th Olympiad came to a close in Lon¬
don’s Harringay stadium last Saturday, Aug¬
ust 15, after 18 days of friendly competition
among 6,000 athletes of 58 nations. Fifty new
Olympic records were set. Most prominent non¬
participant was Russia. Not invited were Japan
and Germany, but these were assured participa¬
tion in the 15th Olympiad scheduled in 1952 at
Helsinki, Finland.
The closing ceremonies, very impressive, af-
firmed international friendship cemented by
athletic competition. The Olympics were started
in Athens in 1896.
The Philippines placed 41st in the general
team standings, with only two points, both
scored by Featherweight Weightlifter Rodrigo
del Rosario who placed fifth in his class. All
the boxers on the Philippine team were elimi¬
nated in their first bouts. Two swimmers sur¬
vived the initial heats but were subsequently
eliminated. These were Rene Amabuyo in the
200-meter breaststroke, and Sambiao Basanung
in the 1,500-meter free-style. They both placed
third in the preliminary. The cage team placed
12th among 23 competitors, earned no point for
that.
Fifteen countries that failed to score included
China, New Zealand, Malaya, Burma, Bermuda,
British New Guinea, Columbia, Iceland, Irad.
Lichenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Syria
and Venezuela.
The unofficial score sheet for the 131 events
completed based on 10 points for first place, and
five, four, three, two and one for the next suc¬
ceeding places, follow:
United States, 645-142; Sweden, 347-3410,
France, 224; Hungary 201-23430; Italy 182; Fin¬


RIGHT: Featherwelght Lifter Rodrigo del Rosarlo who took fifth place in the
Olympic weightlifting competitions. Del Rosario tied for fourth place with Nam
of Korea but lost out due to being the heavier man. More care in his choice of
poundage would have raised his total in three Olympic lifts to a poundage which
might have earned a bronze medal for the PI’s lone lifting representative.
BELOW: Philippines’ Zarcal (left) and Italy’s Zuddas spar for opening in the
Olympic bantamweight boxing competitions. Zuddas decisioned Zarcal, eliminating
PI’s bantamweight from competitions.


land, 166-7712; Great Britain, 163; Denmark,
143-13; Switzerland, 130-7720; Netherlands, 119-
344; Turkey, 90-172; Australia, 88-344, Czecho¬
slovakia, 86-143; Argentina 69-172; Norway, 68-
344; Belgium, 56-144; Austria, 45; South Africa,
42, Egypt, 41-144; Canada, 38-345; Jamaica, 29;
Yugoslavia, 17; Uruguay, 15-344; Korea, 15-344;
Mexico, 12-142; Iran, 11-345; India, 11; Peru,
10; Poland, 10; Brazil, 9; Portugal, 9; Panama,
8; Spain, 6; Ceylon, 5; Cuba, 5; Trinidad, 5;
Puerto Rico, 4; Lebanon, 3-144; Elre, 3; Pakis¬
tan, 3; Philippines, 2; Chile, 1-344, and Greece,
143.
The detalled results of the various events fol¬
low:


TRACK AND FIELD
(Men)


100—Meter Dash
Hatrrison Dillard (USA) Time: 0:10.3.
2. Barney Ewell (USA)
3. Lloyd La Beach (Panama).
The time of Dillard equals the Olymple record of
Eddie Tolan set in the Los Angeles Olympics in
1932 and that of Jesse Owens also for USA in
1936 Berlin Olympio.


200—Meter Dash
1. Mel Patton (USA) Time 0:22.1.
2. Barney Ewell (USA).
3. Lloyd La Beach, (PANAMA).
4. Herb McKinley (Jamaica).


400—Meter Run
1. Arthur Wint (Jamaica) Time: 0:46.2.
2. Herb MOKinley (Jamalca).
3. Mal Whltfield (USA).


800—Meter Run
1. Mal Whilfleld (USA) Time: 1149.2.
3. Arthur Wint (Jamaica).
3. Mareel Hamsenne (France).
(Continued on page 33)


FHE train cut across deserts, wound about and
around mountains, thundered through un¬
counted tunnels and followed the course of a
shallow but animated river (good for trout fish-
ing, said many a fellow traveler). A question
about the river’s name created a mild argument
in the observation dome of our train, the Ex-
position Flyer.
One man said, "I think this is the Snake river.”
A woman with iron-grey hair and steady
black eyes looked scornfully at him and turned
to another man, "Do you know what river this
is?”
“The Colorado river,” said the man quite
firmly. And sure enough it was. The sign said
so at one of the bridges we passed.
“I just like to know where I’m at," declared
the woman righteously and with great satisfac¬
tion.
A porter went the rounds with souvenir cards
and folders. Unlike the fresh, impressionable
creature that we were two years ago we merely
smiled now and said, "No, thank you,” to the
porter’s "Buy picture playing cards, plastic wash-
able, used to sell for two-dollar-fifty, now re¬
duced to one-dollar-twenty-five for advertising
purposes...”
We’re leaving America. Time now to begin
assessing the debits and credits of our two years”
stay in this fabulous ccuntry. All told the two
years yielded a rich dividend in experience, com¬
pounded of events pleasant and not too pleasant;
moments happy as well as miserable; circums-
tances comfortable and otherwise.
There are occasions we wish could have been
managed more wisely, more adroitly. Blunders
we wish could have turned out differently. But
still we met with kindness, friendliness and gen¬
erosity such as our self-defensive and skeptical
mind did not expect to find here when we left
the Philippines. So that for us the balance is
tilted the side of good will and gratitude rather
than of bitterness.
We go home with mixed feelings. There’s
happiness in the thought ahead of home, regret
for that which we leave behind. Times square


ENMR
BORA


Writer gives impressions about America,
expresses desire to return after two years abroad,
and promises to talk more of things American
By LYD ARGUILLA


and Broadway, an eating place under the El,
Greenwich village, Riverside drive and the sub¬
ways—even the subways. We will miss all these
as we missed all places grown familiar and real,
cherishing them because we left some moments
of our life with them.
But the "yearny” feeling for home is strong.
Absence has only made the heart fonder, not in
a narrow, nationalistic sense but in a compas¬
sionate human way — for a people and a land
no one else will love and care for if such as we
don't.
Glad to leave and sorry to go. The train
skirted mountainsides, plunged down gorges,
rushing through the long dark, and coming out
at the end of a tunnel into brilliant white sun¬
shine, clear as bird-song.
Now to the left of the train, now to the right,
flowed streams shallow, grey. Blue mountain
flowers winded at us from among low-growing
bushes. Queen Anne’s lace flowers nodded. Here
and there the land rolled over and over, crepey-
textured from the covering of sage-brush. Sage
brush that we used to read of in Zane Grey’s
novels.
On the first night the pullman porter placed
a sprig of honey-suckle on our pillow (on eve¬
rybody else’s pillow as well). It smelt somnething
mpa¬
ipaya
TOSs
wers
ElkeA


“Thank you,”" we said, "thank you," an absurd
happiness spreading inside of us. We fell asleep
in its fragrance, woke up the next morning to
the same, with that sense of happiness one has
on waking up from pleasant dreams.
On later reflections we thought the gesture in
a way pathetic. A striving to keep the personal
touch in a world grown too materialistic and im-
personal. Yet the gesture succeeded at least
with us. Somebody thought of that sprig of
honeysuckle after all. Some human being.
We thought, that is America. Where the "per¬
sonal touch” is rated so highly because it has
increasingly become difficult to have. A land
where life rushes by so fast that arbitrary senti¬
mental moorings have to be made. Hence a
“Mother’s day,” a "Father’s day,” a "Friend-
ships day," and so on, which the cynical and the
embittered declare to be the conspiratorial in-
vention of greeting card makers, florists and
storekeepers. Here is where the article made
by hand or hand-finished acquires extra value.
Yet, that is not an accurate observation either.
We might say, “That is America — some part
of it.” For certainly warm, folksy relationships
do exist in the smaller cities, towns and in the
country. We found it in Boulder, Colorado; in
Ashburnham, Massachussets; in Green River,
WI
 Dur


At the University of Chicago a classmate of ours
from San Antonio, Texas, remained Texan—a
big, hearty teller of tall tales. At Columbia uni¬
versity, New York city, students from Dayton
Ohio; from Bowie, Arizona; from Beaver, Okla¬
homa; from Summit, Nevada; from Cheyenne,
Wyoming; from North Bend, Oregon; from Rich-
field, Idaho; from Lincoln, Nevada; from Wichi¬
ta, Kansas; from Des Moines, lowa; from Frank¬
furt, Indiana; from Springfield, Kentucky—all
carried with them the folksy ways and manners
they grew up with.
“You must come down and see us in Alaba¬
ma, ma’am. They’re nice, hospitable folks down
there."
The speaker, a trim southern gentleman, come
up to an Atlantic City covention of Coca-cola
bottlers, no doubt was speaking the truth. He
could have been a prewar Filipino saying with
honest pride, “You should come to the Philip-
pines. We’re hospitable people over there.”
When we asked the southern gentleman, quite
innocent of malice, how much there might be in
his own state, of prejudice against Negroes, he
stiffened as a postwar Filipino might, if asked
why, three years after the war, goods being sent
to the Philippines cannot, as yet, be insured.
A tendency to find in people as well as places
eir e


ART MUSEUM


Tonzo I.
P WOdiaL


Illustrated by Romeo V. Tabuena


Can you Sinell the rrisco qOCks? will pe
here soon.
'Soon" was four hours later, arriving at night
in Oakland, saying goodbye to the brief acquain¬
tances we made on the train whose friends and
relatives had come to claim them at the station.
Walking alone by ourself in the dimly-lighted
station, it surprised us to realize that we were
not lonely. In fact we were a little disappoint-
ed that a friend had actually come to meet us
and to ride with us on the ferry to San Fran¬
cisco. We would have liked to have done that
alone. Not that we liked the friend less but
that we liked, at the moment, our solitude more.
All throughout the four-day trip from New
York to the West Coast we were really saying a
long, and lingering goodbye to a great, beauti¬
ful and exciting land. As the train pulled out
of Pennsylvania station we said goodbye to New
York; at Trenton it was goodbye to New Jersey
We said goodbye to “City of Brotherly Love”
Philadelphia, to Washington (off the track), to
sooty Pittsburgh, to “hog butcher, stacker of
wheat” Chicago, to Omaha, to Denver, to Salt
Lake city. The final goodbye was for San
Francisco where two years ago we first set foot
on American soil.
For sentimental reasons we took a room in the
same hotel where we first stayed two years ago.
The same white-haired, distinguished looking
bell-boy was there. When we reminded him that
he took our bags up to our room two years be¬
fore, he pretended to remember. At that, may¬
be he did.
Two years. It had passed almost like a dream
Already, though we still stood on American soil,
we felt removed from the life of the country
which was going on without us. We read the
papers as though they had come from overseas
mail. The Wallace convention had opened in
Philly. The butchers and housewives were on
a consumers’ meat strike in Chicago, the strike
slowly spreading westward and later to jump
across the waters to Honolulu. General Motors
had put an 8 percent price hike on passenger
cars. These local doings were receding behinc
us like scenes traveled over in a train. While
before us, gaining in reality and concreteness
were pulse-quickening visions of home. Thoughts
forbidden till now, thronged in, and we gave our¬
self completely to the danger of homesickness,
now that homecoming was at hand. Mangoes
and nipa houses, and easy talks with friends
known so long and so well there is need for
neither of you to spar for understanding and
good impressions.


the surface one is no longer impatient at the
seeming willful dulness that some Filipinos put
on abroad.
Overheard on Times square were Tagalog voi¬
ces. “Hu!" said one, "So this is Times square!
Para lamang Plaza Goiti.
“And Pennsylvania station," chimed the oth¬
er voice, "It’s just like Tutuban. As for Broad¬
way — it’s nothing but another Avenida Rizal!"
Times square and Plaza Goiti, Pennsylvania
station and Tutuban — that is stretching com¬
parisons very far indeed.
The device has its dangers. It may render
one callous to surprises. And the faculty of star¬
tlement is to travel, as the healthy appetite is
to a banquet.
“So you’re going home, child?” said the woman
with the iron-grey hair. "My, my! Quite a long
way from home, aren’t you? What experience
in this country has been most memorable to
you?"
We thought awhile before answering her
question. "It’s not easy to pick out a single ex¬
perience. A total experience remains...
Yes, we thought, made up of friendships real
and lasting; blueberries in a New England coun¬
tryside; heated but friendly arguments over “the
handling of the time element by Joyce and
Proust” in a Central Park apartment one evening
with Padraic and Mary Colum and some of their
students at Columbia; a quiet hour with Mar-
tha Foley; a walk through the Museum of Mo¬
dern Art with an art student who imparted to
us for a brief while, something of the joy and ex¬
citement that a "person with eyes" finds in a Pi¬
casso or a Roualt.
"It’s not easy," we tried to answer the lady’s
question, while several experiences clamored in
the memory for equal attention.
Golden autumn and fairyland winter in the
Rockies; Chicago and forsythias in the spring;
Judith Anderson, superb in “Medea, and Mau¬
rice Evans, heroic in “Hamlet;" not least of
these, an intangibly more intimate because more
personal, firsthand understanding of a people in
their native and highly varied habitat.


the steady eyes and iron grey hair. "I suppose
one can’t answer a question like that off the bat."
She turned to the scenery, "Aren’t the moun¬
tains beautiful?”
We nodded in agreement while the train shuf¬
fled hastily, scene after scene of enormous moun¬
tain slabs, rough, grey... (they’re called coyotes,
the woman informed us). After the slabs came
ballerina-skirted mountain ledges (mountain
pagodas, said our friend). Farther on, the
mountain sides showed in places pink-red like a
side of ham with the sliced part showing red and
raw-like. Still farther on the exposed moun¬
tainsides presented a flowing grain like taffy.
Then again the earth was bald in spots, bristly
with pine trees in others so that the rolling,
heaving mountainside was a curious patchwork.
If we looked carefully enough every tree was
outlined in light reminding us of Rousseau paint¬
ings where every leaf and twig is an individual,
never lost, never neglected, in the mass.


Many things we would have liked to carry
home with us — ideas of personal freedom and
respect for individual rights; the dignity of la¬
bor; and (for good or ill) its by-products, labor¬
saving gadgets; snow (in season); and the Am-
erican knack for organization and efficiency that
any country may find handy.
Unfortunately, some of these things may not
thrive in our particular climate. Then, too,
though we may smuggle them in our luggage,
they could get pilfered, or thrown out by bug¬
suspecting customs men at various piers. At the
port of destination their absence may even be
overlooked by the harassed person who intended
to bring them in. No matter. There will cer¬
tainly be salvaged, at least, a few impressions
from the miscellaneous welter.
Iwo years was a long dream. Good while it
lasted. Coming home will be the waking to real¬
ity. The reality, we hope, will be the better for
the dream.


YOUR RELIABLE SUPPLIER
for the SCHOOL G OFFICE


Account Columnar Books
DRY SEALS
Stock Certificates
Rubber Stamps
Albums, Autographs
Fine Stationery





E


RARS ATMAL DHAUD


By SEVERIANO C. DOLLAGA
Bureau of Forestry


In 1944, I was operating a small
sailboat off the western coast of
Northern Luzon when my crew
and I ran right into a naval bat¬
tle.
It was on August 26, 1944 that
we sailed cut of Diriki, bound
north for Aparri, Cagayan, for a
load of rice. We were zigzagging
in order to make headway against
a contrary wind, when we sighted
a Japanese convoy approaching
us. There were eight transports in
the convoy, guarded by four des¬
troyers and seven planes.
The sls Rolando’s course took
us directly in a lane between the
ships. This was bad enough but it
become worse all of a sudden when
one of the convoying planes took
a dive toward us and dropped a
bomb some 300 yards away.
But we were not the target.
American submarines had been
sighted! We knew that subma¬
rines were attacking the convey,
for, from out at sea, feathery
lines of foam could be seen head¬
ing for the transports.
A torpedo hit the ship to our
right. Boom! Smoke enveloped
the ship. Another explesion show-
ed that another transport, the


one directly ahead of us, had been
hit! One ship had vanished, and
another ship was sinking. There
were more explosions. A third
ship was in distress.
The destroyers were now zig-
zagging crazily along with the
other transports, dropping depth
bombs, and we were deathly afraid
anyone of them might knife
through our frail boat or blast out
of this world with their bombs.
There was a continuous roar.
Overhead, through the smoke, the
enemy planes circled and dipped,
dropping bombs. The surface of
the water arcund us was sprayed
with machinegun shots. Bullets
sang around us. Cannons boomed
and shells exploded. Two more
transports were sunk.
The feathery streaks of the tor¬
pedoes kept coming. Some missed
the ships and kept on toward the
shore, where they exploded.
It became so unhealthy in the
thick of the battle, that we de-
cided to make for shore. The
treacherous wind had by now en¬
tirely failed us, and we took to
the oars, praying that not one of
the torpedoes whose paths we
crossed would hit us. None did.


The din of battle still rang un¬
abated in our ears as we made
Nagabongan and dropped anchor.
This was four years ago, but
everytime I see the wrecks of the


Japanese ships that ran aground
during the battle off Bangui, I
am reminded of the naval battle
that we sailed into, uninvited.


Mr. Flores' Problem
(Continued from bage 7)
“At any rate, I will try to get a promotion for
you," said Mr. Wilson before they parted ways.
Mr. Flores went out into the grounds with
these words in his ears. Promises were promises,
and experience taught him not to be unduly op-
timistic. But he was smiling happily to himself,
as he approached a knot of children playing
marbles and takyan. The children ran to meet
him.
"Good morning, sir!”
“Good morning, Mr. Flores!”
He said “Good morning”" to this one, and
"Good morning to that one.
How often had children greeted him like that!
He had been told these children were afraid
of him. But they must respect him, too, Mr.
Flores thought.
"And like me, I hope,” he added.
“They like me, I know,” he corrected himself.
1948
Academic supervisor at long last, after 27
years of teaching! He had to hike long dis¬
tances now in order to inspect schools in Co¬
tabato. He had to cross the wide Pulangi River
to visit schools manned by from one to five
teachers. Not one school did he miss.
The Pulangi River had plenty of wild geese.
They were easy to catch and good to eat. The
river also had plenty of crocodiles. The
saurians did not seem to mind voyagers who
sometimes got out of their boats to push them
off sandbars.
He had to ride in airplanes sometimes, flying
high out over the sea during typhoons to avoid
disaster. Mt. Apo, whose summit he climbed
twice as a scoutmaster, and neighboring moun¬
tain ranges, constituted dangerous flying hazards
in stormy weather.
He had to ride frail vintas and launches to
visit schools on the sea.
He travelled far and wide and learned much
about the land and its people, the Moros and
the settler from the Luzon provinces who came
to claim virgin territory. At one time, he ran
across a one-time classmate from Muñoz who
now headed a 'Moro family of note. He learned
about Koronadal; it were better named, he said,
“Koronadust.” He learned about AWOL’s from
Philippine Constabulary camps. He was a walk¬
ing encyclopedia about Mindanao.


Twenty-seven long years. And mow, Mr. Wil¬
son wanted him in Manila for a better paying
job. The embers were flickering and the crickets
in the forest continued their sweet and brittle
music.
The past was rich in memory. In this vast,
pulsing land he had grown from fledgeling into
ri
ere
nd reared children
hac


He had taken root. "Home is where the heart
is," he thought, taking one deep, lingering look
at the trees crowding into the clearing.
Now he must fold his tent, pull up his stakes
and go to Manila. Wistful thoughts about things
that might have been made him pause momen¬
tarily. But only momentarily.
No, it could not be.
Tomorrow, he should remember to write Mr.
Wilson. His answer was No.


Harringay Quest
(Continued from page 28)
series:
TITLE BRACKET
(In which Quintets Vie for
Eight Top Places)
SECOND BRACKET
(In which Teams Compete for)
9th to 16th Positions)
THIRD BRACKET
(In which Teams Compete for
7th to 23rd Positions)
There were three playing dates in each of
the three new brackets, successively referred to
as the quarter-finals, semi-finals and finals,
the knockout system obtaining.
HOW THE ENOCKOUT SYSTEM WORKS.
In these three brackets, winners of the quar¬
ter-finals are automatically assured of the first
four places of its particular bracket. To illus¬
trate, in the title round quarter-finals winners
are certain to land the top four placings in the
overall standings.
These winners advance to the semi-finals
and semi-finals winners progress to the finals
to contest the Olympic cage crown and second
place; semi-finals losers play for third and
fourth places.
Meanwhile, the quarter-finals losers compete
for fifth to eighth places, winners among these
four quarter-finals casualties contesting fifth
and sixth places and the two subsequent losers
tangle for seventh and eighth places.
In the title round’s quarter-finals (or first
playing date), the United States hammered
Uruguay, 63 to 28; Mexico knocked off Korea,
43 to 32; Brazil took out Czechoslovakia, 28 to
23, and France just nosed out Chile, 53—52.
United States, Mexico, Brazil and France
advanced to the semi-finals (as the quarter¬
finals’ top teams), with the Americans smother¬
ing Mexico, 71 to 40, and France upsetting Bra¬
zil, 43-33. Thus, America and France met in
als wi


quintet, the United States taking the dribbling
gold medal, 65 to 21.
Brazil and Mexico tangled for third and
fourth spot as semi-finals losers with Brazil
ending up behind France by tripping Mexico,
54 to 47. Mexico took fourth, the lowest posi¬
tion she could drop to as a quarter-finals win¬
ner.
The losers in the title round’s quarter-finals
were paired off to vie for 5th to 8th places.
Chile took Czechoslovakia; Uruguay turned
back Korea 45-36. Uruguay then overwhelmed
Chile 50-32 to wind up in fifth spot, Chile ta¬
king sixth. Czechoslovakia and Korea tangled
for seventh and eighth positions, Czechoslova¬
kia snagging 7th by virtue of a 39-to-38 by-a¬
nose win. Korea dropped to the eighth spot.
Even from this distance, one can tell the
Olympic Hoop tourney was an all-American
show.
The Philippines had a grand start in her
rating competitions, turning back the vaunted
Argentininans 45 to 43, to assure herself a berth
no lower than twelfth and no higher, of course
than ninth, and dropping Argentina into play¬
ing for positions ranging from thirteenth to
sixteenth positions.
Our boys were turned back by Peru on Aug¬
ust 9, 40 to 29, and had to aim their guns for
eleventh to twelíth position. A Belgian repeat
over our quintet (this' time 38-to-34) and we
wound up the whole affair in twelfth position,
with Belgium still one rung higher on the olym-
pic ladder.
THE FINALS OVERALL STANDINGS
1—United States (Olympic Champions)
2—France
3—Brazil
4—Mexico
5—Uruguay
6—Chile
7—Czecholovakia
8—Mexico
9—Canada
10—Peru
11—Belglum
12—Philippines
13—Cuba
14—Iran
15—Argentina
16—Hungary
17—Italy
18—China
19—Egypt
20—Britain
21—Switzerland
22—Irad
—Eiri


* Les Angvies, Csrornta.
600—Meter nun
1. Henry Erickson (Sweden) Time: 3:40.8
2. Lennart Strand (Swedon)
3. W. F. Siljkuis (Holland)
5000—Meter Run
Won hy Gaston Reiff of Belginm in 14:17.6. The old
record by Gunnar Hocket, Finland, was 14:22.2 estah-
lshed! in 1938 at Herlin games.
10.000—Meter Run
Won hy Zatopek of Czechaslovakia In new Olympic
record time 20:59.6. The old record establihed hy
Jan Kusocinski of Poland In the 1932 Olymples at Los
Angeles, Callfornia was 30:11.1.
110—Meter Hurdles
Won by Blll Porter, USA, In naw Olymple record
time of 0:13.9. The old Ofympic) time of F. Towns,
USA set In the 1936 Berlin Olymples was 0:14.2.
400—Meter Hurdles
Won by Roy Cochran, USA In new Olymple record
time of 0:5141. Old record by George /Hardin also
of USA eatablished in 1936 at Berlln Olymples was
0:52.4
Pole Vault
Won by Gulnn Smikh,f USA wlth a leap of 14 ft
1-141 inches. E. O. Kataja of Finland placed sec¬
ond.
Discus Throw
Won by Adolf Cansolini of Italy with a new Olymple
record of 173 ft. 2 inches. The former Olympie rec-
ord set by Ken Carpenter of DUSA in 1936 at Berlin
Olymplek was 165 ft. 7-848 inches.
Javelfn Throw
Won by Kaj Rautavaara of Finland with a distance
of 228 ft. 10-1/2 Inches. Steve Seymours of the Unit¬
ed states was second wlth a thraw of 221 It. 118
inches.
Broad Jump
Won by Willle Steele of USA with a leap of ,25 ft.
8 Inches.
Hop, Step and Jump
Won by A. Ahman of Sweden with a jump of 50 ft.
G-M Inches. Gordon George Avery of Australla fin¬
ished second with a jump of 50 It. 4-34 Inches.
Shot Put
Thompson (USA). Distance: 50 ft. 2 In.
F. James Delaney (USA).
3. June Fuch (USA)—52 ft. 10 in.
All three break the Olympla record of 52. ft. 6-344
inches established by L. Sexton of USA in 1932 at
Berlin Olympics.
High Jump
1. Jack Winter (Australla) 1.98 meters.
2. Four competlters quallfled for the second place hut
the silver medal was awarded to B. Paulsan af
Norway for having made few errors.
3. G. Stanich (USA) 1.95 meters.
Hammar Throw
1. Imre Nemeth (Hungary) 56.09 meters
2. I. Duhijan (Yugoslavla) 54.27 meters.
3. R. Hennett (USA) 53.73 meters.
Decathlon Events
1. Bah Mathlas (USA) 7,139 polnis.
. I. Heinrich (France) 0,974 poinis.
Simmans (USA) 6,954 points.
4. Kistenmacher (Argentina) 6,929 points.
5. E. P. Anderson (Sweden) 6,877 points.
8. Peter Maullins (Australla) 0,739 points.
4! (X 100—Meter Relay
k. Unlted States
2. Great Britaln


ew hecolds Sel
(Continued from page 29)
3. Italy
4 X 400—Meter Relay
Won by United states (Art Harnden, M. Cliff
Bourland, Roy Cochran and Mal Whitfield).
TRACK AND FIELD
(Women)
100—Meter Dash
1. Mrs. Fanny Blankers-Koen (Netherland) TIme:
0:11.9
2. Darathy Manley (Great Britaln)
3. S. B. Strickland (Australla)
100—Meter Dash
Mrs. Fanny Blankers-Koen (Netherlands) TIme:
0:24.4
2. Audrey Willlamson (Britalny
3. Audrey Patterson (USA)
4. Shirley Strickland (Australia)
8(9-Meter Hurdles
Won by Mrs. Fanny Blankers-Kaen of Netherlands
with a tlme of 0:11.2.
4 X 100—Meter Relay
Won By Netherland
Shot Put
Won by O. M. Ostermeyer (France). Distance: 15 ft.
1-1/2 inches.
Discus Throw
). M. Ostermeyer —(France) 137 ft. 6.5 inches.
2. G. Gentile (Italy) 135 ft. 1 inch.
3. I. Mazeas (France) 131 ft. 10 inches.
Javelin Throw
Won by H. ¡Baume of Austrian new Olymple record
of 45.57 meters (149 ft. 8 inches). The old record
held hy Hilde of Germany in the 1946 Olymples was
45.18 meters.
High Jump
1. Allce Coachman (USA) Helght: 5 ft. d-1/8 in.
2 Mrs. D. J. Tyler (Great Britain).
3. Frances Ostermeyer (Frante).
SWIMMING
(Men)
100—Meter Free Style
Won by Ris (USA) in new Olympic record time of
0:57.3 seconds—one fifth of a second better than the
record of M. Taguchi of Japan in the 1938 Olympics
in Berlln Alan Ford also USA finisned second.
400—Meter Free Style
Wan hy Jimmy MeLane (USA) In naw Olympic record
time of 4:42.2. He made this record in ene of the
heats of the events. The old record set by Jack Me¬
dica in 1926 was 4:44.5.
200—Meter Breaststroke
Won hy Jos Verdeur of the Unlted States In 2139.3—
New Olymple record. Old record was 2:42.5 set by
Hamur
700—Meter
Won E
of US
800—Meter
Won
and P
5-142 seconas natter than tue r
t
Berlin. Hunrgary which placed second bettered the
Olymple record set hy Japan in 1936
1500—Meter Swim
Won hy JImmy MeLane, USA. Time: 18:18.5.
100--Meten Free Style
1. Greta Anderson (Denmark) 1:06.3.


. Marie Vaessen (Holland).
200—Mater Breaststroka
Won by Nell Van Vliet ¡Holland) in new Olympic
record time of 2 minutes and 57 seconds. She made
this record in the semi-final heats of the event.
400—Meter Free Style
Won by Ann Curtis (USA) Time: 5:17.8.
400—Meter Relay


SWIMMING
(Women)
1. Uindted States—4:29.2.
2. Denmark—4:29.9
Holland—4:31.6.
4. Creat Britain—4:31.7
All broke the old record.
Spring Board Diving
Vicki Mahalo Draves (USA) 108.74 polnts
2. Zoe Ann Alsen (USA) 108.23 polnts.
Pat Eisener (USAt 101.30 polnts.
Nickole Pelllsard (France) 100.38
8. Edna Child (Britaln) 91.63 points.
BOXING
Final placings in the boxing championsuips.
Flywelght:
Ist. P. Perez (Argentina); 2nd. S. Bandinelli (Italy):
3rd. A. Han (Korea).
PhilippIne Boxer R. Adoifo
lost by TKO to P. Perez in the elimination round.
Bantamweight:
Ist. T. Czik (Hungary); 2nd. G. Zuddas (Italy); 3rd
J. Venegas (Puerto Rico). B. Zarcal of the Philippines
lost on polnts to Zuddas in the eliminatlon rounds.
Featherweight:
1st. Forementis (Italy) 2nd. D. Shepherd (South Afri-
ca); A. Antiklowics (Poland). Leon Trani of the Phil.
ippines lost to his Pollsh opponent in the ellmination
rounds.
Lightweight:
1st. G. Dreyer (South Africa); 2nd. V. Viseras (Bei¬
gium): 3rd. S. Wad (Denmark!. Mariano Velez of the
Phillppines lost to G. C. Blackburn of Canada on
points in the ellminatlon rounds. Blackburn was eli¬
minated In the quarter-final rounds.
Weltarweight:
ist. J Torma (Czechoslovakla!; 2nd. H. Perkins (USA)
3rd. D. A. Ottavio (Italy). Ernesto Porto of the Phil.
ippines dropped his bout to a Polish opponent in the
elimination rounds.
MIddleweight:
Ist. L. Papp (Hungary); 2nd. J. Wright (Britain); 2rd.
T. Fontana (Italy).
Liglitheavywcight
1st. George Hunter (South Africa) and nd. D. Scott
(Britain); 3rd. M. Cla (Argentina).
Heavyweight:
1st. A Igleslas (Argentina); 2nd. N. Nilsson (Sweden);
3rd. D. Arthur ¡South Africa).
WRESTLING


HUUREA
Champion—Indla.
Runner-up—Britaln.
SOCCER
Champlon—Sweden.
Runner-up—Yugoslavia.


I WAS A BOLOMAN
By GODOFREDO B. PARAWAN


Flashing in the sun, the sharp
blade of the bolo in the upraised
hand of a Filipino has always
served as a symbol of liberty.
Lacking guns, the men of North-
ern Luzon took to the bolo during
the last war and helped drive out
the Japanese.
The USAFIP NL, Better known
as Volckmann’s guerrillas, organ¬
ized bolo battalions in its area.
Membership mounted to 40,000
able-bodied men. I was one of
them.
W
e traine
htir


and were drilled with wooden
guns for time when submarines
would have landed enough real
guns to go around. In 1944 and
1945, as the fighting became bit¬
ter, many of us actually stepped
into the gaps left by casualties
on the front lines.
Most of the time, however, we,
bolomen, formed the indispens¬
able labor corps on the front. As
the fighting progressed, we were
concentrated in bivouacs to faci¬
litate reporting for duty. Most of


supplies. One boloman was assign¬
ed to each soldier and they shared
the same fexhole, Others were re-
tained to care for the horses of the
officers.
We carried the wounded away
from the firing line, We brought
food to our men right under the


guns of the enemy. We served as
secret agents, to report on move¬
ments of the enemy. We also serv¬
ed as lookouts on the routes used
by the enemy.
Many lost their lives, but
we did our duty.


CAN GO TO SCHOOL NOW!"
“Before, I was often absent fiom
school because of my asthma at
tacks. But since I bekan taking
Sirop Norel, which a dactor pre¬
seribed. I can go to schoal reg
ularly now and de household chores,
too.”
JOSELITO DE GUIA
Balian, Pangil, Laguna
Qoaad:to de Macos


Sirop Norel is a doctor’s prescrip-
tion, clinically tested, recommended by
chest specialists for quick, safe relief
from asthma agonies. Also available in
convenient tablets—in a low-priced
packet of 2 tablets, or an economy tube
of 12. At all Boticas.
OREL
SIROP
Read about our P20
NOREL IADLEIS E
Cash Bonus offer in
the package insert.
am
DOCTORS PHARMACEUTICALS, INC.
2nd FLOOR, DE LEON BROS, BLDG., RIZAL AVENUE & RAON


FORMULA: Each 10 ce: Pot, iod. 0.30 gm.; eph. sulf. 0.025 gm.; sod. sal. 0.30 gm.;
TR Belladonna, 0.20 cc.; pheno, sod. 0.01 gin.; sod. benz. 0.05 gm.; syrup, a. s.


P
E


By SALVADOR U. KIMHOKO


ANNAN SRCICHeS by E. MACABUHAY


RN


The "manunungkit" leaves
for work with his disassembled
pole tied in a bunch on his
shoulder.


12


He assembles his "tikin" by
inserting one section end into
another, the “lawis" end first.


He raises it slowly lest it snap
in two.


Down falls the bunch, split¬
to individual nuts.


RNE of the human cogs that keep
Wthe wheels of the coconut in¬
dustry in Southern Luzon turning
is the manunungkit, the man who
brings down the ripe nuts with
his tikin, a series of lengths of
cured bamboo telescoped end to
end and topped by a keen scythe¬
like blade called a lawis. This im¬
plement enables the manunung¬
kit to accomplish the harvest
quickly and safely from the
ground, unlike his counterparts
who have to climb the trees in
other sections of the country.
The manunungkit is an early ri¬
ser by force of habit and necessi¬
ty. Because his work entails star¬
ing upwards for hours at a stretch,
he nas to take advantage of the
cobl of the morning. Glare
strains his eyes, makes his head
ache, and renders it difficult to
tell the ripe from the young nuts
overhead. Coconuts have a dis¬
concerting way of looking alike,
and no manunungkit can long re¬
main on his job if he brings down
more immature nuts than can be
ascribed to simple accident. Only
the ripe ones make good copra or
desiccated products. The half-
matured gumaan has limited uses
in native sweets like bokayo and
bibingka, while the buko is a pe¬
rishable delicacy.
As soon after daybreak as possi¬
ble, the manunungkit leaves for
work with his dismantled pole tied
in a bunch on his shoulder and a
maluto of rice and fish which his
wife has wrapped in heat-softened
banana leaves hanging from his
belt. In the plantation he joins
the overseer and his fellow har¬
vesters. There he assembles his
tikin by inserting one section end
into another, the lawis end first,
and pins every joint fast. Once
his tikin has reached the propen
length, he raises it slowly with its
lower end resting on his thigh. He
takes care lest the swaying, brit¬
tle pole snap in two, for replacing
it is a tedious job invelving skill¬
ful curing and straightening of the
raw material over a fire.
Balancing his tikin carefully,
the manunungkit approaches the
first tree, hooks a bunch of ripe
nuts with the lawis, and tugs.
Down falls the bunch, splitting
into individual nuts hurtling to¬
ward the man’s head below. The
manunungkit makes a deft turn
and the falling missiles hit the
earth with resounding thuds. The
remaining bunches are attended
to in like manner, and the manu¬
nungkit proceeds to the next tree,
carrying his tikin much like a
circus acrobat. Close behind him
comes the tenant, picking the fal¬
len fruit and throwing them into
a carabao-drawn sled. Each time
the vehicle is filled, it is driven


to the clearing near the house,
where the coconuts are dumped
into a pile that grows with every
trip.
In most plantations there are
layugs, old trees that have out¬
grown all the rest. The manu¬
nungkit finishes the shorter trees
first, then hooks his lawis on a
paim frond and attaches one or
two more sections to its lower ex¬
tremity to lengthen it. Then,
staggering beneath the unwieldy
thing, he tackles the layugs.
He stops to rest long before
noon, tor by then the sun’s glare
has become too briniant for his
eyes. He hooks his lawis on a
paim and repairs to the tenant’s
house or to some sheltered nook
to eat his matuto from its fragrant
wrapper. For water he uses the
miik of young coconuts, and for
dessert he eats their tender meat
scooped out with a spoon impro¬
vised from their green husks. Then
he lies down for a needed nap un¬
der the nearest shade tree.
When the sun has begun to dec¬
line toward the west, the manu¬
nungkit bestirs himself, retrieves
his tikin, and resumes the harvest,
followed as usual by the tenant
with his sled. Before sunset he
calls it a day, disassembles his ti¬
kin, bundles the parts together
with rattan, and goes to meet the
other manunungkits in the clear¬
ing. In the presence of the ten¬
ant and the overseer the harvest¬
ers count the day’s pile together
in a singsong chant that belies
their weariness. Then each com¬
putes his earning which, at pre¬
sent hiked rates, is some P10 per
thousand nuts. In the meantime
a makapuno purchaser examines
each individual fruit, rapping the
husk with his knuckles to sort the
delicious, highly-sought makapuno
from the rest. He pays about Pl.
50 for each one he finds.
As long as his sight remains
good, the manunungkit has a stea¬
dy, specialized job. He has a fix¬
ed schedule for each plantation
and moves from one to the next
on a cycle of 45 days save when
thievery is rampant, in which case
the owners order a harvest as soon
as the fruits show signs of matur¬
ing.
The expert manunungkit can
bring down as many as 3,000 co¬
conuts in a single day except dur¬
ing the slack season in the early
months of the year or at present,
when there is an unusual scarcity
due to the past typhoons. How¬
ever, constant squinting toward
the dazzlingly-bright sky strains
his eyes so badly that sooner or
later they begin to fail, and when
they do, he is finished as a manu¬
nungkit and has to look for some
other means of liveliheod.


Close behind the "manunung-
kit" comes the tenant, picking
the fallen fruit...


In the presence of the tenant
and the overseer the harvesters
count the day’s pile, chanting
the numbers.


N
)
4
10

NOM--
Ms me


Le
A
A

S Abld
PDA



18


EIO


MEEZ


