BRIGADIER GENERAL DOMINADOR F. GARCIA
21st Chief of Constabulary


CONTENTS


Page


The Turnover ... 4
Affidavits— Their Significance
and Probative Valve ... 5
The Court-Martial Sentence .. o
8
Road -Safety and Economy ......
The Trafcon Story ... 9
Legal Opinion Digest ......... 10


Scientific Criminal Investigation ... 11
Handling The Labor Dispute ..... 12
The Concept Of Trade Unions .... 13


The Industrial Peace Act ........ 14
The Picket Line .............. 15
Labor Relations Institute ........ 16


The HPC Enlisted Men’s Club .... 17


Courage: The Right Way ...... 18
A
Automatic Burglar Alarm ........ 19


Andres Bonifacio— Hero of Manila 20
On Public Service ............ 21


Et has been pointed out bluntly that “the PC has not been too
successful in stopping the trafficking in smuggled cigarettes,"
that rampant gambling is "going on in clandestine dens and casinos
in many of the large cities in the country,” and that travelers are
not “free from molestation by lawless elements.” Further it was written that “the HUK problem, fortunately, is not the serious threat that
it once was. Still, the No. 1 HUK, Jesus Lava, has defied all the
efforts of the PC to capture him. While Lava remains at large, he
and the hard core of dissidents under him will continue to be a thorn
on the PC side.” And as a concluding statement, it was written that
“General Garcia, therefore, has his work cut out for him. But he is
a competent, capable man. We congratulate him on his appointment
and voice the hope that he will meet the problems squarely.”
The foregoing is an honest year-end appraisal of the situation
facing the Command in 1963, We cannot but take guidance from this
external source. Added to our own survey of the problems of the Command, it could be the civilian partner’s contribution to the over-all
assessment of what could well be the special tasks of the Philippine
Constabulary for the new year. For if these are the ills that throb
td
0)
then certainly they deserve primary attention.
BM
gobi
Agangani
“That we may live in peace, unharmed.” To this prayer and
pledge the Philippine Constabulary is likewise committed, Let us not
forget the evil that seeks emergence from among our youth, our
3a
schools and institutions.
ERf
ne and to
In the flurry of everyday problems — of corruption, filth, banditry, smuggling — your national police is also waging a war to the
death — against Communism.
Rr


Speaker Speaks to Police Graduates 22


To the solution of these problems, we dedicate ourselves,


24
Live Again The Good Old Days ...
Eavesdropping And The Law ..... 26
asas ad
Philippine Town Surveys ........ 28
CPX "SUBOK"
.... 32

Report To The Eighth APAcI
..Conference ....... 52
STA
PC In Sports ............ 53



  
o'1 51
MAJOR CONSTANTE MA. CRUZ
ori lo h
Editor & General Manager
NT.O gh-R
Subscription Rates
In The Philippines.
SbM of oa
Ona Yaa
Six Months ..
Three Months.................. . . .... . . .. . . . .. . . . . .. .
In The United States of America & Abroad:
Ue Yedr 
Six Months ....
Three Months ..:
Entered As Second Class Mail At Post Office, Manila; On November 6, 1926.
2
Single Copy: P1.00
Vol. XXXV, Headquarters, Philippine Constabulary, Camp Crame
Quezon City, Philippines
Tels. 71011 or 66611 thru 66620, local 4-74-83


P10.00
6.00.-
. 3.00
P40.00
24.00
12.00
* 


KHAKING ERED  LOI2


THE TURNOVER
By a Staff Member


receives the saber, symbolic of command, from the then Acting
Chief Brig. Gen. Nicanor D. Garcia.


ITAIL the Chief! Brigadier General Dominador
AM F. Garcia became the 21st Chief of Constabulary when he took his oath of office before President Diosdado Macapagal on January 4, 1963 at Malacanang. On hand were Defense and other government officials, ranking officers of the Armed Forces
and their ladies, his staff, and well-wishers. Amidst
handshakes, the new chief seemed to scan the faces
of officers who were there to wish him a successful
tour. That he seemed mentally forming his staff
then was borne out by the immediate announcement
of his Secretary of the Constabulary Staff, Lt. Col.
Bruno G. Balancio. This was followed by the announcement of his new general staff: C1, Col. Esmeraldo R. Lazaro; C2, Col. Francisco M. Jimenez;
C3, Col. Delfin E. Argao; C4, Lt. Col. Pedro G. Javier; C5, Lt. Col. Onofre T. Ramos. Lt. Col. David
C. Adventurado was designated Camp Commander.
From Malacanang, he accepted the command of the
Philippine Constabulary, at simple ceremonies at
Camp Crame, from the acting chief, Brigadier General Nicanor D. Garcia. In the early afternoon, he
motored to Fort William McKinley to turn over the
command of the Philippine Army to Brigadier General Ricardo G. Papa. He had indeed a busy day.
And so to General Nicanor D. Garcia, we bid a
fond adieu. His one year as acting chief was characterizea only by accomplishments. If he considered
the command of the Philippine Constabulary as the
fulfillment of all that he desired in life, as a sort
of crown to top his military career, then he could
say with pride: I am not obliged to win; I am only
obliged to try.
For the record, through the pages of the KHAKI
and RED, we take pleasure in reprinting what the
Page 4


Philippine Army Information Office has written
about the new Constabulary Chief:
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
An exceptionally brilliant and distinguished officer is the new Commanding General of the Philippine Army, Brig. Gen. Dominador F. Garcia, whose
military career is replete with colorful and outstanding accomplishments.
Born in Malate, Manila on November 22, 1912,
Gen. Garcia started his military education when he
topped the entrance examinations for cadetship in
the Philippine Military Academy, Baguio City. After
his graduation in 1936, he was commissioned 3rd
Lt, and assigned Junior Officer in a Constabulary
unit in Sta. Cruz, Laguna, where he proved his mettle during the Asedillo uprising. Then followed his other assignments: Student Officer in the
School for Regular Officers, Camp Murphy; Cadre
Comdr, 8th Iloilo Cadre; Bn Tac OFF, SRC, Camp
Keithley, Lanao; Instructor, PMA, Baguio; Student,
The Infantry School, Camp Murphy; and Comdt,
ROTC, Lacson College, Manila. At the outbreak of
World War II, Gen. Garcia, then a Captain, inducted
into the USAFFE, was G3 of the 81st Division until
the PA forces surrendered to the Japanese in May
1942
In 1945, he attended the CGSC, USA. Subsequently, he became chief, Plans Div, G4, HPA; Dep
& Ex O, G4 Div, HNDF: assigned ROTC Units and
5th BCT; G4, PGF; G4, II MA; G3, II MA; Chief
of Staff, II MA; CO, Thunder Sector; Dep Comor,
II MA; CO, Task Force Martian; Supt, PASC, PATC
and ACofS, G4, CHO, AFP.
(Continued on page 45)
NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


AFFIDAVITS

Their Significance
and
Probative Value


By Maj. Buenaventura Fernandez


WARLIER decisions of the Supreme Court of
Mthe Philippines show that affidavits are not
admitted as evidence in criminal cases. Instances
may be cited in U.S. v. Esconde, 25 Phil. 579, 580
and in U.S. v. Javier, 37 Phil. 449, 451, the latter
citing Justice Day of the United States Supreme
Court in a case of Philippine origin, Dowdill v. U.S.
(1911), 221 U.S. 325. This stand of our Supreme
Court has not changed since then. Lately, in People
v. Mariquina, 84 Phil. 39, 42, the same court held:
Generally, an affidavit is not prepared by the
affiant himself, but by another who uses his own
language in writing the affiant's statements. Omissions and understandings by the writer are not infrequent particularly under circumstances of hurry
or impatience. For this reason, the infirmity of
affidavits as a species of evidence is much a matter of judicial experience.


and often inaccurate, sometimes from partial suggestion, and sometimes from want of suggestions
and inquiries, without the aid of which the witness
may be unable to recall the connected collateral
circumstances necessary for the correction of the
first suggestion of his memory, and for his accurate
recollection of all that belongs to the subject!' (2
Moore on Facts, 1094-1095).
This ruling is repeated in several other cases;
namely, Campos v. Government, CA-GR No. 9137,
March 25, 1942, 2 O.G. No. 7, July 1943, p. 686;
People v. Patinio, CA-GR No. 2691-R, Nov. 19, 1948;
People v. Paguilican, CA-GR No. 10837-R, Feb. 24,
1954; People v. Dimdim, CA-G.R. No. 7395-R, Oct.
26, 1953; People v. Timbang, 74 Phil. 295, 299; People v. Fader, G.R. No. L-5732, March 12, 1954 and
many more.
Another reason why affidavits are not admis

Infirmities of affidavits, as species of evidence, are much a matter
of judicial experience.


Again in People v. Mones, G.R. No. L-2029, May
26, 1950, the Supreme Court in believing more the
testimony of the witness where it was at variance
with his previous sworn statement or affidavit said:
The defense also points to an apparent discrepancy between Fr. Gabriel's affidavit taken by
2
Asst. Prov. Fiscal Palisoc and his testimony dur ing the trial. In his affidavit, Fr. Gabriel failed
to mention that he told Leoncio Mones and Crispulo Pangangaan that Juan Mones was the one who
shot at Capt. Doliente. Omissions of this kind are
not infrequent in affidavits which are almost always incomplete and often inaccurate sometimes
from want of suggestions or inquiries without the
aid of which the witness may be unable to recall
or mention collateral circumstances. And furthermore the omitted detail in the instant case cannot
detract from the fact that Fr. Gabriel did see Juan
Mones in the act of shooting at Capt. Doliente.
A Similar ruling was enunciated in People v.
Tan, et al., G.R. No. L-516, June 29, 1951. In part,
the high court ruled:
As aptly pointed out by the Solicitor-General,
the contradictions, if any, may be explained by the
fact that an “affidavit a x x will not always disclose the whole facts and will oftentimes and without design incorrectly describe without the deponent detecting it, some errors in the occurrence
narrated o o x” (2 Moore on Facts 1098) and “being taken ex parte, is almost always incomplete


sible as evidence is because they are hearsay. The
hearsay rule prohibits proof of a fact by having a
witness testify to what someone else told him or by
introducing a book, document, report, or other paper in which statements are made, or by producing
a written statement made by someone not in court,


KHAKI &. RED


Page 5


THE COURT MARTIAL
SENTENCE


By Maj. Domingo C. Reyes


NORMALLY, court-martial function is completed upon arriving at a sentence of conviction or acquittal. But, insofar as the execution of
the sentence is concerned, the court-martial that imposed it is no longer a party to the same. The sentence promulgated by the court is merely a recommendation to the authority who constituted it. The
proceedings of a court-martial pertaining to a case
heard by it partakes of the nature of a report of a
body of officers addressed to their superior officer
who ordered them to make it, the whole court-martial process not being complete and the sentence has
no effect until the same shall have been approved
by the officer appointing the court or by the officer
commanding for the time being. In military parlance, the officer appointing the court referred to is
commonly known as the Convening/ Reviewing Authority who is usually the commander.
¿- That no sentence of a court-martial shall be executed until the same shall have been approved by the
officer appointing the court or by the officer com

manding for the time being, connotes a meaning not
too absolute. It simply means that all other actions
necessary must precede the approval of the convening authority before execution of the sentence is ordered. There are courts-martial sentences which, in
addition, need certain requirements before they can
be carried into effect even after the approval of the
Convening/Reviewing Authority. These are:
(1) approval of an officer authorized to appoint a general court-martial, (2) action of the Board
of Review which shall be approved by the Judge
Advocate General, and (3) confirmation by the President. Consequently, therefore, the executions of
courts-martial sentences may fall under four categories, namely: (a) those which can be carried into effect merely after approval by the Convening/
Reviewing Authority; (b) those which require the
approval of the officer who possesses the general
court-martial jurisdiction of the command; (c) those
which can not be ordered unless and until the Board
of Review, with the approval of The Judge Advocate


Execution of a court martial sentence is dependent on superior
authority creating the court martial.


The President of the Court reads the sentence


General, shall have held the record of trial upon
which the sentence is based legally sufficient to
support the sentence; and, (d) those which, in addition, require the confirmation of the President. Al
though the three categories (b, c, d) relate to conditions precedent before execution of the sentence
can be ordered, the approval of the Reviewing Authority should precede these actions. These sentences, notwithstanding the expressed approval of
the Reviewing Authority, still are of recommendatory
nature unless and until the requisite requirements
are complied with. Approval of a sentence by the
Reviewing Authority must be expressed whether orally or in writing. An approval of the findings only
is not sufficient to make the sentence executory. The
disapproval of a sentence by the Reviewing Authority closes the case, and its confirmation or disapproval by higher superior authority is not required
in any case. Since this is also an action by the Reviewing Authority, the same should likewise be expressed. Decisions of acquittal or a finding of not
guilty neither needs be approved or confirmed, nor
disapproved. Such action, in any case, will not affect the finality of the acquittal or findings of not
guilty. On this particular instance, the sentence
of a court-martial is not any more a mere recommendation.


KHAKT R RED


In cases of convictions, the penalties imposed
are graduated commensurate with the gravity of the
offense committed. The Table of Maximum Punishments in our Manual for Court-Martial provides the
guide for the purpose. In all cases where the sentence of a court-martial does not exceed confinement
at hard labor for more than six months and twothirds forfeiture of pay, or pay and allowances, and
involves neither dishonorable nor bad conduct discharge, approval of the same by the Reviewing Authority renders the sentence executory. However, a
sentence involving dishonorable discharge, bad-conduct discharge or confinement in a penitentiary may,
upon approval of the same by the Reviewing Authority, order its execution of the conviction was based
solely upon findings of guilty and a specification or
specifications to which the accused pleaded guilty.
Special Courts-Martial may impose upon the accused a sentence of bad-conduct discharge. A sentence of this nature, before carried into execution,
shall be approved by an officer exercising general
court-martial jurisdiction over the command in addition to the approval of the same by the convening
authority. If the convening authority who appointed
the special court-martial that imposed the sentence
also exercises general courts-martial jurisdiction, ap(Continued on page 37)


Page
g


ROAD SAFETY and ECONOMY


By Lt. Col. Paterno R. Santos, OMS


Authorities concerned must be familiar with factors of road
efficiency, time and space.


PALPH WALDO EMERSON once said “This
HNtime, like all times, is a very good one, if
we but know what to do with it.”
In our ordinary day-to-day activities, as well
as in time of emergency, we would do well to take
heed of the above quotation. In the event of a necessity to evacuate a designated Target/Troubled
Area in Luzon and elsewhere in the Philippines, the
national and provincial highways will have to be
utilized to their maximum road capacity. The period of time involving maximum utilization will vary accordingly with the number of vehicles in the
area, road conditions, orderliness in which traffic
is directed, and other attendant conditions. The
Philippine Constabulary, which is the national police agency vested with overall supervisory authority over the majority of the civilian police forces,
can and will play a very important role in the or

derly, efficient and safe utilization of road ways
both in peace and in time of emergency.
It is, therefore, important that each member of
our law-enforcing agencies be familiar with factors
governing road capacities, road capacity efficiency,
problems on “time and space,” etc.
The purpose of national planning is to get maximum effort and capacity from the industrial, commercial, and service facilities of our country. Related to planning is the optimum base from which
expansion should begin, considering such factors
as the capability for immediate expansion, financial
ability to preserve a healthy economy as a matter
of national policy; time factor involved; the resultant effects; etc.
Several other factors are both complex and intangible, and they make up the vexing problems
(Continued on page 34)


Disabled vehicles are a great detrimental effort on road capacity, especially when they are not immediately
cleared off the traffic lane.


Page 8


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


Aware of its limited facilities, TRAFCON
concentrates its operations on critical areas.


2 CONGRESSMEN DIE IN CRASH
NGELES, Pampanga, November 4, 1954.
Two congressmen were instantly killed and four
others, including another solon, were seriously injured when their car returning from La Union
crashed into a gravel truck in Barrio de la Paz,
San Fernando, Pampanga, at 6:10 P.M. today.
Killed on the spot in the national highway between Kms. 75 and 76 were Rep. Gregorio B. Tan
of Samar and LP Rep. Lorenzo Ziga of the first
district of Albay.
Injured were LP Rep. Pedro Trono of the first
district of Iloilo; Dr. Manuel Arambulo of the Bureau of Hospitals; Jaime Rodolfo, Secretary of the
House committee on Health; and Rosendo Andrada,
driver ...
The car was running between 40 and 50 kilometers per hour.
The
TRAFCON
Story
By Benjamin L. Corpuz


6 HITCH-HIKERS DIE IN SORSOGON
Surigao, Sorsogon, November 21, 1954.
A Philcusa-FOA dump truck was reported yesterday to have crashed into a ditch in Lianga town,
pinning to death 6 civilian hitch-hikers and injuring 7 others. The driver reportedly had no driver's
license and was driving at a fast clip when his
truck swerved to the right upon hitting a rock on
the highway. It fell into a ditch and all the 6 were
killed outright when pinned under the truck ..
6 KILLED IN ROAD ACCIDENT
Dagupan, Pangasinan, November 24, 1954.
Sig were killed and two are dying while 22
others were seriously injured when a Philippine
Rabbit bus from Manila bound for the Ilocos
crashed into a parked cargo truck in Barrio Anonas, Urdaneta, Pangasinan, at 1:00 A.M. today.
The cargo truck, parked because of a flat tire,
was filled with 120 sacks of rice. The tail lights
were on but the Philippine Rabbit bus approached
in high speed. It crashed into the truck with a


A little elbow grease applied on car number plates
would go a long way in identifying the vehicle in a hitand-run case.


very terrific force that all the rice was spilled all
around the crash site.
. . . all from the Manila Times.
The fate of the two congressmen and several
other victims of road accidents of catastrophic proportions, such as noted above, aroused public indignation and focused national concern over the
seriousness of the highway situation. A regional
conference of all police chiefs, traffic officers, constabulary agents, Motor Vehicle Officers, and bus
representatives disclosed that more people die in
motor accidents than in battle clashes between government troopers and dissidents in the Philippines.
At least five persons killed daily due to motor vehicle accidents, was the estimate agreed upon during the conference held by the country’s top experts.
In the wake of a nationwide war against traffic
violators, Vicente Oroza, then Acting Secretary of
Public Works, recommended the establishment of
the nucleus of a national mobile police, patterned
after that of the United States. This was to be
composed of 6 units with one PC lieutenant and one
MVO inspector in each unit. Northern, Central and
Southern Luzon were to have one unit each; Eastern and Western Visayas, also one unit each; and
another unit for Mindanao.
As a result of the Oroza recommendation, and
his personal concern for the safety of motorists
and the general public on the highway, then President Ramon Magsaysay issued a directive— coupled with AFP General Order No. 535—creating the
Philippine Constabulary TRAFCON Group, primarily, to coordinate agencies engaged in traffic control
and intensify the campaign against violations of
traffic rules and regulations.
Thus, TRAFCON was born.
Col. Mariano Azurin, ex-commanding officer of
the first contingent (PEFTOK) sent to Korea, was
handpicked by Magsaysay to head the new TRAFCON group. This however, was but a re-activation
of the basic PC pre-war function of enforcing the.
(Continued on page 39)


 


Page 9


LEGAL
OPINION
Dlgost


The guaranty of freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures
recognizes exceptions.


SEARCHES
and
SEIZURES
NURRENT developments in government activCities, especially as pertain to the drive
against venalities and illicit practices, have brought
about situations and circumstances requiring legal
and technical clarification.
The more prominent and frequent of these situations and circumstances involve the matter of
searches and seizures. In this connection, the question now arises: “May a vehicle and/or moving object be searched without search warrant?”
The guaranty of freedom from unreasonable
searches and seizures recognizes exceptions, one of
which is the search without warrant of moving objects, such as vehicles and vessels. This exception is
due to necessity arising from the impracticability of
securing a search warrant because the vessel or the
vehicle can be quickly moved out of the locality or
jurisdiction in which the warrant must be sought
(See Carroll vs. United States, 267 US 132). However, those lawfully within the country, entitled to
use the public highways, have a right to free passage without interruption or search unless there
is known to a competent official authorized to
search, probable cause for believing that their vehicles are carrying contraband or illegal merchandise. The measure of legality of such seizure, therefore, is that the seizing officer shall have reasonable or probable cause for believing that the automobile which he stops and searches contains contraband goods which are being illegally transported
(47 Am. Jur., 513-514).
It would therefore appear that in every case,
the seizing officer would still be acting unlawfully
Page 10


and at his peril unless he can show probable cause.
In other words, to be exempt from a suit for damages or any possible criminal action for violation of
any of the civil liberties guaranteed in the Philippine Constitution, the searching officer must be
able to establish satisfactorily that the factual circumstances immediately preceding his search were
such that had he chosen to apply to a proper court
for a search warrant, he would have been entitled
to the same in the normal course of events. If he
would not have obtained the warrant, then the
searching officer is in grave danger of being made
to answer, either criminally or civilly, for his action.
Probable cause may be defined as such reason,
supported by facts and circumstances, as would
warrant the act of a cautious man in the belief that
his action, and means taken in prosecuting it, are
legally just and proper (US vs. Addison, 28 Phil.
566; See also PP vs. Syjuco, 64 Phil. 667).
It is, however, emphasized that save as indicated above, nothing in the foregoing may authorize an agent of the law to "subject all persons lawfully using the highways to the inconvenience and
indignity of a search. Only travelers crossing an
international boundary may be stopped and their
vehicles searched without a warrant because of national self-protection reasonably requiring one en
tering the country to identify himself as entitled to
come in, and his belongings as effects which may
be lawfully brought in” (Cooley’s Const. Limitation, 8th ed., 629).
It is likewise emphasized that nothing in the
foregoing may authorize the search of the persons
who may be occupants of the car which may be
searched under the circumstances cited above. The
mere presence of said persons in said car does not
make them lose the immunities to which they would
otherwise be entitled (US vs. Di Re, XIII Lawyer’s
Journal, 118).
It is to be understood finally that if the object
of the search and seizure includes smuggled dutiable goods, the prerogative of searching moving objects, such as vehicles and vessels without warrant
under Sec. 2211, RA No. 1937, may be exercised
ONLY BY PC PERSONNEL DEPUTIZED by the
Commissioner of Customs pursuant to Sec. 2203 (c),
RA No. 1937.
NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


GUSITTO
ORATENGF
Julestination
G


NEW FORENSIC
APPROACHES
By a Staff Member
Crime detection technicians must constantly
grow in knowledge to keep abreast with
modern trenes.
WVTITH this issue, we are inaugurating a secW tion on the technique of scientific crime
investigation. In the main, the section will be devoted to articles on laboratory functions and procedures. We aim to impart to our readers and to
all PC military personnel, as well as to the interested
public, the best information available concerning
various forensic science subjects, observations and
scientific procedures designed to improve and enhance our service to the nation. It is hoped that
the information to be gleaned from subsequent articles will have potent and far reaching effects on
the practice of criminology and on the appreciation
of criminalistics in our country. We will try to
cover all fields of forensic sciences, like crime detection, Investigation, Polygraphy, Police Photography, Fingerprinting and Dactyloscopy, Forensic
Chemistry, Forensic Psychiatry, Firearm Identification, Trace Evidence Identification, QD Analysis,
Toxicology, Spectography, Microscopy, Hematology,
and Legal Medicine. Although these subjects are
of practical interest mostly to police officers, the
interested public will not be deprived of the valuable information pertaining to detection and weeding out of criminals in our society.
The different forensic approaches are not statie activities. Every now and then new methods of
identification are developed in police laboratories.
Technicians of various fields of endeavors must
constantly “grow” in their knowledge in order to
keep abreast with the world’s best and thus cope
with the rising tide of criminal and subversive activities. We intend to apprise our readers of our
part in safeguarding the younger generation and


in making them realize that there is no glamor or
glory in crimes. Through the science of identification and crime detection we hope to have a part in
minimizing if not eradicating, lawlessness and
thereby share with the entire PC Command the vital
task of maintaining peace and order.
New Look
AN example of a new improvement in the
1A camp is the renovation of the PCCL. Originally, the laboratory was jammed into a small utility room. As a result, the chopped-up work space
cut sharply into the laboratory’s efficiency. How

(Continued on page 17)


MAJOR ANTONIO U. BRIONES, MC
Chief, PC Criminal Laboratory


CHAKI & RED:


Page 11


The mission of peace officers during strikes is to maintain peace
and order and protect life and property.


PASICALLY, governments exist for the welEDfare of the people and this is true with cur
own government. It can be said that public interest can be served best when laws are enforced effectively and peace and order is maintained properly. It is for this reason that city and municipal
police forces, the Constabulary and other national
law enforcement agencies are organized and maintained by our government.
Law enforcement and the preservation of peace
and order are continuing activities of police agencies and this task and responsibility become doubly
demanding and delicate during labor disputes. The
role of peace officers during labor dispute, especially when such disputes result in “Strikes” or “Lockouts, is exacting and requires not only knowledge
of the situation and circumstances but also determination, patience, tact and understanding of human
nature.
Consider the term “Labor Dispute.” The term
includes any controversy concerning terms, tenure


ever there is an actual or impending threat to peace
and order.
Very often, labor looks at peace officers with
suspicion and distrust. Such attitude is understandable. In fact, we hear or read quite frequently
about peace officers allegedly obstructing or interfering with peaceful picketing. It is no wonder that
some of our peace officers have found themselves
charged under RA No. 1167, the Revised Penal Code
and other laws affecting them. It is imperative that
this attitude of labor and sometimes, even of management, about peace officers be changed to one of
trust and confidence. Failing to achieve this change,
there can be little or no respect for or voluntary
obedience to our authority and we cannot expect
spontaneous public support and cooperation in the
maintenance of peace and order in the strike bound
areas.
The question may be asked: "How can peace officers play their role during labor disputes so as to
keep the strike and/or picketing lawful and peace

HANDLING THE LABOR
DISPUTE
By Lt. Col. Luciano Gunabe


or conditions of employment, as concerning the association or representation of persons in negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing or seeking to arrange terms or conditions of employment, regardless
of whether the disputants stand in the proximate
relation of employer and employee. An industrial
dispute may result in “strike" or “lockout.” Strike
means any temporary stoppage of work by the concerted action of employes as a result of an industrial dispute. “Lockout" means the temporary refusal of any employer to furnish work as a result
of an industrial dispute.
The mission of peace officers during strikes is
to maintain peace and order, protect life and property and perform such other tasks as directed by
proper authority. In the performance of this mission, the principal duty of peace officers is to keep
the "strike” or "lockout" peaceful and lawful. However, the resolution of legal issues is left to the
proper government agencies designated by law.
Peace officers are assigned in strike areas when

97)
ful?"
There is a ready, two-fold answer to the
question:
First is Service-Performance and Second, Official and Personal Norm of Conduct.
Service is the physical and spiritual obedience
in rendering the duty required of any office. Performance is the act and manner of executing one’s
official duties.
Official and personal norms of conduct refer to
the standard behaviour manifested by the individual
in his official and personal dealings.
In order to render such type of service and performance during labor disputes, it is imperative that
a peace officer must know the laws involved and the
procedure governing their implementation.
As to the laws involved, it is necessary that peace
officers acquaint themselves with (1) RA No. 875
(Continued on page 59)


Page 12


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


The freedom enjoyed by a trade union must be exercised with due
restraint and self-cliscipline.


PaHE trade unions which are primarily organized for the economic and social advancement of the workers are an integral part of a modern democratic society.
The governments and enlightened employers, accepting this fact, try to accommodate themselves with
the basic needs and aspirations of the working people who mainly bear the brunt of social services and
economic activity of the community. It is, therefore,
unjustifiable to find the governments or the employers sometimes attempting to crush the trade unions
engaged in collective bargaining for the purpose of
guarding and improving the conditions of life and
work of their membership.
In spite of this, a trade union is bound to function effectively in a free society, provided it is organized and conducted properly. On the contrary,
in a totalitarian society, where everybody and every
organization is expected to play a subservient role


For a union to act, is to enroll maximum membership, to collect dues regularly, to utilize union
funds properly and to secure maximum participation
of the membership in the democratic functioning of
the union.
(1) Membership —the strength of a union will
depend on the representative character that has got
to be established when negotiations and conciliations
are to be started with the employers.
(2) Finances —regular collection of union dues
will keep the union functioning properly with the
provision of a well organized office and an efficient
staff.
(3) The proper utilization of union funds will
give confidence to each member who will feel that
his own contribution is spent in his own well-being.
(4) Maximum attendance in the committee and
membership meetings will indicate the general interest that is taken by the rank and file in the union.


THE CONCEPT OF TRADE
UNIONS
By G. Mapara
(ICFTU Representative in Southeast Asia)


to the state, trade unions, as free agents, are not
allowed to function or to act.
The freedom which a trade union enjoys in a
democratic country has got to be exercised with due
restraint and self-discipline, otherwise it would lead
to self-destruction. A trade union will show its
worth, usefulness and organized strength when it
begins to act. For a trade union to exist is to act.
We often find that trade unions are very active
during strikes; but it would be seen that the success in a strike would largely depend on the continuous activity of a union before the strike began.
It is like winning a race for which one has to keep
one’s body in form or in a fit condition always. In
this small article I want to emphasize a few activities that a union should conduct before it gets ready
for an industrial action, remembering always in mind
that a fizzled-out or an unsuccessful strike is the
greatest disaster that can happen to a union. Instances are not lacking when unsuccessful strikes
have demoralized workers to such an extent that
they become anti-union.


Such meetings may be devoted to discussions of dayto-day problems and general demands.
There are also other constructive activities
which a union can organize, like trade union education, and setting up a research section which will
study economics of industry, as well as working class
family budgets, wages, housing, welfare schemes
and social security, etc. Such information would be
essential when a union puts forth demands for an
improvement in the wages or in other conditions of
work.
These basic activities will keep a trade union
in fit condition to act decisively in times of emergency, like calling a strike. The trade unions have
to remember that strike is the last weapon in their
armory and it hurts both ways, one who wields and
against whom it is wielded. Greatest precaution has,
therefore, to be taken before direct action is resorted to. The following four conditions will go a
long way to ensure a success in a strike: (1) legitimate and just demands; (2) public sympathy; (3)


KHAKI 8 RED


Page 13


FRHE original Senate Bill No. 358 sought to
A amend Secs. 2, 4, and 14 of Rep. Act No. 875,
otherwise known as the Industrial Peace Act, by
(1) conferring on the Court of Industrial Relations
(CIR) the exclusive jurisdiction to impose penalties
(Sec. 25) for violations of the Act; (2) requiring an
employer to file 10-day notice with the Conciliation
Service of his intention to hire employes in place
of strikers during a strike; and (3) considering the
violation by either employer or employe of an existing collective bargaining agreement as an unfair
labor practice. Because of overwhelming opposition from all quarters including labor unions, these
proposed amendments were abandoned, and instead
an amendment by substitution to said Senate Bill
No. 358 was filed.
The substituted bill, which is entirely different
from the original measure, seeks to penalize any
“peace officer and/or armed person" who shall
“transport or escort in any manner any person who
seeks to replace strikers within the premises of a
strike area.
A strike is usually manifested by a picket line.
This is a valid exercise of the freedom of expression, but it must be peaceful. (Mortera vs. C.I.R.,
79 Phil. 345). Violence, intimidation, coercion or
threats from any quarter including management and
union, are not covered by the proper exercise of the
right to picket. Hence, the objective of the amend

THE INDUSTRIAL
PEACE ACT
By Sen. Ambrosio Padilla


tervening in strikes and picketing characterized with
violence and intimidation from their side, for fear of
being penalized. In short, peace officers would hesitate to keep peace and maintain order.
There can be no question that above all other
considerations, peace and order have to be main

The Act draws particular attention to a significant requisite for
issuance of a writ of injunction in a labor dispute.


ment by substitution is laudable for the presence of
armed men at the instance of capital or of labor
must be discouraged and avoided.
Likewise, peace officers, charged with the duty
of maintaining peace and order or of protecting life
and property, must not take sides during a strike,
much less help “transport or escort" replacements
thru the picket line.
I felt, however, that a peace officer must be
placed in the same category as an armed person.
If neither management nor labor can legally make
use of violence during a strike, certainly an armed
person, who is a stranger to the labor dispute, has
no place in the strike area, much less to transport
or escort “scabs.” A peace officer also must not
intervene in the strike, but he has duties to discharge in the strike area by way of maintaining peace
and order. While this substituted bill prohibits and
penalizes only the transporting and escorting of replacement of strikers, I felt it would have the general effect of discouraging peace officers from in

tained during a strike. As a matter of fact, the
explanatory note of this substituted bill states that
peace officers "should be there to uphold the law
and maintain peace and order.” In the sincere belief that this bill would have the effect of discouraging peace officers from complying with their sworn
duty to maintain peace and order, lest their actions
be misunderstood and thus unduly expose them to
complaints and criminal prosecution under the provisions of said bill, I brought to the attention of my
colleagues in the Senate the advisability of distinguishing between an “armed person" and a. "peace
officer.”
I also drew attention to the circumstances that
under the Industrial Peace Act, one of the requisites
for the issuance of a writ of injunction in a labor
dispute is that “the public officers charged with the
duty to protect complainant’s property are unable
or unwilling to furnish adequate protection" (subpar. (5), par. (d), Sec. 9). Labor has always con

Page 14


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


DEACEFUL picketing is a lawful means of iak bor union activity and is permitted in any
bona fide conflict with an employer of labor. Organized labor has the rights of free speech and peaceful
picketing. In peaceful picketing there is an entire
absence of fraud, violence, coercion or anything of an
intimidating nature. It is characterized by peaceful persuasion for the promotion of a lawful purpose. The term peaceful picketing implies not only
the absence of violence but the absence of any unlawful act. It authorizes picketing which does not
interfere with the person or property of another by
the unlawful use of force, violence, intimidation or
threats. It precludes any form of physical obstruction. or interference with an employer’s business or
the misrepresentation of the facts of the controversy,
and should not go beyond the allowable area of


THE
PICKET LINE
(Adapted)


intimidate the patrons, and the pickets neither do
nor say anything which involves any element of
threat or moral coercion. (Bottling Co. vs. Lawlor,
(Pa.) 18 Leh L.J. 243)
Picketing is peaceful and orderly where four
or five pickets remain in the neighborhood of the


Peaceful picketing implies not only the absence of violence but also
of any unlawful act.


peaceful persuasion. The line between lawful and
unlawful picketing is similar to that between peaceful persuasion and intimidation. The persuasion
that the law permits leaves the will of persons free
to choose. It is addressed to reason. Thus, picketing is peaceful where representatives of the union
are stationed upon a road or a considerable distance
from the land where an employer is carrying on his
business and the men who continue to work there
are in no way molested; or where there is a small
picketing patrol carrying banners that do not misrepresent the facts; or where the pickets are confined to a reasonable distance from the entrance
to a place of business so that they cannot annoy or


Senator Ambrosio Padilla keynotes labor-management relations
confab.
2min


employer’s shop and only one is active at a time,
the others remaining near enough to take turns
as the active picket. And if that picket carries no
sign or banner but merely walks back and forth
on the sidewalk in front of and ten or twelve feet
from the employer’s shop saying “This store is unfair to organized labor” or “Do not patronize this
store,” he is guilty of no intimidating or coercive
acts. Only where pickets speak words in a menscing manner or accompany them by a show of force,
may the words be found to carry a flavor of intimidation rather than peaceful persuasion. So long as
no crowds are collected near the employer’s business, and free entrance thereto is not impeded, where
there are no threats or utterances of false statements, picketing is peaceful. If no crowds congregate because of the movement of an automobile
through the streets which uses a music-producing
box to attract attention, there is no intimidation or
coercion. However, a music box may not play loud
and boisterous music.
Whether picketing in any particular case is peacefully carried on is a question of fact. Minor disorders
may occur during peaceful picketing, owing to the
over-enthusiasm of the pickets, which do not render
unions responsible and which they generally repudiate. But when a particular case is reviewed by
the courts, there is a little difficulty in drawing
the line between acts permissible and acts forbidden.
(Exchange Bakery v. Rifkin, 245 N.Y. 260)
The mere distribution of cards in the vicinity of
particular place of business by members of a union,
who do not speak while doing so, is peaceful. Persons receiving the cards are not put in fear of their
personal safety if they proceed into the shop.. So
long as they are not addressed in a manner likely
to create an impression of danger, such acts are
lawful. (Kirmes v. Adler, 311 Pa. 78)


KHAKI 8. RED'


Page 19





The Khaki and Red
Philippine Constabulary Journal
and General Magazine
Philippine Constabulary
Camp Crame, Quezon City
Attention: Maj. Constante Ma. Cruz
Editor & General Manager
Gentlemen:
In our world there are all kinds of men, each
living in accordance with his chosen life philosophy and service attitude. A good many who
are endowed with the spirit of deep loyalty and
self-sacrifice attune their entire being to responding to the demand of serving the best interest of
God, country and their fellowmen, in disregard of
their own selves. The majority are indifferent,
and some are opportunists.
To the heroic men of dedication and high purpose we owe our divinity in life, the strength of
our national economy, the dignity of our people
and the prestige of our government. These are
the heights towards which a people should direct
all their energies and time to achieve.
It is unfortunate that in our age we have
more about notoriety than heroism in our readings. Is this because from day to day more men
do evil than good? It would be more salutary


in its effect upon our mental health if our reading
public, especially the young, could have more to
read everyday about the good deeds of our people
than otherwise.
The Philippine Constabulary stands as our
national guardian for peace and order. The heroic
deeds of the men in Khaki and Red, individually or
collectively, are a beacon light to our youth inclined towards heroism during peace time. Let us all
hope that this image will hold eternal.
bais
Even in his early youth my departed brother,
Lt. Francisco V Canuto only had one obsession
in life — to join the Philippine Constabulary.
He came to Manila after graduation from the high
school in 1918 but failed to qualify as a Philippine Constabulary Academy cadet because of his
height. This did not swerve him from his determination to be a member of that organization. He
enlisted as a private from which humble beginning
he rose in rank until by dint of service he finally
joined the academy and became an officer. Records of the Philippine Constabulary would bear
out the fact that he pacified the colorums of Siargao, Surigao, and to preserve the peace of this
group he transferred them to an hacienda which
he purchased in the barrio now called San Francisco in Mainit Municipality of Surigao. It was
while in retirement in this hacienda, living with


LABOR RELATIONS INSTITUTE


3-day course conducted by the Asian Labor
A Education Center for Philippine Constabulary personnel and other Police officers throughout
the country offers the following:
OBJECTIVES:
1. to help acquaint PC personnel and other
Police officers with the status of Philippine
labor-management relations;
2. to give PC personnel and other Police officers a working knowledge of the problems,
rights and responsibilities of both labor aud
management which could well serve as their
guidelines in connection with their duties
of policing industrial conflicts; and
3. to orient PC personnel and other Police officers on the various areas of conflicts and
issues involved in a labor dispute or strikes.
METHODS OF APPROACH: In order to achieve
the above objectives, discussions on the following subjects will be undertaken:
Page 16


1. The Role of Trade Unions in a Free Society
2. The Philippine Labor Movement Today
3. Labor-Management Relations: Practices
and Principles
4. Labor-Management Relations: Areas of
Conflicts
5. Labor and Industrial Conflicts
6. The Public’s Stake in Industrial Peace
7. The Role of Government Labor Agencies
in Industrial Conflicts
8. The Role of Police Officers in Industrial
Conflicts
9. Management and Industrial Conflicts
10. The Goal of Industrial Peace
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: Each participant who shall have completed the 3-day Institute is entitled to a Certificate of Completion to be awarded by the University of the
Philippines Asian Labor Education Center.
NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


THE HPC ENLISTED
MEN'S CLUB


By Msgt. Bonifacio Tubiera


It has yet to undergo the process of growth, but
club members are a determined lot.


FN almost every big organization or establishAment there usually are clubs, associations
and many other fraternity groups, all designed to
foster harmony, cordiality and cooperation within
such organizations or establishments. These groupings are not, necessarily, an organizational requirement. Rather, they are manifestations of human
relations for the ultimate good of society and of
those who make up the society.
The Philippine Constabulary is no exception.
Within its fold, there exists a number of personnel
associations and, as intended basically, they are for
the common good of this National Police Organization and of its members.
One such group in the PC is the HPC EM’s
Club. As the name suggests, it is an association of
PC enlisted men in the different divisions, staffs/
sections and separate units of Headquarters Philippine Constabulary. It has to date, a membership
of more than one thousand.
The club officers for 1962 as finally constituted are: MSgt Eliseo V Fernandez, President; FSgt
T R Malonzo, Vice President; MSgt B Tubiera, Secretary (appointed); SSgt Carlos Munoz, Treasurer;


the people to whom he had promised his life assistance, that the Japanese caught up with him
during the occupation as an unsurrendered officer.
What followed you have already narrated in your
Khaki and Red, September-October 1962 issue.
The five other surviving brothers and sisters
of Lt. Francisco V. Canuto join me in making this
acknowledgment of the time and effort you spent
in making the research so that you can publish the
sad but heroic ending of the life of my deceased
brother as a member of the Philippine Constabulary. Personally, I had a premonition as soon
as the Japanese occupied the Philippines that if
my brother ever fell into their hands his uncompromising attitude in life would bring nothing but
death. For my deceased brother did not value
living if it were to be purchased at a cost that
will make life meaningless.
Sincerely yours,
(Sgd.) JOAQUIN CANUTO


TSgt Carlos Velasquez, Auditor; MSgt Calixto Redondiez, Business Manager: TSgt Zate, PRO; FSgt
Tolentino and SSgt Odono, Sgts.-at-arms. Board
Members: MSgt B Javier, OCF; MSgt Ibarra, HPC
Mtr Pool; MSgt Mabanag, HPC & HSB; MSgt Clanor, PC Band; MSgt Alcantara, Repl Det; FSgt
Corpuz, 117 PC Ranger Co; FSgt Agustin, 144 PC
Ranger Co; FSgt Rogado, HPC Det (appointed);
MSgt Honesto Cunanan, PCIG (appointed); and
FSgt Clamor, PC Sig Co (appointed).
Like all other associations, the HPC EM’s club
is concerned, among other things, with benefits that
should accrue to members of the club by virtue of
their membership. One such benefit is the monetary aid to the wife and/or heirs of any member
who dies. The club’s by-laws provide for a compulsory one-peso contribution in such a case. There
is also a provision for an automatic contribution
of fifty centavos (P0.50) by each club member to be
given to a member in case of the death of his immediate dependent or dependents.
The HPC EM’s club is a member of the Enlisted Personnel Central Steering Council, which is composed of representatives of EM’s Clubs from the five
major commands: PC, PA, PAF, PN and GHQ, AFP.
Among its various activities, the Council is consistently working on more benefits for the entire
enlisted personnel of the AFP; and this could only
be achieved through the combined efforts of the
Presidents of the five EM’s Clubs of the five major
commands and GHO.
It would be well to mention in this connection
that MSgt Fernandez holds the distinction of being
the only club president to be commended for the
discharge of the functions of his office. The commendation, signed by former PC chief, Brig. Gen.
Isagani V. Campo on 9 Dec. 1961, was for "sound,
timely and competent management coupled with outstanding ability in the conduct of the club’s affairs,
matured guidance and deep interest in the welfare
of the club, zealous accounting of the club’s funds,
prompt payment of death claims, acquisition of tangible assets for the clubhouse, and other accomplishments that proved his dynamic leadership.”
The HPC EM’s club is young and therefore,
must yet have to undergo the process of growth.
The process, undoubtedly, is replete with many difficulties, as are all things else going through the
ordeal of coming of age. But the club members are
a determined lot, inspired as they are by the club
leadership and the encouragement from the PC
hierarchy.


KHAKI 8. RED


Page 17


COURAGE: The Right Way
By a Staff Member
Only for the "good" and the "noble” should one
be imbued with courage.


T. Col. Artemio S. Espidol, provincial commander of Cavite, was invited recently as
guest speaker at a weekly convocation of the Quezon High School students.
The Colonel was to speak on COURAGE, which
was the convocation theme. A shy speaker (this the
Colonel confessed unashamedly to QHS lady teachers and almost begged to be excused), he finally
found courage to speak on “courage;" and it turned
out a courageous speech, indeed.
Col. Espidol started with an invocation of the
generally known concept of courage as laid down
by Mr. Daniel Webster in his famous dictionary.


Webster, according to Espidol, referred to courage
as “that quality of mind which enables one to encounter danger and difficulties with firmness; valor; boldness — that firmness of spirit which mects
danger without “fear,” etc.
The Colonel took Mr. Webster to task, imputing by inference that courage, as defined by the
learned lexicographer, could mean, in other words,
an emboldened state of mind to do either good or
evil. Col. Espidol would be more specific: he pointed to the “good" and the "noble” as the only excuse
for imbuing one with courage. (Mr. Webster please
take note).
“So that is the definition of courage,” the Co

Lt. Col. Artemio S. Espidol (inset) speaks to students on “courage”


Page 18


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


Picture below shows Sgt. Jose N. Baldovino working on
his invention shown in above picture.


lonel said after citing Mr. Webster. “Therefore,"
he argued, “courage can be utilized for something
good or for something bad."
The Colonel now took occasion to elucidate on
“courage” as he would want it understood. All of
a sudden, he was a preacher to the boys and girls
of QHS, enjoining them “to use courage in the right
direction.” Specifically, he counseled the QHS students never to lose hope in the face of difficulties
attendant to the acquisition of knowledge. Have
courage instead, he said.
Net oblivious of juvenile delinquency, to which
not a few of today’s teenage population are susceptible, Col. Espidol discouraged the young’s courage
in such wayward resorts as drinking, sex exploits,
canto-boy haunts and a lot of present-day frivolities


AUTOMATIC
BURGLAR ALARM


PICTURE shows Utility Model-431 filed with
A the Director of Patents on 1 October 1962
by Technical Sergeant Jose N. Baldovino of Headquarters, PC, Rizal. The utility relates to an automatic burglar alarm for use in television sets, radio phonographs, sewing machines and other valuable appliances. It is designed to give the striking
sound of the horn, that will not stop until the members of the family are awaken to switch it off.
The device will help the authorities, through
the victim, in determining the time the culprit
touched or tampered with the appliance, and at the
same time, even the description could be ascertained
by the authorities in case the victim is alert enough
to verify why the device had given the alarm signal.
The victim will be of great help to the authorities
in furnishing the time, the description and other information relative to the commission of the crime.
Sgt. Baldovino believes that his invention, if
patented, will be of great help to the public, as
well as to the authorities, in minimizing, if not eradicating, criminality in their operational jurisdiction. All Chiefs of Police attending a seminar at the
PC, school expressed unanimous approval of the
gadget when presented by Sgt. Baldovino.
I
Sgt. Baldovino joined the PC on 20 December
1957 and has been an NCO in-charge of the Rizal
PC police crime laboratory.


H aa G
of the youth.
For all the things that the Colonel imparted to
the high school students, the unanimous acclaim
could well be "more courage to the Colonel!”
 nan
Courage, of course, is not anything new to the
serviceman. He had it when first he considered
enlistment. He made good use of it, as he still does,
in his responsibilities in the interest of national
security.. But there’s nothing like brushing up on
one’s courage. As for the serviceman, he simply
cannot afford to relax on his courage; it must be
present in him at all times as he goes about his
business of thwarting all attempts at jeopardizing
his country’s peace, order and security..
ma  a
 The Espidol speech, if at all, served as a necessary reminder in these times of stress and strain.


Page T9


KHAKIAIRED:


ANDRES BONIFACIOALA
Hero of Manila


In a recent proclamation by Manila Mayor Antonio J. Villegas, the Great Plebeian
was officially declared “Hero of Manila.” Below is a reproduction of the Mayor's
proclamation in Tagalog.


NG dugo ng mga bayani ay nananalaytay
oI
Asa mga ugat ng taga-Maynila, mula pa sa
dakilang raha ng magkabilang pampang ng Pasig
na si Lakan Dula na pinagkatakutan ng mga Kastila nang sila’y unang sumadsad dito. Ang kabayanihan ng rahang ito ay sumalin sa lalong napabantog na pangalan ng kanyang anak na si Raha
Sulayman. Ang paghihimagsik laban sa kapangyarihang Kastila ay nagtining sa katapangan ng dimalilimutang Magat Salamat.
iri seifitomias ed
Sa larangan ng kalinangan ay nangunguna ang
pangalan tubong Maynilang si Tomas Pinpin sa sining ng paglilimbag.
At sa sining naman ng pintura ay natatangi
ang pangalan ni Damian Domingo na ngayon ay
siyang ipinalalagay na "Ama ng Sining ng Pagpipinta.”
Sa isip at puso ng Paring Jacinto Zamora na
kasama ng mga paring Burgos at Gomez ay pinagpisan ang pagdakila sa pananampalataya at pagmamahal sa bayan, sa katotohanan ang lupang Maynila ay nadilig ng dugo ng martir.
Hindi lamang mga lalaki ang nagpamalas ng
kabayanihan sa lungsod na ito kundi pati mga babae. Sa larangan ng kawanggawa at pagkamapagkupkop ay namumukod ang katauhan ni Margarita
Roxas ni Ayala.
Sa panitikan naman ay namayani ang makabayang manunulat na si Fernando Maria Guerrero na
kinilala hindi lamang sa loob ng Pilipinas kundi sa
ibang bansa man.
Ang isa sa mga luwalhati ng Maynila ay ang
pagkakatatag dito ng makasaysayang Katipunan,
ang Kataas-taasan, Kagalang-galang na Katipunan
ng mga Anak ng Bayan. Ito ang binhi ng paghihimagsik. Si Emilio Jacinto na naging "Utak ng
Katipunan" ay siyang kanang kamay ng Dakilang
Plebeyo.
T
Ranogeoa sin mdi
At sa talaan ng mga bayaning ito ang pinakadakila ay si Andres Bonifacio, ang "Ama ng Katipunan.” Dahil kay Andres Bonifacio ay nagkaroon
ng malaganap na himagsikan na siyang lumagot sa
tanikala ng kaalipinan. Utang ng mga Pilipino ang
kanilang tinatamasang kalayaan at kasarinlan sa
magiting na pagmamalasakit at kabayanihan ni Andres Bonifacio


Si Andres Bonifacio ang sagisag ng kabayanihang hindi nalupig ng karalitaan. Iniluwal sa Tundo noong ika-30 ng Nobyembre, 1863, si Andres
Bonifacio, na maagang naulila sa kanyang mga magulang, ay siyang nagkupkop sa kanyang mga kapatid sa pamamagitan ng paghahanap-buhay na
mababa nguni't marangal. Sa gitna ng kanyang karalitaan ay nakuha niyang maturuan ang sarili sa
pamamagitan ng pagbabasa ng iba’t ibang aklat.
Naging masigasig din siya sa larangan ng tanghalan at itinatag niya at ng kanyang mga kasama
ang kapisanang “Teatro Porvendir.” Dahil dito'y
naging dalubhasa siya sa Tagalog hanggang sa isalin niya sa Tagalog ang “Ultimo Adios" ni Rizal.
Dahil dito, akong si ANTONIO J. VILLEGAS,
Alkalde ng lungsod ng Maynila, ay nagpapahayag
sa araw na ito, ika-29 ng Nobyembre ng 1962 na
si ANDRES BONIFACIO ay siyang BAYANI NG
MAYNILA.
Bilang katibayan nito ay nilagdaan ko at ipinakintal ang tatak ng Sagisag ng lungsod ng Maynila.
Ginawa sa lungsod ng Maynila, Nobyembre 29,
1962.
ANTONIO J. VILLEGAS
Alkalde
Lungsod ng Maynila


Mayor Villegas adopts the
Great Plebeian as Manila's own
and paves the way for a Bonifacio centennial this year.


Page 20


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


President Diosdado Macapagal sets the norm for public
service.


a decision has been made, there is no reason
why implementing action should be delayed.
d. Firmness.—He enjoined public officials to
resist pressure. Without being discourteous,
he said that we must do (what must be done)
with firmness and justice.
e. Cleanliness.—He said that government offices should hire janitorial services to keep
our offices immaculately clean.
f. Attitude.—He stressed that public officials
and employes should not only consider employment as a means of livelihood. Employes should be imbued with a sense of
duty and with no sense of time — meaning
that in the accomplishment of a mission, officials and employes should not work by the
clock.
g. Work like a team.—He pointed out the necessity of working like a team in the govern

F
OUDEO BE
UOY
By a Staff Member
nioa el andT esansfampotio dasto
Ho
President Macapagal takes occasion to exhort government officials
MO
on desirable norms of conduct in the publie service.


T a conference of government officials called
Aby the President at Malacanang on 8 November 1962, the following points were taken up.
1. The need to disseminate the objectives of
the government for the benefit of our people not
only in the higher echelons of commands but also
in the lower echelons. Among others, such objectives are moral regeneration and the socio-economic
program of the government.
2. The necessity of developing among employes
in the public service the following fundamental characteristics:
a. Honesty.—The President observes that while
he is satisfied with the integrity of higher
officials, there is still need of imbuing the
lower categories of employes with this desirable characteristic.
b. Courtesy.—He stressed that courtesy should
be cultivated not only for general but also
for its technical effect.
c. Speed of doing things.—He wanted all cases
disposed of expeditiously. He said that after


ment service without rivalry, but not shielding officials and employes who are corrupt
and undesirables.
h. The President pleaded with every public official for help and cooperation. He suggested to Cabinet Secretaries the feasibility
of holding similar conferences in order to
bring home to our people the crusade of good
government which he termed "Peaceful Revolution.
3. The President called attention to:
a. Malacanang Memorandum Cir #11 — re
prompt action on official communication.
b.
Malacanang Memorandum Cir #12 — Discouraging the holding of anniversary celebration.
c. Malacanang Memorandum Cir #15 — Submission of Administrative Investigation Reports.
d. Malacanang Memorandum Cir $14 — Avoidance of wastage in the consumption of electricity and water.


 


Page 21


SPEAKER
POLICE
TO


Speaker Villareal addressing the Police graduates.


I congratulate you on your graduation. It is no
ordinary graduation. You have been graduated before, under different circumstances. This is something special.
You did not come here to learn the A.B.C’s of
police work. You were here to learn more about
the work that you now do. As I have been made to
understand, you took up police administration and
operations. Not its rudiments, but the finer aspects
involved in such difficult work.
For you therefore, this was a post-graduate
course. That you are being graduated after six
weeks means that you have successfully hurdled all
the tests which were designed to measure your professional grasp of the problems and situations that
occur in the discharge of your assigned duties.
Your coming to study here is an indication of
your earnestness, of your desire to do a good job
and of your thirst for knowledge that would enhance
your efficiency and your effectiveness in the communities in which you live.
For this you deserve praise, not merely congratulations. By your willingness to learn, you have
demonstrated an intellectual curiosity which is fundamental to growth and improvement in any line of
work.
Police work is not something you learn once
and feel that you know everything that pertains to
it. It is a growing science; it is an art. As communities grow and expand, it becomes more complex.
Because of this explosion our sociological problems are increasing. And so the tasks of policing


SPEAKS
GRADUATES


our communities today are not nearly as simple as
they were, for instance, twenty years ago, shortly
after the end of World War II. Because there are
more people, there is greater need for system and
method, and for changes to suit new situations. Administration and operations have to keep up with the
times, with the bigger population, with the increasing ingenuity of criminals and with the pressures
brought about by increasing political and economic
activity.
The problems of our Republic are many. Not
the least important of these is peace and order. In
fact, peace and order ranks high in the national
priorities. That is why police budgets are increasing every year. Law enforcement organizations have
to be strengthened and enlarged. We are no longer
in the cart-and-carabao stage. We are in a highly
mechanized era. We are in an atomic age. We are
moving in jets and dashes.
To maintain peace and order in its maximum
degree in the crowded cities and in the less populous towns is vital to our development. Lands cannot be tilled by citizens who are afraid for their
safety. And products cannot be brought to the factories where they are needed if the freedom of the
highways is not maintained.
Our police organizations must not be weak organizationally. Otherwise, they cannot guarantee
safety of life, limb and property. That is why orientations, briefings and instruction such as has been
your privilege to undergo are necessary. That is
why we need more men like you who are willing to
become better versed in the science of police work.
There is something else, too, that is important.
I think it is pertinent to point out that it is vital
to the national welfare that the public image of our
law-enforcement agencies and their individual members be improved. It is in your hands to do this
because you know what is proper and what is right.
You who compose the leadership of your organization know that it is necessary to impress upon the
people that the lawman is a friend and not someone
to be feared or detested.
The people like it when they can point to their
guardians of the law and say that they are the
“finest.” The traditions of our police agencies are
(Continued on page 54)


Page 22


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


Ormoc City Chief of
Police Tops Class


CODE


36 police officers from all over the country
graduated from the Class 62-A Police Administration and Operations Course at the Philippine Constabulary School last December 22nd. The first of
its kind at HPC level, the course is designed to
equip the municipal police officer with modern
knowledge in police managerial and operational
functions.
Topping the 36 police officers is Ormoc City
Police Chief Sofronio D. Aguipo, a member of the
Philippine Bar.
To the graduates, Acting PC Chief, Brig. Gen.
Nicanor D. Garcia had this message!


MESSAGE


I wish to express my sincerest congratulations to
the graduates of the Police Administration and Operations Course.
In these modern times the commission of crimes have
become subtle and the criminal mind is continually seeking ingenious means to circumvent the law. Thus, it has
come to pass that police work has become more difficult
and more complex. It is for this reason, more than any
other, that police agencies have sought to train and retrain their personnel in order to keep abreast of the
modern and scientific means to combat crime.
Police work in a modern society must keep pace with
the changing times. Old methods and techniques in police
work must give way in order that the enforcement of law
and the maintenance of order may be effective and the
people to whom the policeman owes his existence and allegiance must efficiently be served.
Cognizant of these facts, the Philippine Constabulary,
as a national police organization, must keep abreast of the
new concept in police work. It is for this reason that
the Police Administration and Operations Course has
been offered by the PC in order that law enforcers,
particularly in the executive level, may acquire modern
knowledge in police managerial and operational functions.
I wish to point out that this is the first, course of
this kind in the country. And I am proud you have become the pioneers. But more so, I am elated that we have
a crop of men who will contribute in a large measure
towards police efficiency geared towards bringing complete peace throughout the countay.
latg noja
GOOD LUCK AND CARRY ON THE GOOD WORK!
(Sgd.) NICANOR D. GARCIA
Brigadier General, AFP
Acting Chief of Constabulary


AS A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, my fundamental duty is to serve mankind; to safeguard lives
and property; to protect the innocent against deception, the weak against oppression or intimidation,
and the peaceful against violence or disorder; and
to respect the Constitutional rights of all men to
liberty, equality and justice.
I WILL keep my private life unsullied as an example
to all; maintain courageous calm in the face of
danger, scorn, or ridicule; develop self-restraint;
and be constantly mindful of the welfare of others.
Honest in thought and deed in both my personal and
official life, I will be exemplary in obeying the laws
of the land and the regulations of my department.
Whatever I see or hear of a confidential nature or
that is confided to me in my official capacity will
be kept ever secret unless revelation is necessary in
the performance of my duty. I WILL never act officiously or permit personal feelings, prejudices, animosities or friendships to influence my decisions.
With no compromise for crime and with relentless
prosecution of criminals, I will enforce the law
courteously and appropriately without fear or favor,
malice or ill will, never employing unnecessary
force or violence and never accepting gratuities.
I RECOGNIZE the badge of my office as a symbol
of public faith, and I accept it as a public trust to
be held so long as I am true to the ethics of the
police service. I will constantly strive to achieve
these objectives and ideals, dedicating myself before
God to my chosen profession law enforcement.


Brig. Gen. Nicanor Garcia congratulates topnotcher Sofronio D. Aguipo of Class 62-A of the PC Police Adminisg m
tration and Operations Course,


 : 


Page 23


AN behalf of the Filipino people and on my
Oown as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed
Forces, I proudly salute the Philippine Constabulary
on the occasion of its 6Ist anniversary.
I have deep personal reasons for regarding the
Constabulary with affection and respect. It is because of my full recognition of the services of the
man in uniform that I approved, among other things
pertaining to the reinvigoration of our armed forces,
the raise in pay of the enlisted man and I am prepared to do more that is within the power of the administration to promote the welfare of the common
man in uniform.
Sixty-one years of honorable soldiery in the
cause of peace and order is a glory to any organization. But let us one and all reflect upon the thought
that this imposes upon us the awesome responsibility
of keeping that record untarnished, and let us remember that this good name of the Constabulary
had been purchased by generations of constables by
their unquestioning devotion, their indefatigable
toil, their sweat and even their blood. Let anyone
in this organization at this moment who feels that
he cannot keep up this glorious tradition feel the
weight of the responsibility, anyone who is cohorting with smugglers, anyone who is abetting corruption, anyone who has allowed himself to be the prey
of vice which he had sworn to fight, anyone who
would disgrace the name of the organization leave


moral. I have vowed to place our beloved country on
the road to moral regeneration, and I expect that
this organization whom I love so well shall lead our
people along that path to our national salvation.
Any deviation from among you will be nothing short
of treason.
It has been with great pleasure and pride that
I have received continual reports of the achievements of the Constabulary in the administration’s
determined campaign to wipe out smuggling, corruption and vice. These reports have been pouring
from all corners of our country. The Constabulary
can be sure that our people are receiving news of
these achievements with jubilation for they serve to
demonstrate the fact that our country has, indeed,
entered into a new era of dedicated public service
and moral regeneration. It recalls those good old
days when our people looked with respect at the
merest constabulary private, when this clean and upright man in khaki and red was the hero worship
of children, when any man in that uniform was the
object of envy of his civilian friends. Those were
the good old days and I am very glad that they are
coming back with us to inspire our people with new
hope for the future of a nation that was almost
ruined by the graft and corruption of politicians of
the recent past.
I am impressed, too, by Constabulary reports
naming corrupt officials and politicians as well as


  

By Diosdado Macapagal,
Moo


its ranks now, for the smallest speck of cancer in
the body of the PC could very well foredoom the
achievements purchased at so high a price in more
than half a century of the glorious history of the
Constabulary.
I trust that you all understand how I feel about
the slightest tinge of dishonorable conduct in my
administration. I have not spared my friends even
in the cabinet from the strict requirement of official
and personal conduct beyond suspicion. And I assure you that if there remains in my administration
any public servant who besmirches that norm of honor, I would weed him out if that is the last thing I
would do as President of the Philippines. This
should give all of you in the Philippine Constabulary
a definite idea of what your Commander-in-Chief
would do to any constabularyman, whether private
or general, who would act in a manner derogatory
to the glorious traditions of the organization. The
Constabulary is no place for weaklings, physical or


corrupting aliens as falling into the nationwide
dragnet that has been scoring against smugglers
and economic saboteurs. I want to tell each and
every constabulary man that he has my full backing in this crusade, and that he can collar any man
violating our laws regardless of whether he is a politician or claims to be an influential man. Spare
no man in this crusade for every guilty one who
falls will mean one scoundrel less in our struggle for
our economic salvation.
We have already launched our five-year socioeconomic program aimed at the upliftment and prosperity of our country and at good life for the common man. There is no turning back in this determined national effort which concerns the welfare
of every man, woman, and child in our country and
the just place of our Republic on the face of the
earth. The Philippine Constabulary is already taking part in this effort and I have every reason to
expect that it shall not fail.


Page 24


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


The Constable feels great and is inspired to a more commendable performance as the C-in-C felicitates the PC in a big way.


Not everyone appreciates the fact that security
is a prerequisite for progress. No plan of economic
development can hope to be implemented successfully if it does not rest on the premise of individual
freedom from fear and anxiety.
 WBA
If the Constabulary is to satisfactorily fulfill
its role in this program, it must condition itself even
as an instrument must be honed.
The first step in the conditioning process is to
divorce itself from political influences. Perverted
politics destroys every agency it taints, and when the
very internal security agency of the State is tainted,
the consequences may well be tragic. The Constabulary must never be made the private tool of any
political individual or group, and I herewith pledge
my office and all its powers as the buffer for any
attempt to convert it into such from the lowest to
the highest levels of command.
Indeed there is too much politics in this country. Since assuming the presidency, I have sought
to lay aside politics, consecrating myself to the gi

tor of progress and contentment. Acts of law violations of all magnitudes are like varying sizes of
grains of sand which all threaten to stop the movement of the government’s machinery, if not shatter
critical parts of the machinery. At this time of our
development, when we have just started to recover
from the retardation caused by government inefficiency, and when we have just started to lay the
foundations of a dynamic stage of national history,
we cannot afford the delay of even one moment.
The final step in the Constabulary’s conditioning should be the absorption by each and every Constable of this Republic’s concept of civil rights. The
right to life, liberty, prosperity and the pursuit of
happiness is the fundamental tenet of our way ef
life.
Every government agency is dedicated to the
enhancement thereof; in fact, it may be said that
it is almost the total concern of government. To
help the preservation of this right, certain citizens
have been delegated the authority to use force if


OSOD
gisIoSD a as fi bemoolaw ii
nigdajsniw siavian jenigys
President of the Philippines


gantic task of economic growth, together with moral
regeneration. Many so-called leaders, however, seem
to persist in dissipating the nation’s time in endless
politics that exults in irresponsible political intrigue
and sensationalism at the expense of the Nation’s
good. I must say emphatically that these quarters
cannot succeed in diverting our efforts from the
crucial task of seeking prosperity for our people;
together with dedicated agencies of our nation like
the Constabulary, we shall proceed in the vigorous
discharge of our duty, undeterred by those who would
place politics above the true welfare of the country.
The second step in conditioning the Constahulary would be to impress upon everyone the importance of internal security. When a smuggler, or a
Communist, or a grafter is caught, the significance
of that event is not confined to the subsequent conviction or the tallying of another statistical entry.
The true dimensions of its significance is that the
country has eliminated one more compromising fac

necessary. This is one of the most powerful authorities which our people can delegate. It can also
be the most treacherous. I enjoin you therefore to
act in the discharge of our noble mission with such
combined firmness and kindness that you shall not
be shunned in fear by our citizens but that your
presence among our countryfolk will be welcome to
them because you symbolize the benign authority of
law and order, protection and helpfulness as the embodiment of the finest qualities of the Constabulary, the friend and not the foe of the people.
Hd
The Philippine Constabulary marks its 61st anniversary at a time when justice is the byword of
government; justice meaning full reward or full
punishment to the deserving no matter his place in
the social or political scheme of the State. The
Constabulary, the glorious Khaki and Red, has long
demonstrated its stern affinity with justice. On
this significant occasion, every citizen voices the
prayer that this reputation shall always endure.


 


Page 25


EAVESDROPPING
AND THE LAW


NY evaluation of the facts brought out by
A this inquiry must be based on an understanding of present law and of the fundamental nature of the acts with which we deal. What is eavesdropping? What is the law on wiretapping? There
has been much talk about the invasion of privacy
through the secret recording of voices. What is the
right of privacy, if it exists in this connection? Let
us get down to the elements of the subject, before
we deal with revelations of fact.
Man’s first means of communication was his
own voice. His first means of interception was the
human ear. With these he got along for many thousands of years. Except for an occasional purloined
letter, interception of communications was purely
the work of the eavesdropper.
In old English law, the eavesdropper was rated
a nuisance along with gypsies, idlers, the common
scold, and the disorderly house. In Book IV, Chapter 13, of his Commentaries, the great 18th Century
jurist, Blacktone, defined the offender thus:
“(6) Eavesdroppers, or such as listen under
walls or windows or the eaves of a house to
hearken after discourse, and thereupon to
frame slanderous and mischievous tales, are
a common nuisance and are punishable at the
court-leet; or are indictable at the sessions,
and punishable by finding sureties for their
good behavior.”
In today’s Penal Law of New York State we find
that section 721, under the title “Eavesdropping,"
classified as disorderly conduct, declares as follows:
"A person, who secretly loiters about a building, with intent to overhear discourse therein,
and to repeat or publish the same to vex or
annoy or injure others, is guilty of a misdemeanor."
This section is obviously an inept 19th Century
attempt to modernize Blacktone. Lawyers recognize
that this seemingly simple sentence contains so
many elements of proof that it would be impossible
to convict anyone under it. It has been a dead letter of the law, though we still recognize the principle
as sound.
The invention of the telegraph in 1844 and of
the telephone in 1876 ushered in a new era, the dawn
of what might be called the Age of Communications. And in the 19th Century the Legislature was
not laggard in acting. In 1845 it enacted a law pro

tecting telegraph lines from damage—along with
piers, abutments, buoys. In 1892 the Legislature
amended this section (in what is now Article 134 of
the Penal Law on Malicious Mischief, section 1423,
subdivision 6) to make guilty of a felony any person
who “shall unlawfully and wilfully cut, break, tap
or make connection with any telegraph or telephone
line, wire, cable, or instrument, or read or copy in
any unauthorized manner any message, communication or report passing over it, in this state."
This passage of 1892 law, unchanged and still
classified along with damage to water mains and
sewer pipes, remains our State’s basic law on private
wiretapping today. Plainly the Legislature then had
the telegraph more in mind than the telephone, and
protection of property as much in mind as protection of privacy. At any rate, this was the germ of
our present concern with interception of communications.
Two other sections of law later gave strength
to the concept of privacy. Section 552 of the Penal
Law, dating to 1881, makes it a crime to obtain
knowledge of a message by connivance with a telephone or telegraph employee. In 1949 section 552-a
was added, making it a crime to possess any wiretapping device in circumstances evincing an intent
to use it illegally. In signing this act, Governor
Dewey expressed some doubt as to the legal necessity for it, but welcomed it as a declaration of policy
against private wiretapping.
Together, these three sections constitute the
statute law of the State on interception of communications. Notably they are limited to the telegraph
and telephone. Nowhere in the law do we find any
recognition of the interception of conversations by
such newer means as microphones and tape recorders.
The most interesting fact about the wiretapping
law is that until the sensational Broady case in 1955,
it has never been effectively enforced. Years ago in
an upstate county a bookmaker pleaded guilty of
wiretapping in order to avoid prosecution for other
offenses. Thirty years ago, we find, the Court of
Appeals affirmed the conviction of one Anthony
Senes, found guilty in New York County of violating
section 1423, subdivision 6, and sentenced to serve
from one to two years. Senes was a private detective, caught tapping the wire of one of two business
concerns engaged in litigation. And that, except
for three abortive attempts at prosecution in 1949,


Page 26


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


Reprint from “Report of the New York State Joint
Legislative Committee to study illegal interception
of Communications."


is the entire record of law enforcement against private wiretapping in New York State prior to 1955.
Certain reasons for the scarcity of prosecutions
are quite apparent. First, there have been very few
complaints. The act of wiretapping is itself secret;
the victim probably never learns of it unless the
tapper has obtained information which the victim
would prefer to conceal. The whole subject has overtones of blackmail, and it is often more discreet to
accept a divorce in Reno than to have a scandal in
New York. Furthermore, the discovery of a wiretap, or “unauthorized connection," is ordinarily made
by an agent of the New York Telephone Company
itself, and the telephone company has never been
known to press a criminal complaint against a wiretapper. The company has agents to go after ccin
box thieves, but as to wiretapping, it insists its men
are not policemen. The company strongly expresses
its opposition to all wire tapping, but even more, it
appears to deplore all publicity connected therewith.
But in the year 1949 there were three attempts
in New York City to prosecute wiretappers, all most
significant in the development of the law. Early
in the year, wiretappers were caught trying to tap
the telephone of the Borough President of Manhattan. In the course of this incident a well-known
former police wiretapper added to the public uproar
by escaping from custody through the ladies’ room
window at City Hall, where he had been questioned
by the Mayor himself. Prosecution failed in this
case because the raid was made before the wiretap
had been physically connected. As a result the Legislature quickly enacted the new section 552-a of
the Penal Law, putting possession of wiretapping
devices in the same category as possession of burglar’s tools.
Also in New York County in 1949 there was a
prosecution for wiretapping in a case involving the
telephones of the Kings County Buick Company. This
resulted in an acquittal because directors of the
company had authorized the tap to check on the inordinate number of new cars which were said to
have been allotted to gangsters. In this case and in
the preceding investigation a central figure was the
same lawyer, Broady, who figures in the 1955 prosecution. He was already notorious as a wiretapper.
More important than these cases was the Appelbaum case in 1949, which became the controlling
wiretapping case among the reported decisions of
our appellate courts. (See Appendix A.) This is
the only court decision interpreting our State law
on wiretapping. It is under this controlling interpretation that wiretappers operate openly and claim
that they are within the law.


In this case a Mr. Appelbaum of Brooklyn sued
for divorce. His evidence was partly based on recorded taps made on his own home telephone, made
by Robert C. LaBorde, a well-known electronics technician and wiretapper. The trial justice in this
case sent the record to the Kings County District
Attorney, and his office obtained convictions for
wiretapping against Appelbaum and LaBorde under
section 1423. These convictions were reversed by
the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court, Second Department, which dismissed the indictments.
The decision was affirmed by the Court of Appeals
and the defendants went free.
The Appelbaum decision held that the telephone
subscriber has a paramount right to protect his telephone from use by other people against his interests,
personal, household, or marital, and therefore Mr.
Appelbaum had a right to have his own wire tapped
—a right superior to the privacy rights of those
he permitted to use his phone.
This Appelbaum case, which is in effect the present law, is the key to the practice of private wiretapping in this State. Under it wiretapping specialists have openly offered their services. They represent their activities to be entirely legal, though
in a number of instances we have shown such wiretap incidents to be clearly felonious. In other instances it is almost impossible to determine just
who is the subscriber who is entitled to tap his own
telephone. Under this decision as it stands, the situation is thoroughly confused. But it is clear that
the wiretappers will continue to regard it as a license to operate. Legislation is certainly indicated,
and we shall have more to say on this subject.
The foregoing summarizes the present law of
New York State insofar as it concerns private eavesdropping, but this discussion would not be complete
without reference to certain widespread misconceptions of the law which continually arise to plague
our thinking on this subject.
MANA
One of these is the status of wiretapping under
the constitutional amendment adopted by the Constitutional Convention of 1938 and ratified by the people. This part of the Bill of Rights is commonly
thought to declare the policy of the State on wiretapping generally, but it actually has nothing to do
with the crime of wiretapping by private persons.
It relates solely to protection of the people from the
State and law enforcement officers.
Early in the days of the telephone the New York
City police began wiretapping for the detection of
crime. The practice seems to have been well established by the turn of the century, though never formally sanctioned by statute or constitutional law.
During prohibition both Federal and local officers
used wiretapping very extensively to combat the
growing power of the underworld, and by the 1930’s
the practice had aroused strong opposition among
those who claimed it violated civil liberties. In the
Constitutional Convention of 1938 an attempt was
made to outlaw wiretapping, but was so strongly
opposed by law enforcement officers that the opposite result was obtained. In the amendment adopted,
ng
(Continued onspage 55) a a


KHAKI &. RED


Page27


Foreword to


PHILIPPINE TOWN SURVEYS
(See pages 18-49 for pictures)


With this issue we start a new series of informational articles on Philippine Municipalities.
Know your town and let others know about it could
very well be a social, economic and cultural message
for 1963. Certainly, it has a valid place in the implementation of President Macapagal’s 5-year socioeconomic program.
The "KHAKI and RED” takes pride in starting
a Philippines "first" in advertising trends. Mindful
of its role as the official journal and general magazine of the Philippine Constabulary it is happy to
contribute what little it can in giving substance to
one of the strongest ideals that guides our Armed


Forces—that of civilian supremacy—by letting the
Constabulary trooper know more about the province
and municipalities he serves. By the same token it
is hoped that through this effort, the people may
know more about their soldiers. Little need be said
about the trade and industry potential of this undertaking save perhaps a reminder about the role of
the honest middleman who makes people with divergent needs meet. HELP US KNOW MORE ABOUT
OUR COUNTRY. INVEST IN SECURITY. ADVERTISE IN THE   .
13!
The Editor


MAGSINGAL


FHE people of Magsingal, lihe the good IloA cano stock that they are, are fanatically devoted to the land. It is a rugged, rock-strewn land,
painfully pinched between the mountains and the
sea, and mercilessly flayed by severe suns and monsoons. It is against these austere elements of earth
and sky that they have to pit their frail and all too
human strength, but fortified by tenacity of purpose, initiative and endurance, they have been able
to carve out their destiny.
So each generation has been able to leave the
imprint of industrious hands on the niggardly land,
as even the hardest rock is worn away by patient
toil. Everywhere in the land, therefore, one can
see indubitable signs of progress and modern living.
But even as all the people themselves must be
accorded recognition for the progress that the community has made, due credit should be given also
to the town officials who have provided the vision,
the urge and the patient and devoted leadership so
that the welfare of the greatest number should be
brought about. It is true that economic development is principally a task of private enterprise; but
it is the role of the government to create a favorable environment that would provide the inducements necessary, in terms of suitable policies and
measures needed, to foster economic growth and
stability. It is also the avowed aim of a wise administration to ensure the judicious application of
public investment programs to the establishment of
basic facilities such as roads and irrigation systems, transportation and communication networks,


harbor facilities, hydroelectric power if possible, and
the development of land, forest and whatever local
minerals there are. Another primary objective is
the improvement and expansion of essential public
services designed to raise the general living standards of the people. These public services include
education, housing and public health.
The following are some of the accomplishments
of the present administration and as can be seen,
they might appear modest in comparison to more
grandiose projects undertaken and completed by
more thickly populated and richer towns, but the
frugal and hard-working people of Magsingal are
proud of them just the same.
Irrigation (total — P7,500)
PACD
1. Maratudo Dam
2. Alatao Dam — PACD
3. Dacotan Dam — PACD
4. Bocar Dam — PACD
. Barbarit Dam — PACD
Puericulture Centers
1. Poblacion — P12,000
2. Barrio Pagsanaan — P5,000
oiguz
3. Barrio Puro — P700
MAab
4. Barrio Miramar — P1,000
 MMEd
5. Barrio Tagaipos — P5,000
TTEISAIN
Road construction:
Barrio roads and feeder roads — P22,000
ri
Poblacion-Napo — P5,000
RtO
Poblacion-Tagaipos bridge — P20,000
Bungro-Pagsanaan-Sarsarakot Road — P15,000
Caraisan-Makat-Katud-Maratudo — P5,000


Page 28


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


SAN VICENTE


BADOC


NAN VICENTE is a small town, with a popuSlation of only 7,049 according to the latest
census figures. Its chief industries are farming,
salt and furniture making. Its chief products are
salt, rice, furniture and tobacco. Fishing is another
source of income for its people.
Fermin P. Tabanda is the Municipal Mayor.
Other officials are: Melchor Rojas, Vice MayorAngel Ramos, Pascual Rosuman, Alfredo Riotoc,
Emiliano Rialubin, Julian Rosal, Uldarico Riberal,
members of the Municipal Council. Municipal Treasurer Isabelo L. Cariaga, Chief of Police Samson
Castillo and Municipal Secretary Natividad L. Tadena are other key officials of the town.
Still, much smaller towns have gained a certain
amount of fame because they happen to be the birthplace of a national hero, the scene of some historic
encounter, or they have been able to accomplish
some gradiose projects more readily due to their being wealthy in the matter of mineral resources or
of commerce. The people of San Vicente quietly
admit and candidly enough, however, that they have
not much to crow about really. Even their projects
being undertaken or those being planned are modest enough: Improvement of school buildings, river control and improvement of bridges.
Furthermore, where other towns gain notoricty
because they happen to be the scene of sensational
crimes, the people of San Vicente, rightfully enough,
prefer not to hit the front pages of newspapers
provided though that they can continue to say that:
For one thing, there is peace and order in their
beloved town.


S
 Caraisan-Likkaong — P2,000
Poblacion-Pagsanaan-Miramar — P20,000
Poblacion-Libtong-Arinaya — P2,000
Artesian Wells (total — F22,000)
Puro, Panay, Mansante, Cabarruan, Pagsonaan,
Miramar, Barbarit, Namsangan, Makatkatud, Tagaipos, and Napo.
Schools — Five pre-fab buildings in Mansante
(2); Sarsarakat (2); and Maratudo (1).
8i1sM
Multiple-purpose Pavement Pagsanaan (P800)
Other projects — Already approved for construction in Malablabtang, Sabat, Madangdangla,
Simmagumay and Subsubusub.
LO
The officials of the town are Miguel Udarbe,
Mayor; Estanislao Pascua, Vice Mayor: Filomeno
Uclaray, Constancio Ugale, Mariano Tobon, Guillermo Ponce, Socorro Garcia, Maria Tolentino, Eufemio Sabado, and Manuel Pascua, Members of the
Municipal Council.
Other key officials are Valeriano Palpallatoc,
Treasurer; Mrs. Nena Corpuz Soliven, Municipal
Secretary; and Prospero Ujano, Chief of Police.


NE place of interest that the people of BaOdoc proudly point out to anyone visiting
their town is a humble house in the poblacion. It
is the birthplace of the well-known Filipino artist,
Juan Luna y Novicio (1857-1899).
Beautiful Badoc island is also a tourist attraction.
Equally worthy of the pride of the people of
Badoc are the solid accomplishments of the present
municipal administration headed by Mayor Angel
T. Bautista. Other officials are Gregorio R. Rodriguez, vice mayor; Bernardo R. Torralba, Antonio
Batara, Romualdo Baldos, Severo Marquez, Juan Cajigal, Francisco Garcia, Urbano Tolentino and Justiniano Vergara, members of the municipal council.
Other key officials are: Luis L. Calaycay, Emeterio
Nicolas, Vicente R. Campos and Generosa Rotesta.
Some of these accomplishments are:
1) Asphalting of the provincial roads within
the poblacion.
2) Reopening of the Badoc Waterworks System.
3) Renovation of the public theater.
4) Construction of the lagoon at the eastern
portion of the public square.
5) Construction of the Coronation Stage and
improvement of the public auditorium.
6) Improvement of feeder roads and construction of the “circumferential feeder road"
(Poblacion
Arcarusip-Nagrebcan-LabutSorod-Sta. Cruz-Paguetpat-Pagsanaan feeder
road).
7) Construction of three health centers: a) Napu-Mabusay-Paane-Parang health center;
b) Ararusip health center; and c) Madupayas health center.
8) Construction of artesian wells in Bolboldes,
Lubub and Ararusip.
9) Pre-fabricated schools in Mabusag, Paltet
and Pagsanaan.
10) Improvement and reconstruction of communal irrigation systems in Nagrebcan, Madupayas, Ballawes, Malcampo, Napu, Banas,
Caoilian, Mabusag and Balaybaboy.
11) Increase in municipal income in the amount
of P20,000 more or less.
12) Maintenance of peace and order.
13) Internal repair and beautification of the
Presidencia, with the session hall and all
the different rooms furnished with tables,
chairs and other furniture.


LET'S KNOW MORE ABOUT YOUR
TOWN THROUGH THIS
 amno:
SPECIAL FEATURE
OF
KHAKI and RED
d5


KHAKI 8. RED


Page 29


CABUGAO


PHERE are not a few people of Cabugao who
E
M aver that once in while they hear ghostly
hoofbeats echoing in the deserted streets of the
town at night. There are even some who claim
they have seen the ghostly horse as well as its
ghostly rider, a beautiful young woman who looks
like an angered goddess. People of Cabugao think
it is none other than the valorous Maria Josefa
Gabriela, wife of Diego Silang.
 Many stirring things have happened in Cabugao, but none as stirring as when the heroic Maria
Josefa Gabriela rode into Cabugao to enlist the aid
of the inhabitants in her revolt against Spanish despotism. Her husband, Diego Silang, had enly shortly before been felled by an assassin’s bullet, but the
extraordinary woman that she was, she vowed to
continue the fight even if the odds had become almost insuperable with the untimely death of Silang.
The people of Cabugao rallied to her side.
That was nearly two hundred years ago and in
comparison, the happenings of the present might
appear humdrum, even insignificant. But it is not
so. The enemies that the people of Cabugao, as
well as that of the whole country, have to contend
with — hunger, poverty, unemployment, and other
social and economic ills — are as insidious and
deadly as the arrogance and tyranny our people
suffered in the hands of our foreign conquerors.
Thus there is no call at all to belittle the accomplishments of the dedicated men who hold the
reins of local government however modest these accomplishments might appear to be. Some of these
projects, already finished or on their way to being
completed are the following:
1) Construction of two big market buildings
2) Asphalting of municipal roads in the poblacion
teg


3) EEA road building program from Bato to
Benang to Cail-layan to Maradodon (P43,000)
4) Improvement of public plaza, including the
construction of two stages and an auditorium
5) Release of P77,500 for construction of communal irrigation dam
6) Improvement of waterworks system, with the
acquisition of 2-1/2 kilometers long of 4-inch pipes
7) PACD irrigation projects
a) Reppaac communal irrigation system
b) Cael-layan communal irrigation system
c) Maradodon communal irrigation systen.
d) Cuantacla communal irrigation system
8) PACD multi-purpose pavements
a) Sagayaden
b) Pila
c) Turod
d) Salomague
e) Dadapan Sur
f) Sabang
g) Namuangan
h) Nagsantaan
i) Maradodon
j) Camsipan
k) Cuantacla
1) Dardarat
9) PACD fishing nets
a) Namuangan
b) Pugas
10) Five artesian wells
Program for further improvements:
1) Construction of new municipal building
2) Construction of more feeder roads
3) Improvement of school buildings and grounds


PIDDIG


"FHE people of Piddig illustrates well the fine
A traits for which Ilocanos are noted — they
are thrifty, industrious and sturdy. Agriculture is
their chief industry and they produce rice, corn and
tobacco. But like many another town in the region,
agriculture alone cannot support its population. So
the people have turned to home industries like weaving, livestock raising, basi manufacturing and other
handicrafts. These home industries have been so
well developed that even if Piddig were a relatively
small town (latest census figures place the population at a little over 11,000), it can claim some modest progress in the past several years.
For example, some of the accomplishments of
the present administration are:
Irrigation: Completion of Bola, Salpad, Sta.


Maria and Marwaya Dams.
Puericulture Centers in the Poblacion, Lagandit, Maababaca and Tonggawan.
Road Construction: Sta. Maria Road, CallosaEstancia Road, Babay barrio road and the riprapping of Garcia and Velasquez streets.
Artesian wells: Lagandit Bo. $11; Gayomot
Bo. ##6; Barrio Vera and Barrio Sta. Maria.
School buildings: Four Pre-fabs in Bo. Calambeg, Estancia, Baybay and Tonaton.
Completion of the public market costing P2,500.00.
The town officials are: Atty. Emeterio T. Balguna, mayor; Emilio F. Asis, vice mayor: Atty.
Aproniano B. Nicolas, Samuel Tomas, Atty. Vicente
B. Agustin, Noel Estabillo, Regino Santos and Galo
Bautista, members of the municipal council.


Page 30


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


SAN ESTEBAN


FANY a time one is stricken with something
Mlike awe at the aptness of some old saying
that seems to have lost much of its brilliance or
vitality. Certainly one might very well be misled
into believing that the town of San Esteban can be
easily dismissed as something altogether insignificant or not worth telling about at all. For a fact,
it is a very small town, with a population of only a
little more than four thousand. Indeed, there are
many barrios in the country which can boast of a
bigger population.
But as the old saying goes, the least is not always the last. And to prove it, San Esteban can
claim to the distinction of having the highest literacy rate in the whole province of Ilocos Sur, as
per the 1960 census. Besides this, San Esteban is
also attracting attention as a very fast-progressing
town.
Progress has really been greatly accelerated
during the administration of the incumbent mayer,
Dr. Samuel E. Orpilla. Now in his second term, he
is ably assisted by the following town officials: Sebastian Cadacio, Vice Mayor; Francisco Edralin,
Teofilo Ebojo, Ernesto Estrala, Filomeno Eleccion,
Eleuterio Europa and Gregorio Corpuz, Municipal
Councilors. Other key officials are Godofredo M.
Vergara, Municipal Secretary; Eusebio E. Agustin,
Municipal Treasurer; and Jacinto Casimiro, Chief
of Police.
The following are some of the highlights in the
progress of the town since 1956:
Irrigation: Communal irrigation dams in Cabaroan, Ansad, Pangnagpuan, Cappa-cappa and Anonang.
Puericulture and Health Centers: Barrio San
Rafael Sweepstakes Community and Health Center,
Barrio Ansad Sweepstakes Community Health Center, Tamurong Rural Health Center in Barrio Bateria, and Barrio Apatot Rural Health Center.
Roads and Bridges Constructed: Bailey bridge
linking Barrio San Pablo to Barrios Bateria and
Apatot; reconstruction and improvement of the San
Pablo-Bateria-Apatot road; widening and improvement of the following roads; Poblacion-Ansad-Cabaroan Feeder road, San Rafael-Cappa-cappa-Beng

ngang road, San Nicolas-Apatot Barrio road, Cabaroan-Mandulon Barrio road; filling and improvement of all municipal streets and culverts; improvement of the Bigbiga barrio road; construction of the
Cappa-cappa, Cabaroan bridge and Mandulon bridge.
Artesian wells drilled at Barrios Cabaroan,
Mandulon, Ansad, Cappa-cappa, San Nicolas, Poblacion East, Poblacion Wests, San Rafael, Biga-biga,
Sabangan and Tamurong. Soon to be drilled are at
San Pablo South Central School, Southwest Poblacion, etc.
Schools: 1) Construction of a duplex pre-fabricated schoolhouse, a Home Economics building, a
shop building and the repair and improvement of
the Ansad Barrio School; 2) Construction of an H.
E. Building, a duplex pre-fabricated schoolhouse and
an additional room to the main building of the Ansad Community School; 3) Repair and improvement
of the South and North Central School buildings
including the Shop building.
Other construction projects underway: A new
P50,000 municipal building; a P15,000 public market; a P4,000 library-youth center; a P5,000 concrete public stage; fencing and improvement of the
public plaza; opening and establishment of a municipal library and the construction of a public toilet.
Projects to be undertaken: 1) Construction of
waiting sheds and other barrio projects; 2) Purchase of athletic equipment and park paraphernalia
as a measure to minimize juvenile delinquency;
3) Formation of a municipal band, with musical instruments donated by civic-spirited townmates in
the United States.
Also underway is the construction of a multipurpose pavement at Barrio San Pablo and a spring
development project under the GIA and PACD at
Barrio San Nicolas.
In the cultural field, the administration has
reorganized the San Esteban Telstar Rondalla and
guided it to become the “Champion" in the province.
The local administration has also initiated the
yearly citations of five outstanding citizens of San
Esteban as a means of awakening the interest of
the youth to live up to the expectations of their
parents and the community.


TURN TO PAGE 42 FOR MORE ON TOWN SURVEYS


KHAKI 8. RED


Page 31


OA


)






NARLY this month, a state of emergency hovered over the nation. Aggressor forces,
believed to have come from a neighboring Asian
country, paradropped somewhere in Central Luzon,
and began to advance steadily to the nation’s capital. The Philippine Constabulary, given the mission to stop the advance, continued to hurl government troops to contain the enemy but to no avail.


By Daniel P.
PIO, H


At the same time, dissident forces massed and
started to assault government installations. Agitators and rabble-rousers, believed led by enemy officers, undertook an insidious propaganda campaign
to discredit the government and incite the people
to rise against the constituted authorities. Enemy
saboteurs went on a rampage in several business
centers of the country; oil refineries and agricultural fields were set on fire by arsonists; enemy jet
planes bombed and strafed Philippine and U.S.
air bases; enemy submarines were sighted in Philippine waters and were reported to have landed
arms, ammunition and supplies to enemy forces.
The threat to the nation’s security was mounting.
The enemy continued to advance; the situation was
hopeless. Because of this threat, the government
transferred its seat to Laguna. The Philippine
Constabulary headquarters moved to Batangas where
it expected to make a last stand against the enemy


Floro Henson, Logistics chief, and Maj. Juan Maniquis, as “SUBOK" comptroller.


This imagined situation ended CPX "SUBOk,"
the five-day simulated exercise of the Philippine
Constabulary to test its efficiency in ag national
emergency. This command post exercise, which bes
gan Dec. 10 and ended Dec. 15, was designed “to
weld each staff into an effective team, develop' coordination between staffs, and train the staffs tos
function smoothly and efficiently under a national
emergency." CPX "SUBOK" did not involve phy
sical movements of troops, which were all on paper.
It was the first exercise of its kind conducted by a
major command, to test constabulary efficiency in
keeping order in the rear areas including anti-sa
botage and anti-insurgency operations. All the time
during the duration of the exercise, business went
on as usual in Camp Crame.
Exercise Director was Brig. Gen. Nicanof D.
Garcia, then acting chief of constabulary, and the
participants were all PC general and special staffs.
The general staff is composed of Col. Giceron dela
Cruz, PC personnel chief; Col. Luis Villareal, PC
intelligence chief; Col. Faustino Sebastian, operations chief; Lt. Col. Pedro Javier, logisties chief;
and Lt. Col. Joel Santos, PC comptroller.
A


Brig. Gen. Ricardo G. Papa, deputy AFP chief
of staff, Brig. Gen. Rigoberto Atienza, IV PCZ Commander, and Brig. Gen. Ismael Lapuz, I PCZ commander, led observers from other major services
and AFP general headquarters, hey included: Col.
Napoleon Mangonon, army; Col. Redro Baban, Lt.
Col. Horacio Reyes and Lt. Col. Gurllermo Garcia,
air force; Capt. Abraham Campo, Cmde. Mictor Jose
Comdr. Leovigildo Gantioqui, Cmdr. Hilario. Ruiz
and Lt. Comdr. Celestino Loria, navy, Capt. Cesar
Miel, AFP personnel division; Col. Blas Alejandre
and Lt. Col. Mario Kimseng, AFP intelligence divis
sion; Col David Palayo and Lt. Col. Genzalo Batad,
AFP operations division;  Lt. Col, Marcos Garcia,
Lt. Col Cesar Elor, Lt. Col. Ricardo Almachar and
Lt. Col: Pedro Ramos, AHP logistics divisions It.
Col. Emilio Zerrudo and Et. Col. Jose del Castillo,
AFP comptreller division, Lt, Col. Richard Lehman
PG. JUSMAG advisor, was also an observer in the
exercise.


At O9OOH December 10, an orientation was held
to acquaint the participants with the objective of
the exercise and to clarify administrative instruetions. The crientation was attended by the Director,
Umpire and Support Greups. Forthwith, at 1300H
that same day, the PC headquarters in Camp Crame
went on “Red Alert, a condition of combat alertness, which was not lifted until the termination of
the simulated exercise. Passes were cancelled, and
men on leave and furlough were recalled. All slept
in Camp Crame from start to finish of the supposed
long fight.


While CPX "SUBO was merely theoretical,
it was developgd from actual world conditions and


Col. Avelino Sauco, PC school Commandant, was
designated Chief Umpire in the exereise, while Col.
Angel Legaspi, deputy chief of constabulary, was
designated “SUBOK" commander with Col. Lucas
V. Cauton, PC chief of staff, as his deputy. Other
officers assigned to the exercise were: Lt. Col.
Patricio Buyson, “SUBOK" intelligence chief;
Maj. Paciencio Magtibay, operations chief; Major


The simulated exercise is


efficiency in times of n


Page 32


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


9
SCBUR


2 P. Azcarate
IO, HPC


an enemy regiment reported to have paradropped
somewhere between San Fernando and Angeles,
Pampanga. The PU drew its reinforcements from
the Ist Infantry Division. All these, of course, occurred only on paper.





applied to a situation where there was a probability
of its taking place. With the world situation as it
is, these theoretical events might happen. One never knows.


Like all military exercises, CPX “SUB


code names. The development of the exefeise was


used


based en a crisis between two world powels threatghing to kngek each other off over a lesseg country
which had set up missile bases poised at the security of one world power. In a determined bid to pros
tect her interests, the threatened one forces the issue and the small nation is forced to dismantle its
muSsile sites, This worle power then sets up a elese
wateh over developments. Meantime, another cofntry with expansionist ambition, launches an offensive against small nations in the Far Easts This
aggressor country intends to encroach upon all the
small nations, ineluding the Philippines. Thus, the
stage was set for CPA ASUBOE


CPX“SUBOK" was complete in itself. Directives and orders were issued as if they were real.
March orders, war maps, traffic diagrams for vehicular movements, reorganization of PC units, 1equests for funds, gasoline, supplies and materials
were made. The orders also included evacuation of
patients, and refugees; commandeering of civilian
vehicles for transport; issuance of five-month salarges to PC troops; release of civilian personnel from
york; and induction into the service of needed personnel. Spot promotions for gallantry in action and
awards or decorations were also provided for in the
exercise. It involved all the necessary activities and
all elements existent during war-time.


Simulated situations piled upon ene after another as the exercise progressed hourby-hour, dayby day. For all intents and purposes; it was the
real “MCCoy.” Reports of intensified insurgent and
subversive agtivities in the country kept coming in.
The enemy was infiltrating government as well as
civic, student, youth and labor, organizations, and
causing the spiralling of prime commodity prices.
A familiar pattern came gut: these were attempts
of the enemy to destroy the economy of the country,
panic the people and throw the government machinery into chaos.


A critique on CPx “SUBOl was held on Dec.
15. Umpires assigned to each office in Camp Crame
were required to submit reports on the reactions
and activities of the different offices to which they
were assigned in connection with the exercise. Observers from other major commands were also allowed to comment. At the orientation briefing before the actual start of the exercise, Col. Sebastian
pointed out that it would be better for the staffs
to commit mistakes during the exercise and know
about them so that they may learn from these mistakes and be better prepared in case of a real emergency.


With peace and order, conditions deteriorating,
the PC placed all local police forces under PC control and mobilized its troops. In one theoretical sitcommander,
uation, Col. Legaspi as "SUBOK"
threw three battaliens of goyernment troops against


It will be recalled that at the outbreak of the
Second World War, the country's armed forces were
totally unprepared. CPX FSUBOR,” with all the
possible war-time situations, is to train the PC to
cope with any contingency of this nature. It also
attempts to weld the PO general and special staffs
into an efficient executive group. The exercise tests
how efficient and effective the constabulary can
function under a national emergency of this nature.


 is a test of Constabulary
of national emergency.


Based on the critique, CPX "SUBOK" was
considered a success by PC authorities. This conclusion was the result of an analysis of the strong
and weak points noted in every participating office.
Constabulary planners pointed out after the exercise that the Command could take care of itself, cope
with emergency situations, and be able to secure
rear areas in case of a real emergency. They
stressed that the PC was now ready for any eventuality. If at all, CPX “SUBOK" assured the people
that if present world conditions changed from bad
to worse, the Philippine Constabulary would be
more in a position to help them and secure their
safety. It is the consensus that, unlike during the
last World War, the PC, as any other armed services, would not be caught "with its pants down,"
disregarding an aerial atomic attack, of course.


 


Page 33


Road Safety ....
(Continued from page 8)
which concern our peace-time or emergency economic planners and logisticians. One thing to remember, though, is that plans are made for the
purpose of improving the overall economy and the
sociological and political conditions of the country.
THE LOGISTICIANS ROLE IN
TRAFFIC PLANNING
This includes certain aspects of industrial and
economic requirements related to furnishing supplies and services. Logistical planning is also ene
of the bases for the many successful operations of
government agencies, such as the Department of


This does not mean, however, that we should make
streets one-way to attain maximum efficiency. This
is not only impractical but impossible to attain in
many instances. A well prepared plan will, hewever, enable the maximum and safe utilization of
such roads.
One must remember that when the possible capacity of highways has been reached, the result is
a high degree of restraint on every driver or motorist, particularly under conditions that are wholly
intolerable, such as often occur during rush hours
or in emergencies.
FACTORS AFFECTING ROAD CAPACITY
Each type of road has the so-called "practical
working capacity. It is the maximum volume that


Each type of road has the so-called "practical working capacity


National Defense, the Department of Commerce and
Industry, Department of Labor, National Civil Defense Administration, Civil Aeronautics Administration, the Department of Public Works and Communications, etc. In time of emergency there is usually
an increased demand for supplies and services,
therefore a system of priority and allocation is inherently necessary for a fairly equitable allocation
of supplies and facilities. Implementing and limiting orders and regulations are made ahead of time,
and their proper or propitious institution is essential to successful operations.
Take the problems of vehicular traffic flow.
To attain the highest flow of traffic, the highways
by necessity must be regarded as a “one-way street."
In ancient times, the Romans used the “one way
streets" and special off-street parking facilities for
chariots, which were located on off-travelled places.


will permit a reasonable degree of freedom from
congestion. Traffic engineers in countries with high
degree of motor and traffic development are agreed
that the greatest capacity volume is obtainable at
uniform speeds of about 30 miles per hour (M.P.H.).
The operations of traffic based on a speed of 30
m.p.h. and on a scale of 100 vehicles to a mile,
should therefore be a good figure in computing the
road capacity required in mass movement of vehicles. This is a practical aid among traffic police
officers in routing traffic flow to avoid confusion
or congestion during rush hours in usually heavy
traffic movements, or in an emergency.
Experience gained by the U.S. Highway research committee on highway capacity indicates
that "on a two-lane (lane-width of 12 ft.) each undirectional highway where traffic flow is uninterrupted, a volume of 1,500 vehicles per lane per hour


Page 34


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


is practical.” This is at an average speed of 30
miles per hour.
Probably, the Traffic Control Center (TRAFCON) of the Philippine Constabulary is one of the
agencies in the Philippines today which is in a position to undertake planning for an orderly vehicular
movement in case of emergency on an inter-previncial, city or nationwide basis. Traffic planning,
however, should be made in coordination with civil
defense, local police forces, and other agencies of
the government concerned.
During evacuation, problems involving the
heavy use of motor vehicles which most likely, will
occur in large urban areas such as the Manila area,
Cebu City, Davao, etc., the use of certain routes


Time in minutes to pass a point equals the number of vehicles times 60 (running time) divided by
average speed of vehicles (Miles in Hours) times
number of vehicles to the mile (vtm).
Allowance for “human error” for large movements may be fixed at 25 percent of the number of
minutes to pass a point. The above formula may
be used as a guide but actual conditions should be
studied and plans should be so made as to suit the
different and changing conditions.
Other factors that tend to reduce practical capacity are restricted lateral clearances, narrow
shoulders, vertical constructions, bridge trusses, and
parked vehicles on road sides which reduce the effective width of a traffic lane. It is to be conceded


There should be a practical aid among traffic police in routing traffic flows to avoid congestion and confusion during rush hours.


should be pre-determined. It will probably be necessary that certain routes will have to be used by
more than one group of people, in which cases,
“block timing” would be essential. By “block time”
is meant the use of certain group of vehicles at certain fixed clock times which must ensure that all
vehicles of each group are cleared of those roads
within the time allowed. This will necessitate establishing control points. The time taken by a group
of vehicles to pass a point governs the amount of
time for which any stretch of road must be allotted.
This is important in organizing any large scale
movements, and is particularly essential when it involves civilian motorists who, as individuals, are
not ordinarily organized.
As a further guide, the following is a simple
formula for calculating the time to pass a given
point taken by a group of vehicles:


that lane width and lateral clearance also affect
driving comfort, speed, safety and accident rate.
Narrow shoulders reduce the effective width of
a traffic lane by the natural tendency of drivers to
travel nearer the center of the pavement. For this
reason traffic officers should exert efforts to reduce such hazards. When vehicles are disabled,
the greatest detrimental effort on the capacity results, especially where disabled vehicles are not immediately cleared off the traffic lane; and this happens frequently in our highways. Right now, disabled vehicles left in the center of the roads are
the greatest cause of traffic jams in Manila and en
many highways. Police forces or highway traffic
agencies should provide tow-vehicles to remove disabled vehicles from the travel portion of the roads.
Towing could be done at the expense of owners of
(Continued on page 36)


 


Page 35


It will be observed that the tempo in the implementation of the Socio-Economic Program has increased recently,
including the building of more roads.


Road Safety ....
(Continued from page 36)
disabled vehicles, as what they do in the U.S., Canada and other countries. Owners of towed vehicles
are charged certain amounts depending on distance,
place and kind of vehicle towed to cover administrative and operating cost.
Similarly, government vehicle inspection should
be tightened to reduce, if not altogether remove from
the public highways, dangerous and non-roadworthy vehicles which are the greatest cause of danger to human lives, of traffic jams, and of unnecessary national expenditure, in terms of maintenance and operating cost.
Some factors responsible for such situations are
the attitudes of operators, indifference of some traffic enforcing officer, poor attitude of the general
public, and, most important, the poor maintenance
program and replacement policies of both the private and government sectors.
A well planned preventive maintenance program
assures continuity of service with minimum "down
time” caused by mechanical failures. It also promotes safety and prolongs the economical operating
life of equipment.
Some of the basic factors in any preventive
maintenance program are: Planned periodic inspection and maintenance based on actual operations,
careful selection of maintenance staff of both capable workers and supervisors, clearly defined authority from management to carry out the program and
accurate record keeping system. It would mean


more safety and better service to the riding public
and increased income for the management when
this aspect of the transport industry is viewed with
more concern. Not to be forgotten however, is the
replacement of vehicles and equipment policies in
the entire transport industry. A great deal of preventive maintenance policies and procedures hinge
on replacement policies. Normally, replacement policies are promulgated and then a systematic, tightly
controlled preventive maintenance program is set
to work.
In terms of highway capacity, we can say generally that one commercial vehicle on a route facility
in level terrain has approximately the effect of two
passenger cars and of four passenger cars if on rolling terrain. Generally also, commercial vehicles
occupy a greater road space and influence other
traffic over a larger area of the highway than do
passengers cars. Commercial vehicles usually travel
at lower speeds especially on grades or rolling terrain. Thus, when a highway is operating at its
maximum capacity the total number of accommodated
vehicles, is less if there are commercial vehicles
than if the trafic were composed entirely of passenger cars or similar vehicles.
EFFECT ON NATIONAL PREPAREDNESS
It will be observed that the tempo in the implementation of the current socio-economic program
of the government has increased recently. Consequently, the managerial skills and innate ability of
our human resources as well as the vast capacity of
our natural resources, will be continually put to
(Continued on page 38)
els
iod


Page 36


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


The Court.
FPIO
(Continued from page 7)
pelate review action is necessary before execution of
the bad-conduct discharge can be effected.
Save in those based on pleas of guilty, sentences
involving discharge (dishonorable or bad-conduct)
and confinement in the penitentiary shall require
appellate Review (Board of Review) action approved
by The Judge Advocate General before execution
may be ordered. After holding that the record in a
case is legally sufficient to support the findings and
sentence, the Judge Advocate General shall advise
the Reviewing Authority from where said record was
received, who will in turn order the execution of the
sentence by causing to be published an appropriate
court-martial orders. Sentences requiring confirmation by the President (before executions are ordered) are as follows.
(a) Any sentence respecting a general officer(b) Any sentence extending to the dismissal of
an officer;
(c) Any sentence extending to the suspension
or dismissal of a cadet, flying cadet, probationary second lieutenant; and
(d) Any sentence of death.
There are, however, exceptions to the aforementioned rules. For example, in time of war, the sentence extending to the dismissal of an officer below the rank of Brigadier General may be carried
into execution upon confirmation by the Commanding General of the Army in the field. Likewise,
sentences of death against persons convicted of
murder, mutiny, desertion, or espionage in time of
war, after action by a Board of Review approved
by The Judge Advocate General and confirmed by
the Commanding General of the Army in the field,
may be carried into execution. In a case where the
court-martial is appointed by the President, or in
time of war where the Commanding General of Army in the field is the Reviewing Authority, confirmation herein required is no longer necessary. Approval of the sentence renders the same executory.
Following the compliance with the aforementioned rules, courts-martial sentences are already
executory. Executions are effected by the promulgation of appropriate Courts-Martial Orders. After
the promulgation of the appropriate Courts-Martial
Orders, no other orders are necessary from the convening authority to effect the sentence. Only implementing orders are thereafter issued as may be
necessary. Such courts-martial orders are sufficient
bases for any implementing unit and/or officer under the command to enforce the sentence. In the
case of a summary court-martial, however, approval
of the sentence by the convening authority which
should be reflected on page 4 of the charge sheet,
renders the sentence enforceable. The promulgation
of a court-martial order is not required.
In the full sense of the term, a court-martial
is not a court as the same is understood in civil
phraseology. It is not a part of the judicial system
but simply an instrumentality of the Executive
power. Not being a component of the judiciary, it
is not an inferior court, and no statute having placed
it in a legal relation therewith, its proceedings are
not subject to be directly reviewed by any court,
*
KHAKI S RED


AFP DAY
)
The Armed Forces of the Philippines observed
the 27th anniversary of its founding last December
21, 1962 in simple ceremonies at Camp Murphy.
The highlight of the ceremonies was the presentation of awards to AFP men of the year. They
were:
AFP Enlisted Man of the Year
TSgt Jose F Fotros 475243 PAF
GHO Enlisted Man of the Year
SSgt Saturnino F Diola 522567 PA
PA Enlisted Man of the Year
TSgt Adriano B Quevedo 503069 PA
PC Enlisted Man of the Year
TSgt Alejandro R Orotea 498172 PC
PAF Enlisted Man of the Year
MSgt Eugenio Puente 114138 PAF
PN Enlisted Man of the Year
MMC Edon J Pacheco 477028 PN


either by certiorari, or otherwise, nor are its judgments or sentences subject to appeal. It is purely
an executive order designed for military use, put into
existence by military orders. Like any military body or person, it is subject to the orders of a competent military superior. Its existence, as well as
the power to act upon its proceedings, are attributes
of command. It is on this wise, that the execution
of its sentence is purely dependent on the action of
the military superior who created it.


CAUTION
(Prepared by the Constabulary Staff Judge Advocate in line
with pronounced policies of Secretary of National Defense Macario
Peralta, Jr this orange light appears as a parting word in the
revised "Primer On Strike Doties" recently distributed by TI & EO,
HPC.)
a) In the performance of duties enumerated
in Section IV, pars. 1, 2 and 3 of this primer, AS
A GENERAL RULE, such remedies as arrest and
seizures should be resorted to only when other
measures such as persuasion, appeal to reason, etc.,
calculated to convince the strikers or picketeers to
confine their activities within lawful limits shall
have failed.
b) In some instances, unlawful activities of
strikers may, by positive intervention, be restored
to peacefulness without resorting to drastic actions.
There is nothing like giving the strikers a second
chance. Where annoyance has been removed by
peaceful means, further action need not be undertaken unless there is persistence or positive defiance.
c) Unless required by a court order specifically
directing it, under no circumstance will force or
compulsion be used for the purpose of confining the
activities of strikers and/or picketeers to lawful limits
except incident to the exercise of arrest (a crime
must have been or being committed) in which case
ONLY THE MINIMUM necessary to effect it should
be employed.


Page 3)


Road Safety ....
(Continued from page 35)
crucial tests that should give the nation the confidence and proficiency desirable in the face of a final
test especially in an emergency.
Since the end of Second World War rapid
progress has been achieved in this country both in
rehabilitation and reconstruction, as well as in projects to update the country’s basic facilities and
services. The expanded economy, concommitant with
the growing population, imposes additional requirements for complementary public services and utilities, particularly in the transportation field, both
for needed goods and products and the riding public. Plans, however excellent, are of little worth
without the means for their execution. In a sense,
logistics is an economic force which is conditioned
by the nature of the task to be performed. Certain
requirements of the civilian economy are basic to
the support of an emergency effort, which may be
war-supporting, and to those which the civilians
must have for their necessities. Civilian requirements are those necessary to maintain "acceptable”
living conditions and keep up public morale, while
military requirements are obvious. In the event
that civilian requirements should become part of
the total requirement in a mobilization or an emergency, consideration should be towards an equitable
division of resources with every sector bearing its
share according to the situation.


WHAT TRAFCON CAN DO TO HELP INCREASE
ROAD CAPACITY EFFICIENCY
Section 20 of Executive Order 209 dtd 19 Oct
1956 provides, among other things, that the “functions, powers, duties and responsibilities of the Traffic Control Group of the Philippine Constabulary
shall include but not limited to the enforcement of
traffic and safety laws, rules and regulations,
It is further pointed out that under Sec. 21-C of Executive Order 209 the Headquarters of TRAFCON
develop instruction, standards,
(PC) shall
programs and procedures for traffic control operations". Uunder such provisions, it can be assumed
that the TRAFCON is in a position not only to help
other law enforcing and regulating agencies apprehend traffic violators, but also help frame such
rules and regulations for the maximum and safe
utilization of our highways. This is especially so,
considering that of all the agencies involved in the
traffic problem of our country, TRAFCON has the
personnel and equipment that can be used to advantage. Public policy and need dictate that where agencies are in a position of advantage to help solve
socio-economic problems of the country, they should
be utilized and/or heard. Considering that Constabulary Officers are potential traffic officers, they
can be a major factor in our traffic and safety improvement program, given the proper authority and
support.
(Continued on page 4o)


Plans, however excellent, are of little worth without the means for their execution.


Page 38


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


Unnecessary changing of lanes has caused many a traffic jam.


The Trafcon ....
(Continued from page 9)
Motor Vehicle Law and other traffic laws. This
function dates back to 1933 when the “Triple
Alliance” was entered into by Brig. Gen. Clarence
Bowers, Chief of the PC; Mr. A. D. Williams, Director of Public Works; and Mr. Luis Torres, Senior
Public Service Commissioner.
The initial group which was headed by Col.
Azurin and activated on December 1, 1954, was composed of 12 officers and 41 enlisted men from the
different Army units. These military personnel underwent a rigid training conducted by technical men
from the Motor Vehicles Office and the Public Service Commission. All phases and intricacies of the
Motor Vehicle Law and other traffic laws were explained. This was supplemented by pertinent memoranda and SOPS covering all phases of the new
job. But however competent and efficient these few
men may have become, traffic violations and accidents continued to haunt their minds. The operational responsibility of the TRAFCON encompasses
the entire Philippines—the area of operation being
divided into 8 traffic districts with a traffic team
of one officer and four enlisted men to each district. The TRAFCON, therefore, in relation to its
area of coverage, was and still is very much undermanned.
Nag
On October 19, 1956, through Executive Order
No. 209, the group was authorized a complement of
150 (38 officers and 112 enlisted men.) The new
set-up provided for a staff of 6 officers for its
headquarters and 32 for distribution to the different
KHAKI &. RED
AMAVOM


provinces of the four military areas, General Order
No. 348, GHO, AFP, of December 11, 1956, redivided
the area of operation into 28 traffic districts in
line with the increase in personnel and for a better
traffic control and more effective supervision.
 Since its organization in 1954, the TRAFCON
has survived several chiefs. It had been headed by
Col. Azurin, Lt. Col. Amadeo Garcia, Col. Leopoldo
L. Acot, Col. Luis Uranza, in that order, and, presently, by Col. Jose D. Regala. But after its reorganization in 1956, the group has ceased to grow;
its personnel has remained constant at 150.
The question arises: Can 150 men, with only 37
patrol cars (only 25 of which are in running condition) efficiently and effectively cover a total of
36,521,491 road kilometers? Can these 150 men account for 219,000 registered vehicles and 337,562
licensed drivers? The answer, obviously, is no. But,
it is sad to say, lack of funds has hindered the
TRAFCON to expand.
Well aware of its limited capabilities, the
TRAFCON concentrates its operation along critical
areas to cope with situations normally expected to
arise because of seasonal activities. Among such
operations — which are provided with 24-hour coverage by the TRAFCON and other enforcement
agencies — are the following:
Operation Kennon Road, which covers the North
and Southbound routes which are kept busy on summer by vacationists to and from Baguio; Operation
Maytime, which covers the route leading to Antipolo; and Operation School Term, which covers
provincial-highway routes leading to Manila, for


Page 39


The Trafcon ....
(Continued from page 39)
the opening of classes.
Aside from the above-mentioned operations, the
TRAFCON assists the Manila Police Mobile Units
in "watching over” critical areas in Manila’s suburbs. It aides the Motor Vehicles Office, the Public Service Commission, and other traffic bureaus,
in going after dilapidated vehicles that pose more
danger than convenience on the highway.
It also assists the GAO and the PAGCOM in
going after officials misusing government vehicles;
and the BIR in going after hot cars, smuggled to
evade payment of taxes.
These missions present several inherent difficulties and are too gigantic for the present composition of the TRAFCON. Besides, the MVO is not
adequately equipped and organized to cope with the
tremendous annual increase of licensed drivers and
registered vehicles. Add to this the fact that safety
consciousness is sorely lacking among our public
service operators and drivers; and the enforcement
of traffic laws is lax. In fact, some unscrupulous
agents have gone to the extent of enforcing traffic
laws for personal aggrandizement, to the detriment
of the group’s prestige and standing before the
public.
In addition to these problems, our highways and
roads are still of pre-war standards despite the increase in vehicular power, speed and weight of modern cars. Our speed limit have become very unrealistic in the face of these modern vehicles. In
other words, our traffic laws are now out-of-date.
The new TRAFCON Chief, Col. Regala, suggests
that for a more modern, yet more realistic traffic
situation in the Philippines, our traffic laws ought
to be updated and improved. He has in mind a NATIONAL TRAFFIC CODE which in effect, will incorporate, among other things:
a) creation of a national traffic body to undertake studies, analyses, plans, etcetera, for a safety
program which shall have the authority to direct
agencies concerned with traffic, as well as agencies
whose jurisdiction affects the traffic situation;
b) creation of special traffic courts to try traffic cases to facilitate the speedy adjudication and/or
penalization of traffic violators; and
c) Designation of the TRAFCON as the policeenforcing arm of the National Traffic Code so that
appropriations may be regularly provided for from
special funds.
When this National Traffic Code will have
come to being, if ever, the TRAFCON Chief will be
a happy man. Equally enthusiastic and eagerly
waiting for the implementation of this suggestion
is Operations Officer Capt. Leonor M. Reyes.
In the meantime, the TRAFCON, in its effort
to promote traffic safety on the highway, has adopted and launched the following measures:
1. A traffic safety education campaign to acquaint bus operators and owners with the
fundamentals governing their public utility
operations;
2. A weekly driver-seminar on safety all over
the Philippines;


Road Safety ..
(Continued from page 38)
CONCLUSION:
There is apparently little or no precedent planning or figures for use as guide in solving our traffic problems at present and in time of emergency.
It is necessary to initiate and periodically review
plans and figures as a basic for future operations.
If any emergency or evacuation plans should be made
and implemented, dissemination of all available information and details to the public is imperative.
Any measure for road capacity efficiency must consider the space occupied per person in the moving
traffic stream and the length of time that the space
is occupied in traveling a given distance. “Space
per person may be expressed as the space occupied
in the traffic stream by a vehicle of a particular
type divided by the number of persons carried by
the vehicle. The length of time that the space is
occupied may be determined by the distance traveled by the overall speed of the vehicle. For comparing efficiencies, therefore, of the different modes
of road transportation, the speed of the vehicles,
the space occupied by them in the traffic stream,
and the carried load plus the restrictive factors,
are the elements to be considered if conclusive results are to be obtained.
The participation of the members of the AFP
in keeping our roads safe and in the socio-economic
development of the Philippines has been a challenge
and a philosophy likened to the words of Robert
Louis Stevenson: “That man is a success who has
lived well, laughed often and loved much; who has
accomplished his task; who leaves the world better
than he found it, whether by an improved poppy, a
perfect poem or a reserved soul; who never lacked
appreciation of earth’s beauty or failed to express
it; who looked for the best in others and gave the
best he had.”


3. Assistance to the Bureau of Land Transportation in the enforcement of requirements
concerning drivers’ licenses and motor vehicle registrations;
4. Coordination with the MVO, the PSC and
the BPH with the end in view of discovering ways and means to promote safety on
the highway;
5. Encouragement to school authorities to conduct classroom dissemination of pedestrian
safety; and,
6. Supervision of local police forces and all
other traffic enforcement agencies in order
to achieve standard and uniform enforcement of traffic rules and regulations.
ib
The mission of the TRAFCON to promote traffic safety on the highway may be a difficult task;
but it is not impossible of successful accomplishment. Accidents may be inevitable but with the
cooperation of motorists, traffic-enforcing agencies
and the general public, this catastrophe of highway
deaths and injuries could be minimized, if not totally prevented. Then, the Philippines will be a safe
ground to drive in.
BUPhSSE


Page 40


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


Affidavits ...
(Continued from page 5)
Furthermore, the adverse party is deprived of his
right to cross-examine and test the credibility of the
affiant (Azcuesta v. Cabangbang, CA-GR No. 628-R,
June 30, 1947; 45 0.G. 144, Supp., May 1949), and
the court will not be afforded a chance to observe
the demeanor of the witness while testifying. With
respect to the right of cross-examination, Sec. 87
of Rule 123 says:
Upon termination of the direct examination,
the witness may be cross-examined by the adverse
party as to any matters stated in the direct examination or connected therewith, with sufficient fulness and freedom, to test his accuracy and truthfulness and freedom from interest or bias, or the
reverse, and elicit all important facts bearing upon
the issues.
The right to cross-examination is a constitutional precept in connection with defendants in criminal cases. Paragraph 17, Sec. 1 of Art. III of the
Constitution reads: “In all criminal prosecutions,
the accused shall enjoy the right to meet the witnesses face to face”. This right of cross-examination will not be satisfied if the witness is allowed
to be absent and only his affidavit is presented in
evidence in lieu of his oral testimony. Thus it was
held that "while Exhs. 9 and 9-A are admissible as
public records, the statements contained therein, as
to the date of the supposed death of Juan Reyes,
are hearsay, because the declarants were not subjected to the test of cross-examination. The date
set forth in the said Exhibits is the date fixed by
calculation of the affiants or of the one who prepared the statements. (People v. Caggauan, et al.,
G.R. No. L-5385, Dec. 28, 1953. See also Cordova v.
Catile Bros, 18 Phil. 317 and Quinto v. Soriano, CAG.R. No. 765-R, Sept. 27, 1947). Not only that, the
submission of affidavits in a case pending in court
violates Sec. 77 of Rule 123 which states that “the
testimony of witnesses shall be given orally in open
court and under oath or affirmation".
The rule that an affidavit may not be presented
as an exhibit because the affiant is not cross-examined by the adverse party, does not apply, however,
to an affidavit executed by the accused. That is so,
because the affidavit may be a confession under Sec.
14, Rule 123, if the accused-affiant expressly acknowledges the truth of his guilt as to the offense
charged, in which case conviction is assured. If
not a confession, the affidavit may be an admission under Sec. 7 of the same Rule 123. In other
words, an affidavit of the accused in the possession
of the prosecution may be presented and admitted
as exhibit but the affidavit of a witness is inadmissible as evidence because, aside from being hearsay, it also violates the law on confrontation. Sald
witness should be produced in open court. Before
the affidavit of the accused is presented, however,
the execution of the affidavit as well as the signature of the accused — affiant should be established
to the satisfaction of the court.
One reason why the technique of taking an affidavit should be well understood, especially by those


connected with investigative agencies, is that the
taking of the affidavit while the facts are still fresh
in the mind of the witness is a great assurance that
no detail, regardless of how trivial it appears at
the time, will be overlooked.
In People v. Lopez & Laja, CA-GR No. 00190-
CR, July 26, 1961, 58 O.G., No. 14, p. 2938, the
Court of Appeals held:
Affidavits executed by eye-witness a few hours
after an accident while the events attested to were
still fresh in their minds deserve more credence
than affidavits of retractions executed by the same
witnesses a month thereafter, especially where said
witnesses were not presented during the trial to
support their affidavits of retraction.
DSH
Moreover, if a prospective witness knows that
he has given a previous statement under oath, the
possibility of changing his testimony at the time of
the trial is remote. Whereas, if he has not at all
given any written statement under oath, he may
change his testimony because of friendship, fear,
pressure or money.
The element of surprise from unforeseen testimony during the trial is lessened if some of the
witnesses have executed their affidavits concerning the incident.
To some extent the missing link or the undeveloped lead in the case will be discovered after
studying the supporting affidavits and other evidence on hand. Sworn statements will, therefore,
form the basis of pursuing the investigation further.
With the aid of an affidavit the witness will
have a ready guide when his turn to testify comes,
even many years later. Litigations in the Philippines are tiresome, long, and time consuming. Pesides, our court dockets are always clogged. The
possibility of trying the case several years after
the occurrence of the incident is not remote.
Aside from refreshing the memory of the witness, it will also serve as a guide for the counsel.
In some instances the affiant will testify differently when put on the witness stand. In such
a case his affidavit may be used to impeach or
discredit him, as was held in People v. Almadovar
84 Phil. 76, 83
Although affidavit may not, under the two-witness rule be used to prove his overt acts of treason
it may at least be utilized to impeach the defendant
as a witness, because of the conflict between the
IHsS
contents of said written statement and his testimony in court during the trial in support of his.
pretended innocence and professed loyalty to the
Government, and it may be further used to show
his adherence to the enemy.
In People v. Agcaoili, et al., G.R. Nos. L-3084-
3085, June 6, 1950, the principal witness for the prosecution made two conflicting affidavits. In Exh.
"1” he incriminated the appellants in the same way
when he testified at the trial. In Exh. “2” he retracted the contents of Exh. “1”. The court declared:
This is certainly destruetive of the witness”
credibility which cannot easily be overcome by the
(Continued on page 57)
ni zan


 


Page 41


ILOCOS NORTE:


PAOAY


PPHERE is very little doubt that at least two
94
A local landmarks quickly and surely attract
the attention of a native of Paoay from his most tender and impressionable years. One of them is the
Paoay Lake — a beautiful natural wonder that is
rich in legendary lore. The other is the hoary, centuries-old Paoay church with its massive flying
buttresses.
People say that these two noted landmarks have
had something to do with the choice of a career
among many a native son of Paoay. Sight of the
lake is a soul-uplifting experience, while contemplation of the venerable church has provided the
inspiration and the answer to many perplexed young
men.
In the whole province of Ilocos Norte, Paoay
has contributed the greatest number of priests. In
the town itself, those who have taken up the priesthood as a profession outnumber the doctors, lawyers, engineers, teachers, mechanics and other vocations. The rest of the population are also engaged in such gainful occupations like farming,
fishing, salt making, weaving, basi manufacturing
and other home industries.
Paoay is a town situated south of Laoag, seme
four kilometers west of Batac, seven kilometers
north of Currimao and five kilometers from the
China Sea east of Culili Point.
It was established in 1701, by Don Martin Guiang. Originally, the settlement was very close to
the coast, but the constant incursions of Chinese
pirates forced the people to move several kilometers
inland.
Incumbent officials of the town are: Gomersindo Echiverri, Mayor; Estanislao Bagayas, ViceMayor; Atty Bonifacio Clemente, Francisco Ralleca,
Dr. Rafael R. Aquino, Glicerio Rosal, Isidro Sadomiano; Alipio Galapia, Primitivo Arzadon and Eligio Cabugon, members of the Municipal Council.
Other key officials: Lucas D. Carpio; Justice of
the Peace; Simplicio Cabilis, Municipal Treasurer,
Crescencio E. Pobre, Municipal Secretary; and
Jorge Plan, Chief of Police.
Projects finished by the present administration
Irrigation: Galpac Dam (PACD); Lawis Dam
(PACD); Bugas Dam (PACD); Burok Dam (PACD);
and San Agustin diversion canal (PACD); totalling
₱10,000.
A puericulture center costing P10,000.
Artesian wells in Dolores, Pannaratan, Nalbuan, Salbang, San Blas, Paratong, Pambaran, Bacsil,
Suba, San Roque, Cabangaran, Nangguyudan, and
Mumulaan.
Road Construction: 1) Asphalting of the Processional road — P24,000; 2) Paoay-Balacad-Laoag
road — P20,000; 3) Asphalting of Cemetery road -
P2,000; and construction of Monte Bridge — P5,000.
Schools: 1 pre-fab building in Pasil; 1 annex
2-room building in Nagbacalan; 1 Home Economies
Building in Nangguyudan; 1 one-room building annex in Bacsil; I school building in Sideg.
Page 42


Program for other improvements (To be implemented starting Jan. 1, 1963):
Name of Projects
Paoay Communal Irrigation System (6)
Dili Dam
Paoay School Building
Nagbacalan School Building
Paoay Public Theatre
Paoay Town Plaza
Paoay-Nagbacalan Rd. Km. 470.558 -
Km. 481.665
Paoay Communal Irrigation System (6)
Dili Dam
Malaguip School Building (repair)
Gabaldon Central School Building
Paoay North Central School Building
Paoay East Central School Building
(repair)
Entrada-Cementary road (Const.)
Concepcion-Provincial Road (const.)
MacArthur-Cementary Road (const.)
Cabuyadao Str to Gabur Dam Rd. (const.)
Town Hall
Various Public Works Projects
Paoay Municipal Building
Municipal Streets & Barrio Roads
Paoay Feeder Roads
Paoay Barrio School Buildings
Central Elementary School
Paoay-Nagbacalan-Balacad Rds.
Paoay Communal Irrigation
Paoay Barrio School
Paoay Communal Irrigation
Nagbacalan Barrio School
Salbang Barrio School
ciala
Bacsil-Mumulaan Barrio School
Malaguip Barrio School Building
9OD
Monte Barrio School Building
Suba Barrio School Building
AR Ag
Nalasin Barrio School Building
hani
Feeder Roads
O
Communal Irrigation System
nod
Paoay-Currimao Rd. (Asphalt)


Amounts for above Projects:


15,000.00


1,000.00


2,000.00


1,000.00


20,000.00


1,000.00


10,000.00


1,000.00


10,000.00


1,000.00


32,000.00


2,000.00


5,000.00


4,000.00


2,000.06


10,000.00


1,500.00


3,000.00


1,000.00


2,000.00


2,000.00


4,000.00


1,000.00


1,500.00


20,000.00


1,000.00


10,000.00


2,000.00


4,000.00


9,000.00


7,000.00


2,000.00


4,000.00


10,000.00


15,000.00


3,000.00


4,000.00


150,000.00


CERTIFIED CORRECT:
GOMERSINDO L. ECHIVERRI
Municipal Mayor


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


BANTAY


RHERE are two explanations on how the
A town of Bantay got its name. The first is
that the word “Bantay” in the dialect means mountain and the town was so named because it is the
most mountainous in the whole first district of Ilocos Sur. The second is that “Bantay” in the dialect
also means "guard.” Anybody who wishes to go to
Vigan, the capital of the province, would have to
pass through the town so that any army wishing to
attack the capital must have to overcome first the
guards at Bantay.
This proximity to the capital of the province
could very well have proven a big handicap to the
community. It could have smothered the aspiration
or the initiative of its inhabitants. But the people
of Bantay, like the good Ilocano stock that they are,
have proven beyond doubt that they are self-reliant,
industrious and hardy.
DM
Thus in the whole province, Bantay is one of
the most progressive towns. The following is a partial list of the accomplishments of the present administration:
1) The asphalting of all the streets in the poblacion;
2) Improvement of the municipal building;
3) Opening and completion of barrio roads connecting the interior barrios of Ora, Malineb, Cabusligan, Quimarayan, Sagneb, Anannam, Tay-ac and
Naggidayan;
4) Construction of permanent bridges at Malineb and Tay-ac;
5) Improvement of barrio roads at Bulag West,
Bulag Center to Taguipuro, Buimod-sagpat, Paing,
and others;
6) Construction of foot-bridges at Sinabaan,
Puspos and San Julian;
7) Construction of school buildings in the poblacion, Paing, Bulag, Tay-ac, Bulaleng, Guimod, Ma

lineb, Banawag, Tagaytay, Capangadanan, Ora and
San Julian.
8) Construction of a concrete plume at Sinabaan and Puspos;
9) Construction of the Ambuklao Generator in
the Poblacion;
10) Construction of a Rural Health building,
and some others of minor importance.
Projects that are still to be finished:
Irrigation dams at Nagtiripitian, Bahjet and
Peru. The projects have already been surveyed and
only the approval of the Baguio and Manila Offices
is being awaited before the work begins. The money appropriated is P100,000.00 and is ready for release.
MT
EOHw
Program for other improvements:
1) There is now a project that may be sponsored by the EEA regarding the harnessing of the
waters of the Abra River at Banawang, Bantay, just
about 150 meters east of the Quirino Bridge, to
irrigate not only the ricefields of Bantay, but also
all the other towns of the First District of Ilocos
Sur and also some of the municipalities of the Second District of the province.
2) There is also a plan for the beautification
of the town plaza and the construction of a "rotunda at the intersection of Govantes and the National
Highway to Manila.
The municipality is presently being administered by the following: Ciriaco P. Parel, Mayor;
Santos Pacleb, Vice Mayor; Juanito Valdez, Francisco Parada, Igmidio Osalvo, Jesus Pabo, Petronilo
Hidalgo, Lorenzo Padre, Pascual Paranada and Crisanto Villegas, Members of the Municipal Council.
Other key officials of Bantay are Judge Victorio V. Alcantara, Justice of the Peace; Constante
del Castillo, Municipal Treasurer; Dr. Felicidad B.
Lucero, Rural Health Officer; and Gregorio P. Peredo, Chief of Police.
SE
o


Accomplishments


Irrigation:
Galpac Dam — PACD

Lawis "
Bugas " 
Burok "  
San Agustin diversion canal

ni balyi
 y
". 3 PA
5 DE)
PACD)


Total P10,000


Artesian Wells:
Dolores, Pannaratan, Nalbuan, Salbang, San Blas,
Paratong, Pambaran, Bacsil, Suba, San Roque
Cabangaran, Nangguyudan, Mumulaan
Road Construction:
Asphalting of the Processional road — P24,000.00
Paoay-Balacad-Laoag road — P20,000.00
Asphalting of Cemetery road — P2,000.00
Monte bridge — P5,000.00
Schools:
Hot
TO
1—prefab building — Pasil


1—annex 2-room building Nagbacalan — P3.000 00
1—Home Economics building, NangguyudanD
P2,000.00
1—1 room building annex — P2,000.00 (Bacsil)
Completion of Sideg school — P1,000.00
Other projects:
Implementation for the construction of all approved artesian wells (I-Nagbacalan, 1-Biran,
Masintoc, Callaguip, Upay, Taenir, Sideg, Mapusdo, Paratong, Veronica, Cayubog, Sta. Rita.
Construction of a circumferential road around
Paoay Lake, passing Nagbacalan, Sungadan,
Pasil, Nangguyudan, Suba to Balacad road. MeKinley st., Pobre I st., Young st., Municipio st.,
Taft st., Agbayani st., Tabora st., Green st., Balacad — Pasil road passing through Nalasin.
Echiverri st, from Bo. 20 to Bo. No. 16., Poblacion-Urzadan-Baraniw, Summer st., 4th st.,
Paoay-Currimao Road to Monte.


KHAKI &8. RED


Page 43


TOWN SURVEYS
(Continued)


BATAC
HO
The Town With A HISTORY


NET in the center of the lush Ilocos plain,
Sabout seven miles from where the waters of
the China Sea kiss the western rim of our country,
and under the shadow of the mysterious Ilocos
range, the town of Batac was founded by the famous Spanish Conquistador, Juan de Salcedo, in 1577.
It is the birthplace of Bishop Gregorio Aglipay,
founder of the Philippine Independent Church, General Artemio Ricarte, that doughty old soldier who
preferred exile in Japan rather than bow to American might, the vernacular poet, Jacinto Caoili,
whose “The Life and Sufferings of Jesus Christ,"
is still sung and recited during the Lenten season,
as well as of the late Assemblyman Julio Nalundasan, Senator Ferdinand Marcos and Congressman
Simeon M. Valdez. The town of Batac can also point
with pride to its heroie struggles during the Philippine Revolution and the Japanese Occupation.
But Batac is not content to rest on the laurels
it has won in its glorious past. The present administration: Mayor Feliciano Q. Asuncion, Vice
Mayor Atty. Fe Acosta-Aguinaldo, Members of the
Municipal Council Pio Sabas, Marcial Cuanang, Leonel S. Verano, Gregorio G. Guittap, Santiago Abitong, Pablo Bactin and Attys. Consejo Lagmay-Nalupta and Julian Q. Chua, Municipal Treasurer Vicente S. Castro, Chief of Police Claudio A, Bagaoisan and Municipal Secretary Alejandro A. Arcangel.
They have set a record of accomplishments that
could very well be the envy of many Philippine
towns.
Among these that can be cited are the following:
To minimize losses from floods which generally
destroy crops, dwellings and human lives, dikes have
been constructed along the banks of the big rivers
in and outside the poblacion.
To meet the needs of the common people for
food, clothing, material aid and general guidance
for the old and young, a unit within the office of
the mayor has been opened. It is called the Office
of the Social Welfare Administration, Ilocos Norte
Branch.
MOTI
Roads within the poblacion and in the barrios
have either been improved or newly opened. Bridges
connecting several barrios have also been constructed, like those in the barrios of Quiling, Baoa, Nagbacalan, Cubol, Mabaleng, Parangopong, Nuto-Baobao.

Artesian wells have been installed in the poblacion and in barrios Baay, Dariwdiw, Nagbacalan,
Baoa, Rayuray, Palonpong, Bil-loca, Pagangopong,
San Mateo, Payao, Colo, Tabug, Magnuang, Cubol
and Quiling.


School buildings within the poblacion and outside have been considerably improved. In several
schools, canteens maintained by teachers and pupils,
have been set up. And to implement home industries, home economics buildings have been erected
and they function within the school compounds of
the poblacion, and in barrios like Baay, Bil-loca,
Quiling, Tabug, Magnuang, Cubol, Colo, Maipalig,
Sumader, San Mateo, Palongpong, Camandingan,
Baoa, Nagbacalan, and Dariwdiw.
In a number of barrios outside the poblacion,
health centers have been established through the
cooperation of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes.
Multi-purpose pavements and barrio halls have also
been constructed in many barrios.
To further serve the needs of the inhabitants,
street lights and waiting stations have been installed in the poblacion through donations of civicspirited citizens, youth organizations and the aid
of the barrio people.
noiog!
But still bigger and more useful projects are being undertaken or are being planned. For example,
the blueprint of a branch of the Provincial Hospital
of Ilocos Norte in Batac has already been completed.
The hospital will accommodate 25 beds. A total of
P250,000 has been appropriated for its construction.
Also underway is the construction of a library
building, an amphitheater, and the renovation of the
34-year old municipal building.
Surveys of communal irrigation dams have been
finished by the Bureau of Public Works at Baoa,
Rayuray, Nagbacalan and application for water
rights construction at Cabarruan and Palongpong
through the recommendation of the municipal mayor with the aid of the PACD and the people. And
for better security during the rainy season, a dike
east of the poblacion from Palpalicong going northward to the end of Nalasin has been surveyed and
is expected to be constructed soon.
Also included in the Mayor’s program for further improvement of the town is the asphalting of
processional streets and roads leading to the cemeteries. He is also considering the zonification of
the poblacion to avoid disasters from fire and other
calamities. Like any man of vision, enthuasiasm
and courage, the mayor cannot be content with what
has already been accomplished but would always
strive for more feeder roads, better school buildings, strongly built irrigation dams, bridges, barrio
plazas and many other improvements.
A
Thus it can be seen that Batac, blessed with a
great past to which it can look back with pride, has
an equally great and encouraging present. Its future is very bright indeed, as it will be built further on the solid rock of positive achievements.


Page 44


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


CURRIMAO


PPHE strategic location of a town is, in a way,
A already a big and important advantage. But
it is not enough. For a community to make any marked degree of progress, its inhabitants must possess
the spirit of self-sacrifice, cooperatiion, traits of
frugality and industry and the will to succeed. The
community, morevover, must also have for its leaders men of courage, wisdom and the dedication to
work for the best welfare of their fellow citizens.
The Ilocos region is not noted for good natural
harbors; much of its coastline is hilly or sandy.
Currimao, however, is one of the few good Ilocos
ports. In this way, Currimao is already more fortunate than many of her sister towns in the Ilocos
region.
italgino
IIsH awo'
Currimao is also blessed with a homogenous
population of almost pure Ilocano stock. One would
be hard put to find the equal of the Ilocano in industry, frugality, self-sacrifice, perseverance, and
the will to succeed.
aE
fosit) dinro
Finally, Currimao is fortunate enough to have
men like Mayor Clemente F. Lazo, Vice Mayor Andres Reyno, Municipal Board Members Gervacio Gavino, Francisco Aglipay, Florentino Pascua, Antonio
Pardo, Julian Agolod-od and Jose Dumlao. Other
key officials are: Atty. Fidel P. Dumlao, Justice of
the Peace; Jose R. Ruiz, Municipal Treasurer; Juan
Peralta, Chief of Police, and Foribio M. Lazo, Municipal Secretary. They are, one and all, sincerely
dedicated to their work and imbued with courage
and wisdom to guide ably the destiny of Currimao.
It is little wonder then that although Currimao
is a very small town, both in size and population,


the projects that have been accomplished by its
people are worthy of the emulation of other communities:
Among these projects are:
Road Construction —
1) Poblacion — Bimmonga-Pangil (P5,000)
2) Poblacion — Sta. Cruz — Lang-ayong — Baramban to National Highway (P1,300)
3) Asphalting of a portion of the provincial
road in Poblacion (P36,000 — self-help)
4) Pias-Anggapan-Conacomloong (P800 — selfhelp)
motas
5) Poblacion — Municipal cemetery (P36,000)
6) Maglaoi-Caboosan (P1,200 — self-help)
Irrigation—communal irrigation system (P5,500)
Puericulture Health Center—Barrios Pias
(P5,000)
m9sgig
School Buildings -
no
1) Five pre-fabs in Barrio Pangil; one in Bummanga; one in Lang-ayan one in Poblacion
and one in Maglaoi.
2) One Home Economics building and one Industrial Arts building in Lang-ayan.
3) Repair of old Gabaldon Building in Poblacion (P10,000).
4) Concrete fence around school building in
Bummanga and Barrio Pias.
Projects being undertaken:
1) Asphalting of the processional road in the
poblacion.
foodoi
ad
2) Municipal stage and auditorium.
3) Industrial Arts Building in Maglaoi.


The Turnover....
(Continued from page k)
Thereafter, he was detailed with the SEATO
Group, Office of the Chief of Staff in 1956 and to
Taiwan and Japan (Joint JUSMAG Logistics Div)
in 1957. From July to November 1958, he attended
the Management Course at the CGSS, Fort Wm MeKinley, Rizal. Then, he was handpicked and detailed for about a month with former Sec. Serrano
to the United Nations and the Pentagon to expedite delivery of MDAP assistance because of his extensive knowledge of logistics. In March 1959, he
was sent to New Zealand as a delegate to the 10th
Military Advisers Meeting, Council of Ministers,
SEATO.
After his stint abroad, he was designated Zone
Commander, II PCZ from 1 July 1959 to 31 August
1961. He received the much-coveted star of a Brigadier General on 11 August 1961. With this promotion came his appointment as Commanding General
of the IIMA/2ID on 1 September 1961. Prior to his
assumption of the Philippine Army Command on
September 16, 1962, he was Acting Deputy Chief of
Staff, GHO, AFP.
anisi silona



elin
'uanquin
lay
Tayum Abra


He is married to the former Consuelo Caballero
of Gumaca, Quezon. They have six children: Josephine, Lottie, Ernesto, Elizabeth, Annabelle and Ara Mo
lene..
0 gowsM sot


Mayor Samuel E. Orpilla
San Esteban, Ilocos Sur


KHAKIG TRED


Page 45


TOWN SURVEYS
(Continued)


SINAIT


JOUNDED by an Agustinian friar, Sinait is
 one of the oldest towns in Ilocos Sur. Past
progress, however, had been rather slow. For one
thing, its soil is poor and has never been favorable
for extensive farming. Also all the arable areas of
the municipality is not enough to support the local
population.
Lately, though, with the advent of scientific
farming, it has been possible to raise more crops.
Chief among these are rice, corn, vegetables, Virginia and local tobacco. Aside from farming, other
industries are fishing, salt-making, poultry and pig
raising.
Backed thus by a hard-working and thrifty people and with the community enjoying peace and order, the present administration has been able to
push through some important projects. Some of
these are the following:
1. Construction of new feeder roads; improvement of existing barrio roads; asphalting of municipal streets; repair and improvement of the Sinait
River Control and the communal irrigation systems.
2. Construction of 6 rural health units in Barrios Sta. Cruz, Dadalaquiten, Banicacud, Cadanglaan, Baracbac and Teppeng, and 5 multi-purpose
pavements in the rural areas.
¡ABIfiG
3. Installation of several artesian wells in the
Poblacion and in the barrios.
4. Construction, repair and improvement of
barrio schools and in the Poblacion.


5. Construction of the Municipal Auditorium.
6. Construction of the market building annex.
Other important projects being undertaken:
1. Establishment and operation of the Ilocos
Regional Experimental Station in cooperation with
the Philippine Tobacco Association which will serve
Northern Luzon.
of
2. Construction of the Zapat-Quimmalugong
Barrio road; the Jordan-Pacis-Binacud-Quitbitquibit
barrio road; and the Sapriana-Cabarambanan barrio
road.
3. Completion of the Town Hall, and additional
market buildings.
Program for other improvements:
MdOd
The local administration has requested the
Emergency Employment Agency, through Congressman Crisologo, to assign a permanent labor force
in the municipality to help construct barrio roads,
public buildings and irrigation systems.
RSEI
Incumbent officials of the town are: Valerio
Yabes, Mayor; Marianito Ibanez, Vice Mayor;
Amador V. Corpuz. Hermenegildo Agdeppa, Ludovico A. Pascua, Marino V. Sabado, Leonardo Y.
Dayoan and Felix Y. Ines, Members of the Municipal Council.
Other key officials are: Vicente S. Sagun, Municipal Secretary: Rufino Impelido, Municipal Treasurer; and Felipe Agdeppa, Chief of Police.


BUCAY (Abra)


—OR fully 15 years, that is, from the time of
A its founding on October 29, 1847 by Padre
Blanco — priest, soldier and botanist — and who
named it after a vine called makabuhay which grew
in abundance locally, Bucay had the distinction of
being the capital of the province of Abra. But for
the indiscretion of the military governor’s wife, it
might have perhaps, retained that distinction to the
present. However, that is past history, and as people are wont to say, there is very little use in pining
for what might have been.
It is therefore, quite understandable why the
people of Bucay today will readily respond with enthusiasm when mention is made of its distinctive
places of interest like the “Casa Real” gate in the
poblacion and the Nagcolloban Cave in Barrio Pakiling or of its being the municipality that supplies
all the fuel needs of tobacco planters of Ilocos Sur.
Also, for a comparatively small municipality, it can
be proud of the progress that has; so far, been sccomplished under the administration of Mayor Julio
Gonzales, Vice Mayor Cojeto Paligutan and Mem

bers of the Municipal Council Demetrio Espiritu,
Valentin Timbreza, Juan Quintos, Rosalio Alagao,
Angel Tuzon and Padre Ballera. Other key officials
are Floro T. Bernardez, Municipal Secretary: Gregorio B. Baleras, Asst. Mun. Treasurer and InCharge of Office.
dis.
Among these accomplishments are:
1. Communal Irrigation Systems: those in Lublubnac, Tabiog and Patoc.
2. Waterworks and Spring Developments: Improvement of the Bucay waterworks (Poblacion); Spring developments in Madalipay and
Salnec.
3. Health Clinics: Rural Health Clinic at Poblacion and Patoc Health Clinic at Barrio
Patoc.
4. Construction of barrio and feeder roads in
Abang, Bangbangcag, Calao, Dugong, Lublubnac, Pagala, Sioasio, Tabiog and Quimloong.
5. Transfer of site and construction of the
:
public market.


Page 46


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


New Forensic....
(Continued from page 11)
ever, this was remedied by moving the set-up across
the corridor into a space vacated by the CIS. The
arrangement required knocking out some walls and
partitions between rooms, transferring some equipment into available and workable space, even putting a comfort room out of commission to accommodate supplies and records. The corridors have
been cleared of cabinets and tables to give room to
working slab tables, a new place for the bulky
opium vaults and more light installations, thus setting up a satisfactory work flow pattern for the various branches and sections. What remains to complete the job is for the walls and partitions to have
a new paint to obliterate the 1958 shades which obviously, are no longer pleasing to the eye. All this
environment was the result of the efforts and ingenuity of the Chief, Major Antonio U. Briones.
Now we can do more work without stepping into
another’s shoes, the major said in apparent satisfaction over the job.
The laboratory is primarily concerned with looking for clues left by criminals. This will be accomplished through scientific analysis of evidence submitted by various PC Units all over the Philippines,
Handicapped by limited facilities, the laboratory is
turning out more than 2,500 analyses every year. Its
achievement has been chronicled in court records
throughout the country.
The operation of this PC unit which has no
counterpart in any branches of the Military Service, encompasses the entire range in the ordinary
scheme of Justice administration in our country.
Laboratory service assures that the criminals and
other enemies of society do not escape the ends of
justice and, at the same time, ensures that aggrieved
parties are not denied the same justice.
Since its foundation seventeen years ago, its expansion and development have steadily kept pace
with the rapid progress of law enforcement— the
profession it serves.
The laboratory is in the hands of competent and
trained career men headed by Major Briones. Most
of the officers and technicians have been with the
unit since its inception after Liberation. The Chief


6. Conversion of the municipal high school into a national high school.
7. Construction of streets culverts and improvement of municipal thoroughfares in the Poblacion.
8. Improvement of the town hall.
9. Construction of concrete spillways in Barrio
San Miguel.
Projects being undertaken:
1. Extension and improvement of barrio roads.
2. Improvement of existing communal irrigation systems.
Program for other improvements:
1. The construction of more barrio communal
irrigation systems.
2. Stocking with fish fry existing ponds and
creeks to replenish the town’s supply of
fish.
 


Former PC Major, now Representative Teodulo C.
Natividad (N-Bulacan) pays a visit to his former office,
the PCCL.


of the Unit has built a strong association among
the 65 military and civilian personnel whose zealousness in this exacting task of crime detection
and prevention has been quite notable.
Major Briones is a career officer who took over
from Major Natividad when the latter was loaned
to Malacanang as legal officer to the PCAPE. Major
Briones was instrumental in separating the unit from
the CIS in 1959 prior to his going abroad as an ICA
-NEC grantee. He has been with the laboratory
since 1950, when he organized the Medico-Legal Section of the Police Affairs Division (CIS). In 1958
after the fire that razed the Headquarters, he reorganized the laboratory following its separation
from the CIS. With a limited administrative staff,
he was able to carry on the burden of reorganization. In 1959 he was recomended to take a more specialized technical training to prepare him for a long
career in the laboratory. Under the ICA-NEC Program and the sponsorship of the International Association of Chiefs of Police, he was given the opportunity to observe facilities and operation of laboratories all over the United States and to undergo
specialized training in the various phases of crime
detection and prevention.
When Major Briones replaced Col. Bugarin
from the PCCL early this year he conducted right
away a 6-month (every Saturday) In-Service Training of the Laboratory personnel on various discipline such as Fingerprinting and Dactyloscopy, Firearm Identification, QD and Trace Evidence Identification, Scientific Photography, Investigative Polygraphy, Forensic Chemistry, Toxicology, Hematology,
and Legal Medicine. The training was terminated
with a moot court conducted in every detail.
The laboratory is an observation and training
ground for interns, police officers, military police
personnel and visitors from various Asian countries.
Through it, in the years to come, we can look hopefully for continuing advances in the application of
science to the problems of detecting and apprehending law-breakers.


Page 47


(Continued from page 28)


Mayor Camilo U. Baker
Penarubia, Abra


Hon. Jose L. Valera
Provincial Governor, Abra


Atty. Ciriaco P Parel
Municipal Mayor


Mayor Jose A. Achalar
Santiago, Ilocos Sur


Mayor Manuel Purugganan
Licuan, Abra


Mayor Miguel Udarbe
Magsingal, Ilocos Sur


Mayor Ricardo B. Lunizo
Lagangilang, Abra


Mayor Lorenzo I. Formoso and members of the Vigan Municipal
Council


COMMENDATION: Congressman Lucas Paredes of Abra is shown
congratulating Mayor Ludovico H. Anin of Pidigan, Abra, who received a commendation from former defense secretary Alejo S. Santos (partly hidden) for having busted a cattle-rustling ring in Pidigan
and other neighboring towns of Abra. The occasion took place last
year at the Quezon City residence of Secretary Santos. Vice-governor
Carmelo Z. Barbero was also present.


Mayor Valerio Yabes of Sinait, Ilocos Sur,
together with the
members of the Municipal Council and their ladies. Photo was taken
during the induction of the elected officials of Sinait in 1960.


Mayor Victorino A. Savellano and the Members of the Municipal
Council, Cabugao, llocos Sur. (L-R) Councilors: Teofilo Serrano, Dr.
Frank Giner, Mariano Rocero, Mayor Savellano; Hilario Gazmen, E.
Pacifico Sison, Rodolfo Sonida; Mun. Sec. Atty. Benigno Siruno.
(Not in photo is Vice Mayor Wilfrido Zabala.)


Page 48


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


(Continued from page 28)


T
O
W
N
S
U
R
V
E
Y
S


Hon. Jose E. Evangelista
Provincial Governor, Ilocos Norte


Mayor Fermin P. Tabanda and the members of the Municipal
Council of San Vicente, Ilocos Sur. (L-R) Councilors: Emiliano
Rialubin, Pascual Rosuman, Angel Ramos, Mayor Tabanda, Vice Mayor
Melchor Rojas, Councilors: Alfredo Riotoc, Julian Rosal, Uldarico
Riberal.


Mayor and Mrs. Jaime R. Cordero, Narvacan, Ilocos Sur


Santos Pacleb
Vice-Mayor
Bantay, Ilocos Sur


Mayor Angel T. Bautista
Badoc, Ilocos Norte


Mayor Lorenzo I. Formoso
Vigan, Ilocos Sur


Mayor Clemente Lazo
Currimao, Ilocos Norte


 .


Mayor Gomersindo L. Echiverri
Paoay, Ilocos Norte


Mayor Valerio Yabes
Sinait, Ilocos Sur


Mayor Emeterio Balguna
Piddig, Ilocos Norte


Mayor Guillermo Anunciacion
San Ildefonso, Ilocos Sur


Page 49














Compliments of:


U.I BAGS & GARMENTS CORPORATION
Karuhatan, Valenzuela
Bulacan, Philippines
Tel. 2-27-94


FIL-HISPANO CERAMICS, INC.
Valenzuela, Bulacan


UNIVERSAL FIREWORKS FACTORY
Bunlo, Bocaue, Bulacan
Enrique del Rosario, Proprietor


PHILIPPINE FIREWORKS FACTORY
P. Buhangin, Sta. Maria, Bulacan


3-STAR FIREWORKS FACTORY
P. Buhangin, Sta. Maria, Bulacan
Fidel de Jesus, Proprietor


INTERNATIONAL FIREWORKS FACTORY
P. Buhangin, Sta. Maria, Bulacan
Pastor Joaquin, Proprietor


STARLIGHT FIREWORKS FACTORY
P. Buhangin, Sta. Maria, Bulacan
Teodoro de Silva, Proprietor


NATIONAL FIREWORKS FACTORY
Bocaue, Bulacan
Pelagio Ventura, Proprietor


STA. ANA FIREWORKS FACTORY
Bunducan, Bocaue, Bulacan
Carmen Sta. Ana, Proprietor


PROGRESSIVE FIREWORKS FACTORY
P. Buhangin, Sta. Maria, Bulacan
Elpidio P. Gabriel, Proprietor


2
FIVE-STAR BALIUAG FIREWORKS FACTORY
Valenzuela, Bulacan
O


Page 50





Greetings to


The Philippine Constabulary


from


The Municipality of Tayum, Abra





Greetings to


The Philippine Constabulary


from


The Municipality of Penarubia, Abra


KHAKI &. RED


PACOM REPORT TO THE
EIGHTH APACL CONFERENCE


reHE period between the Seventh Manila
APACL Conference in 1961 and the Eighth
APACL Tokyo Conference today marks a significant
stride in our overall effort to promote, strengthen
and maintain our anti-Communist posture in the
Philippines.
The new administration of His Excellency, President Diosdado Macapagal, ushered in a new but vigorous stand against Communist subversive activities and infiltrations. So strong was the pronouncement of our President against the inroads of Communism in Asia that he even expressed serious resentment against the soft-gloved policy of our ally, the
United States of America, which he interpreted as
a setback in rallying Asian nations around an effective anti-Communist leadership.
One of the most important works undertaken
Movement
by the Philippine Anti-Communist
(PACOM) was a mammoth anti-Communist youth
rally held last March 10, 1962 in Quezon City, the
new Capital of the Philippines.
It was the biggest Philippine rally held so far
in denouncing Redism and the pernicious evils that
it brings to mankind. A big crowd estimated at
more than 25,000 heard President Diosdado Macapagal exhort the youth and all liberty-loving peoples
to fight Communism in every way everywhere. In
this mammoth rally, the Communist emblem was
burned amidst a colorful setting used in a pageant
written and directed by Dr. Jose Ma. Hernandez,
our PACOM First Vice-President. It was a truly
enthusiastic assembly of youth, foreign dignitaries,
religious groups and the highest officials of our government which cheered the burning of the “hammer
and sickle” symbol before the President of the Philippines.
The successful affair was a banner headliner
the next day in all the leading newspapers in the
Philippines. Friendly agencies such as the United
States Information Service in Manila and the Armed
Forces Journal of the Philippine Army carried the
significance of the occasion across the front pages
of their publications. Our television networks and
movie companies also projected the important event
in their respective media. The rally was a huge
success because of the enthusiastic support extended
to the Philippine Anti-Communist Movement by civic
organizations and governmental entities. Our organization was also assisted by the Filipino-Chinese
Anti-Communist League.
The Philippine delegates to the extraordinary
session held in Seoul, Korea, last May 10, 1962,
played a major role in shaping the plans for a
Freedom Center and the organization of a Freedom
Brigade in Southeast Asia.
During the same period, Major Medardo T. Jus

tiniano, our PACOM director, had delivered a series
of important talks in the United States, Okinawa and
in the Philippines expounding on the anti-Communist
activities being undertaken by PACOM as well as
our other national agencies. He also discussed with
appropriate agencies the potential of our organization and the different factors hindering us in our
anti-Communist efforts. We are hopeful that assistance to minimize these adversities will not be dimmed
by complacency, indifference and even redtape. We
are happy to receive the encouraging commendations
given to our PACOM director by the Okinawa Government and the different agencies of the United
States Government for his “outstanding presentations" on the Philippine Anti-Communist programs.
We also assisted the Filipino-Chinese Anti-Communist League in sponsoring the visit of Professor
Chow Ching-Wen, a former key-man of Mao Tse
Tung who defected to freedom after more than
twenty years of Communism. His series of lectures
in the Philippines had served to expose before our
countrymen the other secret evils of Chinese Communism on a first-hand basis.
A woman anti-Communist group is also presently being formed to supplement our drives on other
fronts. This is held significant because there are
more women than men in the Philippines. Doubtless,
the influence of women in our anti-Communist campaign will be of far-reaching effect.
During the year, our organization has distributed
about 200,000 copies of assorted anti-Communist literature all over the Philippines. Our population now
is 28 million. We hope that with the kind assistance of our sympathizers, perhaps we may step up
our dissemination in the coming year.
We have made our modest contribution to freedom’s cause by being the only Asian country which
had outlawed the Communist Party organization.
We had upset the Red’s timetable of subversion in
our country by crushing the military “Revolutionary
HUK" force of the CPP. Nevertheless, we are fully
aware of the surreptitious devices of the purveyors
of this godless ideology to germinate again with
the ultimate objective of overthrowing our duly constituted government. We know their sinister designs. We are ready for them.
His Excellency, President Diosdado Macapagal,
after nine months of incumbency, had served notice
to the world that the direction we Filipinos have
chosen to take in this crucial battle of survival for
mankind’s destiny is unswerving and firm.
With God’s help, with your help, and with the
earnest support of freedom-loving peoples, we in
the Philippines shall carry on with renewed vigour
the fight against International Communism.
Of similar importance is the organizational mis

Page 52


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


PC IN SPORTS


FRHE PC Knights in the recently concluded
M. AFP Little Olympics was able to retain its
Runner-Up position last year outclassing its closest
rival, the Philippine Navy, by 7.5 points. This entitled the PC to the Secretary of National Defense
trophy which was awarded during the closing ceremonies held last 21 Dec. 1962 at the Camp Murphy
Parade Ground.
Although the Constabulary had retained its spot
as Runner-Up in the overall championship of the
Cth AFP Little Olympics, it is worth mentioning
that it has improved in its accomplishments in sports
by winning five team championships compared to
last year’s three. The Philippine Air Force won
eight, the Philippine Navy, five, and the Philippine
Army, one. The following is the resume of the final
standing of the competing major services in the different events:
VI AFP LITTLE OLYMPICS
GENERAL STANDING


1.


EVENTS
Badminton


PAF
9


PC
6


PN
3-


PA
15


2.


Baseball


15


3


6


9


3.


Basketball


15


9


3


6


4.


Boxing


9


6


15


3


5.


Cycling


3


1


6


9


6.


Golf


15


5


9


7.


Judo


9


6


15


3


8.


Shooting


6


15


3


9


9.


Soccer Football


6


9-


15


3


10.


Swimming


9


3


15


6


11.


Table Tennis


6


15


9


12.


Tennis


6


15


3


9


13.


Track


15


4.5


4.5


3


14.


Field


15


9


6


3


15.


Volleyball (G-man)


15


6


3


9


16.


Volleyball (9-man)


9


15


3


6


17.


Water Polo


15


3


.9


6-


18.


Wrestling


9


3


15


6


19.


Weightlifting


15


3


7.5


75


Total


201


154.5 147


124.5


sion being undertaken by us to counteract Communist penetration in schools and colleges. There
has been of late an alarming intensification of Communist activities exploiting the campuses or fraternities of our educational institutions. This is, of
course, being closely watched by our intelligence
community. For the PACOM, we have set the initial
mechanics to organize our youth to meet this systematized plot of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). A PACOM Jr. drive whose membership will come from universities and colleges is on
the way. We expect to cripple the Communist threat
in this direction thru the organization of PACOM’S
extension in our schools.

2a
KHAKFE REDLTLS


Comparative standing of the individual PC


teams during the
Olympics:


III, IV, V


and VI


AFP Little


Events


IIl AFP
Olympics


IV AFP
Olympics


V AFP
Olympics


VI AFP
Olympics


Basketball


4th Place


Champion


Ronner Up


Runner Up


Track


3rd Place


Runner Up


Champion


3rd Place


Field


3rd Place


Ronner Up


Runner Up


Runner Up


Table Tennis


Runner Up


Ronner Up


Champion


Champion


Shooting


3rd Place


Runner Up


Champion


Champion


Soccer


No Entry


3rd Place


3rd Place


Runner Up


Baseball


No Entry


3rd Place


3rd Place


4th Place


Golf


3rd Place


3rd Place


3rd Place


3rd Place


Boxing


4th Place


3rd Place


3rd Place


3rd Place


Wrestling


No Entry


tied with PA
for 3rd place


Ath Place


4th Place


Swimming


No Entry


Ath Place


4th Place


4th Place


Water Polo


No Entry


A4th Place


4th Place


Ath Place


Tennis


4th Place


Ath Place


3rd Place


Champion


Badminton
Volleyball
" (6-man)
" (9-man;
judo
Cycling
Weightlifting


Runner Up
No Entry


Ath Place
Ath Place


Ath Place
3re Place


3rd Place
2rd Place
Champion
3rd Place
Champion
4th Place


Managers and Coaches of the five (5) Champion
Teams:
COL ANGEL P LEGASPI
Shooting
Manager
MAJ JAIME F VILLAFUERTE
Team Captain
DILA


Table Tennis COL C P DELA CRUZ
Manager and Coach
gor
isod
BRIG GEN FLAVIANO OLIVARES
Tennis
Manager
LO
LT COL SANTIAGO MARQUEZ
Coach
Volleyball (9-man team)—LT COL PEDRO JAVIER
Manager
MAJ HERNANDO COSTA
n hag
Coach
MAJ INOCENCIO FALLARIA
Cycling

Manager
y Agad
CAPT TORIBIO D RABAGO
aM 
9 SAMAN
AS
*Coachi Sug
Page 53-


Speaker Cornelio T. Villareal trooping the line with then Acting Chief of Constabulary, Brig. Gen. Nicanor D.
Carcia.


Speaker ....
(Continued from page 22)
rich with instances of kindness, dependability and
integrity. These must be maintained. They must
be made real.
It is not pleasant to hear or read or learn about
men in uniform being involved in both petty infractions of the law or in more serious crimes. While
to some extent these cases are unavoidable it is
preferable that they be kept down to a minimum.
We cannot allow these to become causes of distrust
and disrespect for our police forces.
The police has always been looked up to as
rrotectors of the community. If this high regard
has somehow been diminished in recent years, let
us step forward and try to get it back to the degree
that it was in the past. Let us repair the damage and
restore prestige whenever it is threatened or endangered.
It has been said of the police everywhere in the
world that upon no group of men have so many depend for protection and good example. Let us develop eur police and other law-enforcement agencies
to their finest once more. Let us get the public to
Page 54


believe and to witness that the best traditions are
abided by and observed.
There is no place for misfits and undesirables.
There is no need for men who ignore the majesty of
law which they are supposed to enforce. We cannot
tolerate mulcters and crooks. We cannot settle for
less than uprightness in character and unquestioned
dedication to duty.
It has been argued that it has been difficult
for our police officers to remain uncorrupted because of the interference of politicians. I wish you
would not be so scared of politicians, especially the
crooked ones. My advise to you, in passing, is that
you should never be intimidated by anyone so long
as, in your honest belief, you are doing the right
thing. No man should fear anyone who operates in
utter disregard of public welfare.
Remember, however, that no politician is per se
a bad or crooked man. There are those who are
sincere and honest, who have only the common welfare at heart.
Before I close, my friends, let me appeal to you
to cultivate respect for law and make our people
more greatly aware that there is such a thing as the
majesty of law.
NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


Eavesdropping ...
(Continued from page 27)
wiretapping was given clear legal status for the first
time.
The amendment was added to the Bill of Rights
guarantee against unreasonable searches and seizures. To the layman it may seem to read backwards. The amendment provides:
“The right of the people to be secure against
unreasonable interception of telephone and telegraph communications shall not be violated,
and ex parte orders or warrants shall issue
only upon oath or affirmation that there is reasonable ground to believe that evidence of
crime may be thus obtained, and identifying the
particular means of communication, and particularly describing the person or persons whose
communications are to be intercepted and the
purposes thereof.”
Thus was paved the way for the passage of
section 813-a of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
under which orders are issued by the courts to permit and regulate law enforcement on wiretapping.
Confusion as to the meaning of these provisions
was one of the factors in the Appelbaum case. The
trial judge cited them, as though they had been violated, in his charge to the injury which convicted
Mr. Appelbaum. The appellate judges unanimously
found that in doing so the trial judge had committed a reversible error invalidating the verdict, because these provisions “relate solely to the sovereign
authority and its agencies and not to individuals."
This distinction is one of the important reasons
why we have found it desirable to consider private
eavesdropping quite separately in this report from
wiretapping by public officers. Thus we avoid confusion in our thinking.
Another widespread misconception which has
direct bearing on our problems has to do with “the
right of privacy.” Obviously the practices of eavesdropping constitute invasion of personal privacy, and
clearly the laws against interception of messages
are aimed to protect their privacy. In our discussions practically all of us have spoken of “the right
of privacy” as though it were something we all
possess as a matter of law.
“The right of privacy” is not mentioned in the
Constitution and it appears in the statutes only as
the titles of Article 5 of the Civil Rights Law and
of section 50 of that law. This article has only
three sections. Sections 50 and 51 provide criminal
and civil penalties for the unauthorized use of a
person’s name or picture for commercial purposes.
Section 52, added in 1952, prohibits the broadcasting
or televising of any proceedings in which witnesses
are examined under oath. From the legal standpoint, these three sections constitute the entire right
of privacy as it exists in New York today.
Even though it does not now apply to eavesdropping, this “right of privacy” is of direct interest to
us in the present circumstances, as an example of


how the law grows and is adapted to modern conditions. The legal concept was first expressed in an
article, “The Right of Privacy,” in the Harvard
Law Review of December 1890 by Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis. This was a quartercentury before Mr. Brandeis became a justice of the
United States Supreme Court. In this article the
authors noted that in earliest times the law protected the physical person and property, and "later,
there came a recognition of man’s spiritual nature,
of his feelings and his intellect.” Gradually, they
argued, the scope of legal rights had expanded to
include “the right to be let alone.” They asserted
that “the term ‘property' has grown to comprise
every form of possession—intangible as well as tangible.” This common law argument was directed, not
against eavesdropping, but against the unauthorized
publication of personal papers and photographs.
A dozen years later, the Brandeis philosophy
became the central issue in a major case in the
New York State Court of Appeals, Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Company (171 N.Y. 538) In this
case the picture of a young girl, Miss Roberson, had
been used on a label for 25,000 flour containers,
without authorization. She sued to stop and collect
damages. The Court of Appeals, divided 4 to 3, decided against her. Clearly she had been wronged,
but the Court found the law contained no remedy.
The Court said that "an individual’s so-called
right of privacy, founded on the claim that he has
right to pass through this world, if he wills, without
having his picture published, his business enterprises
discussed, his successful experiments written up for
the benefit of others, or his eccentricities commented
upon either in handbills, circulars, catalogues,
periodicals or newspapers... does not exist in the
law and is not enforceable in equity."
The minority of the court strongly advocated
the Brandeis viewpoint, and maintained that the development of instantaneous photography presented
new conditions which the law should face.
Chief Judge Alton B. Parker, for the majority,
spoke of “the vast field of litigation which would
necessarily be opened up should this court hold that
privacy exists as a legal right enforceable in equity . .. He suggested that the remedy lay in legislation, from which "no embarrassment would result
to the general body of the law."
The following year, 1903, the Legislature enacted sections 50 and 51 of the Civil Rights Law, establishing the right of privacy to that extent and
that extent alone. The Brandeis view had prevailed,
but only with respect to unauthorized commercial
use of names and photographs.
These events of the past have a relation to our
problems today. The invention of instantaneous
communication is of even more moment than the invention of instantaneous photography, and has raised many more questions of privacy. Of these the law
should take cognizance.
The law at its best is the embodiment of human customs and the common opinion of men. The
(Continued on page 61)


 


Page 55


GRADUATING POLICE OFFICERS


C/Pol Benny M Agravante .. M Fortich, Bukidnon
Pol Lt Alfredo Aguas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . Manila
C/Pol Sofronio D. Aguipo . . . . . . . . ... Ormoc City
C/Pol Felix P Alqueza . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Toledo City
C/Pol Felix L Arlan ........ Sapao, Surigao Norte
C/Pol Simeon S Ayala ... Libmanan, Camarines Sur
Pol Lt Francisco Balancio ........ Agoo, La Union
C/Pol Samuel B Banquicio .. Salvador, Lanao Norte
DC/Pol Vicente De Barras III ........ Ozamis City
C/Pol Vicente H Batuhan ... Sison, Surigao Norte
C/Pol Maximo C Bool ........ Batangas, Batangas
C/Pol Maximo B Campos .... Mankayan, Mt. Prov.
Pol Ctp Isidro N Canafranca ....... Lopez, Quezon
Pol Lt Rodolfo B Caralian ....... Gumaca, Quezon
C/Pol Gavino A Castro ....... Cataingan, Masbate
Pol Cpt. Leonardo M. Cortez .. Mandaluyong, Rizal
C/Pol Justo C Cruz . . . . . . . . . . .. Plaridel, Bulacan
C/Pol Bernardo D Depra ........ Dumangas, Iloilo
C/Pol Tarotopan R Dipatuan. Malabang, Lanao Sur


C/Pol Alejandro Q Estonilo ...... Placer, Masbate
C/Pol Jose B Gil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Baybay, Leyte
C/Pol Antonio Giron . . . . . . . . . .... Aurora, Quezon
Chief Dominador A Inocentes .. C/U-Tex Security
Force
C/Pol Agripino Isaac ............ Unisan, Quezon
Pol Sgt Carlos C Javier .... ...... Marikina, Rizal
C/Pol Isidro M Javier . . . . . . . ... Malolos, Bulacan
Pol Cpt Jose L Lat .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lipa City
Pol Lt Francisco A Lopez ....... Gumaca, Quezon
Pol Lt Valentin C Losares . Surigao, Surigao Norte
C/Pol Graciano G Magtira .... Paombong, Bulacan
DC/Pol Doroteo C. Marasigan ...... Tagaytay City
C/Pol Felipe M Mocay ....... Buquias, Mt. Prov.
DC/Pol Emeterio B Molato ............. Silay City
C/Pol Conrado T Perlata . . . . . . .. . . Limay, Bataan
C/Pol Senecio T Recolizado .... Sta Ana, Cagayan
Pol Lt Jose L Ronquillo . .. .......... Quezon City


FACULTY


Maj Domingo C Tutaan ... Head, I & I Department
Maj Alfredo C Cabbab .... Head, Law Department
Maj Antonio Y Concepcion ... Head, Gen Instn Department
Maj Deogracias S Paguio ... Head, Tactics Department
Capt Toribio E Collantes ..... Instr, Law Department


Capt Arcadio S Lozada ... Instr, I & I Department
Capt Antonio Habulan ... Instr, I & I Department
Capt Gil L Manuel .. Instr, Tac Dept & Tng Aids O
Capt George L Gaona ..... Instr, I & I Department
Capt Valerio C Perez ..... Instr, I & I Department
Capt Filomeno G Gonzales ... Instr, Gen Instn Department


SCHOOL COMMAND


Col Avelino E Sauco . ............. Commandant
Capt Cicero C Campos ... Research & Evaluation O
Lt Col Paulino E Sanchez .. Asst Comdt & Secretary
Capt Luis F Mendiola ............ Utility Officer
Capt Pedro T Bersamin ........... Supply Officer


Affidavits ...
(Continued from page 1i)
explanation of the prosecution that the latter affidavit was obtained through machinations of the
attorneys for the defense.
An affidavit may also be the basis for prosecuting the affiant for perjury under certain circumstances. It is high time we should start prosecuting
people who take lightly the sanctity of an oath.
Another use of an affidavit is in support of a
criminal complaint. It is the practice in our country that affidavits of the witnesses, especially that
of the complainant, are attached when filing a complaint or information.
The Court of Appeals, speaking of affidavits in
support of the information, said:
The fact that the affidavit of the offended
party in support of the information is less detailed
than her testimony in open court does not make
said affidavit or testimony false or incredible, there
being no incongruity between the former and the
latter, or inconsistency in the facts therein stated
in one and the other. Neither the rules nor practice
require detailed affidavits in support of an information. (People v. Torrefiel, et al., CA-GR No. 659,
Nov. 29, 1947.)
However, if the declarations of the witnesses
for the prosecution on the witness stand coincide
or tally substantially with the affidavit executed
by the accused, even if he repudiates or contests
the contents of the affidavits later on, this circumstance will influence greatly the outcome of the case.
In effect, that was what the Supreme Court said
in People v. Meriales, et al., 84 Phil. 20-21 which in
part is as follows:
Otra prueba que refuerza la prosecucion despejando toda duda sobre la culpabilidad de los apelantes, son sus affidavits prestados ante el Teniente
Guillermo Y. Manuel, del Military Police, en donde
confiesan la commision del delito de un modo sustancialmente conforme con lo declarado por Isabelo
y Josefina Ledda ante el Juzgado. Estos affidavits
denotan que los tres acusados actuaron en conjunto,
probandose de esta manera positivamente la existencia de una conspiracion. Antes de la prestacion
de estos affidavits, el apelante Isidro Mendoza ya
habia confesado al juez de paz de Balaoan su participacion en el crimen, nombrando como companeros
a Alfonso Mendoza y Marciano Meriales. Los apelantes alegan haber sido forzados a firmar dichos
affidavits. Esta alegacion es enteramente futil.
Tanto el Teniente Manuel como el juez de paz
de co-accion ni violencia sobre los declarantes c
de Balaoan aseguran que no ejercieron ninguna
coercion sus confesiones... No se ha demostrado en
autos nada que pudiera afectar en lo minimo a la
credibilidad de los dos mencionados funcionarios que
tomaron las declaraciones juradas.
In People v. Fausto, G.R. No. L-16381, Dec. 20,
1961, the accused signed a statement barely three
hours after the commission of the crime. Furthermore, he re-enacted the crime at its scene only a
few hours after he committed it. His defense was
insanity. The Supreme Court held that these facts
left no room for doubt as to his sanity, both during


and after the execution of the crime.
A sworn statement or affidavit may be either
in question-and-answer form, in narrative form, or
a combination of both. The question-and-answer
form, however, has a decided advantage over the
narrative form in that the person conducting the
investigation has a full control of the situation. He
can ask the affiant anything whether or not the
question is related to the crime under investigation,
although only those germane to the case are to be
taken down. Besides, it is only in questioning that
the interrogator is able to clarify matters left out
by the affiant in the course of his narration.
He should also know the general facts of the
case; the more he knows about it, the better. Only
if he knows the general facts of the case under investigation will he be in a position to ask questions
which will finally lead to the solution of the case
and its ultimate prosecution in court. Facts favorable to the subject should be included in the sworn
statement for this will enhance the value of the
affidavit. It simply shows that the person taking
the statement of the witness is impartial in recording all facts
... . The statement should be in the phraseology of
the person making the statement, even though it is
ungrammatical. This is one way of showing that
the statement is voluntarily made.
Joint affidavit of two or more persons or witnesses who may testify to the same facts should be
avoided for it is quite impossible for two or more
individuals to relate the incidents they both observed
in exactly the same words.
When a statement is in the question-and-answer
form, leading or suggestive questions should not be
asked. Sec. 82, Rule 123 of the Rules of Court defines a leading question as "a question which suggests to the witness the answer which the examining
party desires”
The affidavit, be it in the narrative or questionand-answer form or a combination of the two, should
be a chronological recital of all pertinent facts surrounding the case under investigation.
Whatever the form is, the person taking the affidavit or the investigator should make intentional
errors in the sworn statement. These errors should
be corrected by the affiant by crossing the erroneous words and at the same time writing the correct ones in his own penmanship, if he knows how
to write, and initialed by him. It is strongly recommended that these errors should be scattered all
ver the affidavit; one at the beginning of the statement preferably on page 1; another at the middle
of the second page, another at the end of the third
page, then at the middle of the fourth page, etc.
If by chance the affiant overlooks those intentional
mistakes, his attention should be called. For examle, if the affiant declares that he is from Pasig,
Rizal, the statement may say that he is from Tanay,
Rizal.
Now, if he fails to notice the mistake, he should
be asked the question: "Did you say you are from
Tanay, Rizal?” In all probability he will recall what
he rightly stated. He will then be asked to make the
(Continued on page 58)


 


Page 57


Affidavits ...
(Continued from page 57)
correction as explained above. The presence of many
corrections seattered all over the pages of the affidavit and properly initialed by the affiant will preclude the excuse affiants usually interpose during
the hearing while testifying that they signed the affidavit without reading it. But how can one make
corrections without reading it? It is quite natural
that the mistakes in the affidavit were noticed because the affiant read it. The court will then doubt
the truthfulness of the witness and, following the
Latin maxim of falsus in ono falsus in omnibus, his
credibility as a witness will be greatly affected.
Full opportunity should therefore be given the affiant to make any and all corrections he desires.
Each page of the statement should be signed by
the affiants so as to do away with a possible later
charge that the investigator has inserted or detached pages.
The concluding paragraph of the statement
should recite that the statement consists of a stated
number of pages, each of which has been numbered
and signed at the margin by the affiant and his instrumental witnesses to the signature, that the statement was given freely and voluntarily without threat
or promise of any kind; and that the person making the statement or the affiant has read it. Below
is a good example of the concluding paragraph of
a statement:
I have read this statement consisting of five
(5) pages. I have signed each and every page of


A Salute to the PC...


for a very good job done during the
year 1962.


Y2
JOSE BERNABE & CO., INC.
M
1535 Juan Luna, Manila
Tel. 2-86-51


1
Page 58


this statement and have initialed all corrections.
I have made this statement freely and voluntarily.
No one has promised me anything or threatened me
in any way to obtain this statement.
Any disability of the affiant that might reflect
on his possible understanding of the contents of the
statement should be explained as should also how
the difficulty was overcome. An example of a handicap and how to overcome it, is that of a blind affiant. In such a case it is wise for a friend (a member of the affiant’s family is preferred), to read the
statement to him, and the person who does this
should make an appropriate statement to that effect
over his signature.
In the event the affiant refuses to sign his
statement, invoking for this purpose his constitutional rights, the interrogator should, at any rate,
so indicate such fact in the last portion. The interrogator should also certify, preferably at the end
of the statement, that the affiant refused to sign
the statement on grounds of constitutional rights.
The recorder of the interrogation should likewise
make a similar certification. These acts should be
supported by additional certificates of at least two
unbiased witnesses that the affiant refused to sign
his statement and that no harm nor intimidation has
ever been applied to him.
If the affiant is willing to sign his statement,
his picture in the act of signing the same should
be taken. It will be better if his interviewers appear in the picture too, as witnessing the signing
of the statement.
It is recommended that the witnesses to thesignature be a lawyer to further attest to the genuineness as well as to the execution of the affidavit.
It has also been noticed that there are affidavits written in the third person.
The most common is an affidavit in the first
person. Legally, it does not matter whether the affidavit is in the first or third person, but just the
same, it is strongly recommended that affidavits
should be in the first person. The reason is not
on the semantics alone. If the affidavit is in the
third person, it would look as if the person who
took the statement is the one talking. Thus the declarations therein do not appear as forceful as one
taken in the first person. This is especially true
if the statement involves a confession. Under Sec.
14, Rule 123, the accused must expressly acknowledge the truth of his guilt in order to constitute
confession. Now, if the confession is in the form
of an affidavit written in the third person, although
there is no prescribed form of a confession, it is
doubted if such confession has met the legal requirement of "expressly acknowledging the truth of
his guilt". This fact, together with other circumstances, may cast a reasonable doubt on the guilt of
the accused. This seemingly "minor matter" may
mean the life or freedom of an individual. There
is no doubt that an affidavit in the first person ismore emphatic than one in the third person.
Finally, as much as possible, no copies of the
sworn statement should be furnished the affiant
or his lawyers.
NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


PTGWO and AWU president Roberto S. Oca addressing union officials


Handling the ....
(Continued from page 12)
(an Act to Promote Industrial Peace and for Other
Purposes) (2) RA No. 1167 (an Act Punishing Obstruction and/or Interference with Peaceful Picketing During any Labor Controversy) (3) CA No. 103
(Act Establishing the Court of Industrial Relations)
and (4) Laws or amendments to existing laws regarding labor relations which our government may,
from time to time, promulgate.
As to procedure, particularly in cases of pending
or actual strike, the following are suggested:
1. During Pre-Strike Period
a. Gather and report data on:
(1) Demands and complaints of labor
against management.
(2) Issues involved.
(3) Points of compromise advanced by
management.
(4) Attitudes of labor and management..
(5) Number of persons likely to participate in the strike —Names of leaders
and sympathizers.
(6) Whether impending strike is purely
the result of a legitimate labor dispute or merely a front of the CPPHMB to create confusion and discontent.
b. Conduct a reconnaissance of the area or
areas to be covered, plan probable patrol
disposition, and screen personnel to be


utilized for Police Duty in case the strike
is staged.
c. Adopt necessary precautionary measures
to forestall untoward incidents in case of
sudden or unscheduled actions of either
labor or management.
d. List principal leaders of the strike, and
as much as possible, know their life history.
e. Consult and collaborate with regional representatives of the Department of Labor; and appeal to probable strikers thru
their leaders to avoid unlawful picketing
and other untoward acts in the event of
actual strike.
f. Study factors affecting the situation and
immediately provide available personnel
and facilities to take care of any emergency arising from the staging of the
strike.
g. Keep all personnel likely to participate
in the impending strike, posted on the situation prevailing and brief them on the
Rights and Restrictions imposed by law
on the limits of their own participation,
if strike materializes.
2. During Strikes
a. Report immediately occurrence of the
strike and pertinent details, particularly
data when staged, number of direct participants, identity of leaders, and types
(Continued on page 60)


KHAKI &. RED


Page 59


Handling the.
(Continued from page 59)
and number of arms and weapons available to both parties.
b. Take the following steps, whenever necessary or as deemed appropriate.
(1) Assign men to maintain peace and
order and protect life and property
in the strike area.
(2) Establish checkpoints to collect unlicensed firearms and deadly weapons of parties involved in strike.
(3) Provide security along picket lines
during conciliatory talks.
(4) Determine if any CPP-HMB assistance was or is being extended to parties involved in the strike.
(5) Confiscate placards with subversive
wordings or tending to incite mobbery, violence, or disorder.
(6) Keep picketeers off the employers”
premises whenever the picketing is
not peaceful or when it constitutes
an obstruction to the free use of the
particular property wherein the picketeers establish picket lines.
(7) Implement or enforce orders of the
Court of Industrial Relations or appropriate Courts of Justice.


(8) Apprehend strikers and members of
the strike-bound company who have
violated or are violating the law and
all who disturb peace and order, regardless of affiliation.
(9) Consult and cooperate with Department of Labor representatives in
their conciliatory efforts and consult
with fiscal and/or local JP in case
of probable prosecution of violators.
(10) Advise armed picketeers to get rid
of their arms, if any, and if they
refuse to do so, apprehend them for
serious disobedience to agents of persons in authority and confiscate their
arms.
(11) In case of riot, disperse the crowd
immediately, giving them reasonable
time to comply with the order, care
being exercised that the movement
will not interfere with those of the
peace officers and apprehend riot
leaders or those who are inciting the
crowd to unlawful acts.
3. After the Strike
a. Secure a copy of the instrument of agreement terminating the strike.
b. Withdraw personnel after the signing of
the agreement, but meanwhile, continue
surveillance of affected area.


Page 60


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


c. Submit reports to include critique and
recommendations to improve efficiency of
discharging police duties during strikes
or operations of similar nature.
4. In case of Unlawful Picketing
a. Peace Officers may intervene when the
picketing is not, or ceases to be peaceful,
or when it is being conducted unlawfully
inside the premises of the employer. Instances of unlawful picketing are:
(1) When carried on with violence, intimidation or coercion or so conducted as to amount to a nuisance.
(2) When it obstructs the free use of
property or hinders the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of
a street.
(3) When staged on the employer’s property which is an unlawful interference with the property rights of the
employer.
(4) Picketing outside the employer’s property may be considered unlawful if
not held at reasonable distance therefrom so as to cause annoyance or
disturbance to the employer and the
public.
(5) Patrolling undertaken by strikers in
front of factory is a private nuisance
when held for the purpose of interfering with the business.
(6) Picketing for the purpose of obstructing persons and traffic at the gates
of the compound of the striken management.
(7) Forming human blocks at the gates
of the compound for the purpose of
preventing the ingress and egress of
vehicles.
(8) Picketing along private roads of the
establishment where “No Trespassing” signs are clearly in view.
(9) Using handbills containing abusive
or libelous charges, or hurling libelous remarks against any individual.
(10) Coercing or intimidating strike breakers or scabs from working with the
company.
In cases of unlawful picketing, peace officers
should first seek the principal leaders of the strike
and request them to advise the strikers to desist
from unlawful acts. If the strikers persist, the peace
officers should consult representatives of the Departments of Labor and Justice on possible legal
action they should take, if any, to stop unlawful
picketing. Pending the aforementioned consultation,
peace officers may use their discretion in the manner of their intervention, always keeping in mind
that the only justification for such discretion is to
keep the picketing lawful and peaceful.
b. When arrest and seizure become inevitable, the same should be done strictly in
accordance with law.
No doubt, the laws and procedures of imple 


mentation enumerated here are known to peace officers. Nonetheless, complete acquaintance with the
same, will give peace officers the much needed selfconfidence, determination and dedication productive
of the desired public service and performance.
Every actuation of individual officers could
contribute to the overall efforts which will bring
about public confidence and raise the standard of
police organizations in the eyes of our people. By
the same token, a simple failure, either by commission or omission, by any member of the organization could do much to destroy public confidence.
Certain norms of conduct, to mention a few, are
as follows:
(1) Habitual courtesy — cheerful, cordial in
speech and actions, firm but generous and
considerate, friendly and helpful in dealing
with people and always acting with discretion.
(2) Just, Impartial, Reasonable — There should
be neither abuse of power or authority nor
interfering with any legal act of labor or
management in the furtherance of their respective interests.
(3) Honesty — Peace officers should not reduce their effectiveness and efficiency by
accepting favors such as gifts, emoluments,
foods, drinks, transportation, etc., from
either labor or management. This breeds
distrust and suspicion. There is absolutely
no justification for peace officers to compromise their official and personal dignity,
(4) Respect for the dignity of the common man
—Help in the preservation of human rights.
We are peace officers first and foremost
and we need not use force or arms unless
and only as a last resort.
In the summing up, the term "peace officers"
connotes clearly the role of police officers, even
during labor disputes—the maintenance of peace and
order and the protection of life and property. That
is their mission. The fact cannot be over-emphasized that in the performance of this mission, peace
officers will observe strict neutrality and impartiality towards both labor and management, and will
employ the utmost tact and diplomacy compatible
with firmness as police officers.


Eavesdropping ...
(Continued from page 55)
mere fact that we have so generally assumed that
eavesdropping is an invasion of a right of privacy,
non-existent in New York law, is perhaps the best
evidence that the law should be expanded to include
recognition of it. Our concepts have expanded, even
as the arts of telephony and electronics have expanded. In 1892 it seemed natural to put the protection of the telephone company’s lines into the saine
category as the protection of sewer pipes. Today
this offends our sense of propriety. Wiretapping,
and any electronic eavesdropping, have taken on new
importance, not only in relation to our increased
capacity to inflict wrong, but also in relation to our
expanding concepts of the rights of man and the
dignity of the individual person.
soaaa


Page 61


9f
The Concept.
(Continued from page 13)
sozod evia fio
willingness to go to voluntary arbitration; and (4)
non-intimidation.
These conditions require a little explanation.
Firstly, while framing demands we have to be extremely careful, otherwise our case will be weak
from the very beginning and there will not be a
reasonable chance of an agreement. It is, therefore,
necessary for us to find out an adjustment between
our pressing claims and the objective conditions.
Secondly, public support is another factor to be
counted, otherwise our struggle will be isolated. It
is not that there are only two classes in a society,
namely employees and employers, who can be left
alone to decide their own affairs. There is an important and a wider class of consumers which is immediately affected by an industrial action. We have
to convince the public or the consumers, on whose
support and sympathy we hope to win, that ours is
a just cause and the employers are acting in an un

The Industrial
(Continued from page 14)
demned labor injunctions, and Courts are loathe to
issue the writ. In fact, only unlawful picketing may
may be enjoined (PAFLU vs. Barot, 52 0.G. 6544).
The legislature, cognizant of the disfavor with whizh
a labor injunction is viewed, made it difficult to
obtain the writ under Sec. 9 of Rep. Act No. 875.
And one of the hardest requirements to satisfy under
Sec. 9 before a labor injunction is issued, is the requisite that public officers are unable or unwilling
to furnish adequate protection.
As the substituted bill would have the effect of
deterring peace officers from maintaining peace and
order during a strike, it would become easier to
satisfy this requirement about the inability or unwillingness of peace officers to furnish adequate
protection. Hence, it would likewise be easier for
complaints praying for the issuance of labor injunctions (usually on the part of management) to secure
the writ in labor disputes.
I proposed to provide in two separate paragraphs
the prohibition against transporting and escorting
replacements, whether entering or leaving the premises of a strike area, but due to the reluctance of
my colleagues to distinguish a "peace officer” from
an “armed person,” I insisted in introducing an
amendment to the bill, which would not curtail the
inherent duty of peace officers of maintaining peace
and order, to the effect that "Nothing in this Act
shall be interpreted to prevent any peace officer
from taking any measures necessary to maintain
peace and order.” Fortunately, this amendment was
incorporated in the bill as the last paragraph of
Section 1 thereof, when the bill was approved on
second reading by the Senate. I hope that iny
amendment will help clarify the position of peace
officers during a strike and thereby contribute to
industrial peace.



reasonable way. Employers will also try their best
to put their case before the forum of public opinion.
This particular point could be best illustrated in the
case of city council employees who must realize that
their real masters are a vast mass of taxpayers and
not a few officials of the city council, and as such
they have to win to their side, the taxpayers and
citizens in a trade dispute.
ti
Thirdly, we must be prepared to get our claims
examined by an independent arbitration. If we have
a strong case, we need not be chary about going before an arbitrator. We have, of course, to take care
that the arbitration proceedings are not dilatory and
we have our say in the choice of an arbitrator.
And fourthly, there should arise no necessity at
all of the intimidation against our fellow workers.
Strikes must be conducted, therefore, in a perfect
non-violent fashion. Any outbreak of violence in the
course of strike would give an upper hand to the
guardians of law and order, who would not hesitate
to use force in suppressing a strike.
The trade unions in action cannot rest content
with their own activities if they want to play a national or an international role. The trade unions
in action are ever widening circles. Just as workers
in particular trades and industries have banded together in trade unions in order to win better working and living conditions, these unions have almost
universally formed national trade union organizations for the sake of greater strength and unity.


Department of Poblic Works and Communications
BUREAU OF POSTS
Manila
SWORN STATEMENT
(Required by Act 2580)
The undersigned, MAJOR CONSTANTE MA. CRUZ, editor of the KHAKI
AND RED published bi-monthly in English at Headquarters, Philippine
Constabulary after having been duly sworn in accordance with law, hereby
submits the following statement of ownership, management, circulation,
etc., which is required by Act 2580, as amended by Commonwealth Act
No. 201:
Editor. Major Constante Ma. Cruz . TI & EO. HPC
Business Manager: Alejandro B. Aquino .... TI & EO, HPC
Owner Hdatrs.: Philippine Constabulary ... Camp Crame, Quezon City
Publisher Hdatrs.: Philippine Constabulary . . . Camp Crame, Quezon City
Printer: Phoenix Press, Inc.
. 315 Quezon Blvd. Ex., Q.C
Office of Poblication: Headquarters, PC .... Camp Crame, Quezon City
If publication is owned by a corporation, stockholders owning one
percent or more of the total amount of stocks:
Not Applicable
Bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders owning one percent
or more of total amount of security:
Not Applicable
in case of daily publication, average number of copies printed and
circulated in each issue during the preceding month of September 1962;


 554
1. Sent to paid subscribers --
2. Sent to others than paid subscribers - 466
 1000
T o t a


CONSTANTE MA. CRUZ
Editor & General Manager
TI & EO, HPC
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this 23rd day of October 1962
at Camp Crame, Quezon City, the affiant exhibiting his Residence Certificate No. O282982 issued at Manila January 29 1962.
2.
WILLIAM N. CHAVEZ
Captain, INF (PC)
Adim O, TI & EO, HPC
NOTE: This form is exempt from the payment of documentary stamp tax.
ACT 2$80 REQUIRES THAT THIS SWORN STATEMENT BE FILED WITH THE
BUREAU OF POSTS ON APRIL I AND OCTOBER 1 OF EACH YEAR.


Page 62


NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1962


Greetings to


Hon. JOSE L. VALERA
Provincial Governor


From the Province of Abra


g



THE BI
RIC BRIER
PACKAGE


E




E


or comforf
WITH IMPORTED
U.S. WAISTBAND
MADE EXCLUSIVELY
fon rme
BRIEF
guoranteed
ot to shrink
ouf of fit nor
refch ovtof size.


rwa
DE
EPENDENCE
IVERSIRY
ISSUE


here Is
S M. Tarue
m te
Birth ol
e Republic
O CENTNIOS


MODEL


The principle of "sequential aulomatic tuning is appliec
to a popular priced, compact radio! No more dial tuning ...
no more controls to turn ... no more buttons to push! Simply
— touch the drum tuner to bring in your choice of six stations! That’s alll It’s that simple, that easy! A jewel-like
light changes color to tell you when your station is in!
Only PHILCO has Itl


Fits into her travelling
bag like a book...
plays AC-DC anywhere! “She shall
have music wherever
she goes”...!



ATUO


Model 603—₱108.00


And PHILCO has a truly Personal Radio! No bigger than a ladies"
handbag... yet with the full power and range to bring in stations
with undistorted tones ... from five to ten times the power ever
built into a personal radio!
Jewel case design, mocha plastic; leather-trimmed golddecorated ... Space for owner’s initials! Only PHILCO has it!


The
454 DASMARINAS
TELS. 2-79-78 8. 2-79-79


Store of Quality
16th &. ATLANTA STS.
TEL. 2-94-89


Tune in on DZPl for the Deems Taylor Concert from 6:30 to 7:30 P.M. every Tuesday
—and Sunday and on DZRH from 7:00 to 7:30 every Wednesday night for the PHILCO
HOUR, Bing Crosby Show.


AROS
a


home
appliances


NVITATION TO HOUSEWIVES:
When you are dowtown shopping, take
time out for refreshments.
Drop in at our Display Room and rest
awhile-—bring your friends too—
you are all welcome as our guests,


DSESCOLTA
UniversalIrading
MANILA
Tel. 2-66-89
COMPANY, INCORPORATED


June, 1949


Page 3


6
0
N
*
y
50

go
20
—1
5

B0
₱3
m
R
L



Page 4


KHAKI and RED


Beffer Truck Performance with
Exhausf Valves of Advanced Design


THE HEAVY-DUTY, truck-type exhaust
valves used in International truck engines
rest on seat rings inserted in the cylinder
block. These rings are made of special
alloy... extra-strong, extra-tough, extradurable to withstand extra-long periods
of extra-hard wear.
In addition, all valves are thoroughly
cooled by large water passages around
each seat.
Result: longer valve life, greater engine
efficiency.
This is just another example of International quality ... quality that serves


and satisfies alert truck owners throughout the world.


- (HIERNANONAD).


There are 24 basic International truck models
in a complete range of wheelbases .!.. with 14
different engines, including 5 Diesels that can be
used in 1o models. Engines range up to 300
horsepower. Truck load capacities from one to
twenty tons. Consult your International dealer
about the right model for your job.


INTERNATIONALHARYESTER COMPANY
MCCORMICR Internattonal
2
Tractors and Farm Equipment
OF PHILIPPINES
International Trucks
E
154 Marques de Comillas, Manila


Magallunes Street, Cebu
Sasa, Davao - Lacson St., Bacolod


Et


Internatlonal Refrigeration
International Industrial Power


June, 1949


Page 5


Always ready to serve


MANILA TRADING & SUPPIY
PORT AREA, MANILA
SAN PABLO
DAGUPAN CITY
BAGUIO
SAN FERNANDO, PAMPANGA
BATANGAS, BATANGAS


Page 6


KHAKI and RED


This Month’s Cover


BACKBONE of the Philippine
Constabulary today is the PC enlisted man of whom Pvt. Reynaldo
Reaso is a type. This 21-year-old
EM joined the PC on December 24,
1948, was born in Oas, Albay, and
is unmarried. He reached first year
high school. An infantryman, he
has pledged to defend the colors at
all times, feels that he and his comrades-in-arms have it in them to
equal, if not surpass, the best soldier
there was in the PC organization
before the war—given the breaks.
In the cover he portrays the soldier
“oler the ramparts" ever on the
guard to protect his country’s freedom.
June, 1949


OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY


CONTENTS
Vol. I, No. 3
JUNE, 1949


Page


EDITORIALS — LETTERS


8


PRESIDENT QUIRINO'S MESSAGE


9


BIRTH OF THE REPUBLIC


10


ORGANIZING VS. COMMUNISM
By Raul Y. Gonzalez


I


FREEDOM TO TALK
By Lieut. Noli R. Reyes


12


OUR PRIDE AND OUR HONOR


13


INDEPENDENCE PROCLAMATION


14


THOUGHTS FROM RIZAL


15


WHERE IS LUIS M. TARUC?
By Major Celso M. Alikpala


16


HUK REVOLT IN LAGUNA
By Capt. Arfuro J. C’emente


18


POEMS OF FREEDOM


20


TRUMAN ON COMMUNISM


21


THE PC AND THE RED CROSS
By Sgt. Juan M. Eduarte


22


THE INVESTIGATING OFFICER
By Capt. Eduardo P. Bahia


24


PC SPORTS


27


ABOUT VETERANS BENEFITS
By T. L. Sinclair


28


LETTER FROM LINDA TARUC


36


PC WOMEN'S CLUB SECTION


38


HOW BUSY IS THE PC WOMEN'S CLUB?
By Amparo O. Acab


40


Published monthly on a nonprofit basis by the General Headquarters, Philippine
Constabulary. Associate Editors: Lt. Constante Ma. Cruz and A. Litonjua. Business
and Advertising Manager: Capt. Alfonso A. Calderon. Editorial and advertising
offices: Camp Crame, Quezon City—Tel. 6-87-31—242. Entered as second-class
mail matter at the post office at Manila on April 9, 1949. Subcription rates: Philippines, P6.00 the year; foreign countries, ₱12.00. Articles and photographs submitted for publication may not be returned, in case of rejection, uniless they are
accompanied by self-addressed envelopes and sufficient postage. Opinions expressed
in signed articles do not necessarily reflect the views of the Philippine Constabulary.
Photo credits: Photographs appearing on pages 10 and 19 of this issue are through
the courtesy of the Manila Times; on page 16, the Evening News. The rest are
credited to the Signal Corps, PC.


Page 7


Mottana
to tha Editona
The Editors
KHAKI and RED
The article "I Worked with a Woman Spy” in the May issue of K& R
is one of the most absorbing pieces
of guerrilla literature I have read
since liberation. Mrs. Claire Phillips,
the American “Mata Hari," certainly
deserves a Medal of Valor for her
daring and sacrifice.
Where can I buy a copy of her book
Manila Espionage”? I would like to
keep it in my collection of guerrilla
literature.—Sgt. R. DE LA CRUZ.
A survey of Manila book stores
showed all copies of the book have
been sold out since several months
age. Some local book stores, however,
particularly Alemar’s at Plaza Sta.
Cruz, have indicated that if there is
sufficient public demand for the book,
they may order more copies from the
United States.


The Editors
KHAKI and RED
Yay Panlilio’s “Message to the
Mountains” (May issue, KHAKI and
RED) is a moving, realistic open letter to the dissidents. It should be
read by every single Huk in the lowlands and in the mountains. If only
the dissidents could be convinced by
pamphlets. .. —JOSE WILFRIDO
ROSAS, San Juan, Rizal.


The Editors
KHAKI and RED
An Enlisted Men’s Barrio, better
known as “Barrio Suarez,” has just
been established at Headquarters,
Mindanao Zone, PC, Camp Overton,
Lanao. It came into being through
the efforts of the headquarters commandant, Capt. Jose L. Fabello with
the cooperation of the staff and enlisted men stationed at Camp Overton.
The spirit of friendship and helpfulness has been cultivated and exercised by every one, making the barrio a decent place to live in.—T/Sgt.
REGINO BANDOLA, Headquarters,
Mindanao Zone, PC.
(Continued on page 36)


EDITORIALS


Thoughts from Rizal
ON RIZAL'S birthday enniversary this month, there are two passages culled
from his prose works thet ere timely and significant.
will never he the one,” wrote he, "to encourage the mulfitude to get
by force what the government does not think proper to grant.fI should
ever see the multitude armed,! would place myself on the side of the
government.
So much power in the hands of men, ignorant men filled with passions,
without moral training, of untried principles, is a weapon in the hands of a
madman in a defenseless multitude."
K
A Thought for the Anniversary
THE Republic of the Philippines will, be exactly three years old next month.
There is much to be said of the progress the country has aftained toward
normalcy during the last three years.
War-devasteted communities have been rebuilt, the repair of roads,
bridges and other installations destroyed or damaged during the hostilities
is going on at a steady pace. A government agency for social amelioration is doing e lot to supplement the meterial needs of the poor and the
underprivileged. Concrete measures have been mapped ouf to forestall a
serious economic crisis as a result of the expected stoppage of American
windfall in the next few years. Millions of pesos have flowed into the Philippines in the form of war damage payments, veterans’ benefits, backpay,
and other cash assets earned by the Filipino people for their gallant participation on the side of the democracies in the last war. When such bounties
end, the effects of economic readjustment would be tragic unless effective
measures are initiated early to neutralize or af least minimize the expected
crisis.
While physical recovery has been substantial the same can not be said
of the moral espects of our rehabilitation. There ere elements among our
citizenry which have shown a wanton disregard for the law. An organized
movement of ouflaws still sways some influence among the unlettered masses,
perpetrating heinous crimes against persons and property and the State.
The Philippines can not reach its full economic development unless every
town and hamlet is rid of the bandits. This is elemental.
This is a thought fo ponder on this third anniversary of the Republic.


K


A Question
A UNITED PRESS dispatch from Tokyo this month quoted a Tokyo University lecturer as saying many young Japanese would like to see Japan involved
in another war and are intriqued with the possibility of recovering "old territories" of Nippon
Is MacArthur’s G-2 well aware of such sentiments?


Page 8


KHAKI and RED


MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA
MESSAGE
am pleased fo convey my greetings fo the members
of the Philippine Consfabulary Force on the occasion of
the third anniversary of our Independence Day.
On the Constabulary rests the responsibility of
maintaining infernal security. In recent days, there have
been some disturbances in the dissident areas thaf posed
a challenge to the PC organization.I am confident the!
General Ramos and his men will soon enough prove thaf
they are equel to his challenge.
We must secure domestic tranquility if we are to
carry ouf our economic mobilization plans intended to
make our country strong, happy and enduring.
call on the men in KHAKl AND RED to intensify
their efforts and help prove to the world that we merit
the sovereignty which we won on July 4th, 1946.


PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES


June, 1949


Page 9



ESS
July 4 Three Years Ago Marked the Climax of America’s
Experiment in Democracy in This Part of the World


IT was the fruition of a glorious
I dream. A sea of faces, estimated
at nearly half a million, were directed at a hallowed spot at the new Luneta that bright morning in July three
years ago where a solemn ceremony
-one of the most momentous in Philippine history—was slowly unfolding.
High Commissioner Paul V. MeNutt, representing U.S. President
Harry S. Truman, read the proclamation in slow, measured tones: “I
do hereby recognize the independence
of the Philippines as a separate and
self-governing nation."
Rain fell from a suddenly overcast
sky for several minutes but the solemn ceremony continued uninterruptedly.
At 9:16 a.m. that day, July 4,
1946, the American flag atop a towering flagpole in the center of the
scene of the celebrations, was slowly
lowered with Mr. MeNutt holding
the halyard. While it was halfway
down, the Stars and Stripes gently
kissed, as it were, the Filipino tricolor being hoisted by President
Manuel Roxas. This particular rite
was designed to symbolize the transfer of sovereignty over the Islands
from America. The American and
Filipino national anthems were successively played while somewhere
toward the beach a 21-gun salute was
fired. Many a face in the vast throng
shed a tear, hearts skipped a beat,
moved by the significance of the occasion.
Shortly after, Vice-President Elpidio Quirino stood before Chief Justice
Manuel V. Moran to take his oath of


THIS WAS the stirring moment
when the Filipino flag was being
hoisted at the Luneta while the
Stars and Stripes was lowered as a
symbol of the change of sovereignty.
office. This was followed by President Manuel Roxas who in his turn
took his oath of office as chief magistrate of the newborn Philippine Republic.
President Roxas delivered a speech
full of courage and hope for the new
Republic, stressing the everlasting
friendship with which the new independent nation held for its benefac

tor, the United States of America.
High Commissioner MeNutt and
Senator Millard E. Tydings, a friend
of the Filipino people and one of the
group of U.S. Congressmen who
came to Manila to attend the celebration, both expressed best wishes
for the success of the newborn Republic.
Gen. Douglas MacArthur, the "Liberator of the Philippines," likewise
gave a gallant salute to the Republic
and to the people "that I have known
so long and loved so well."
As befitting the occasion, the day
was celebrated all over the country
with festivities.
In Manila the main ceremony at
the Luneta was followed by a military and civic parade escorted overhead
by squadrons of U.S. air force planes.
The same afternoon, Mrs. Trinidad
Roxas, wife of the President, planted
a narra tree in front of the City Hall
symbolic of the growing nation. In
the evening a state dinner and ball
were given by the President in Malacanan and an elaborate fireworks
display was held at the New Luneta.
Paul V. MeNutt, the first ambassador accredited to the Republic, called at Malacanan and presented to
President Roxas his credentials as
Ambassador Extraordinary and., Plenipotentiary of the United States.
For the next few weeks messages
of congratulations poured into Malacanan from all over the world, from
officials in the world capitals and private citizens, all wishing the newborn
Republic a brilliant and successful
future in the concert of free nations.


Page 10


KHAKI and RED


V
CIGAIMS OOTPOTVASLA
In the Current Struggle Against Communism, All Elements
Should Extend Full Support to the State, Writer Contends


By RAUL Y. GONZALEZ


WOU will, I believe, agree with me
when I say that the purpose of
Communism is to abolish all private
enterprises, be they of political, economic, social, cultural or religious
nature. In a word, such organizations
as are free today to function will be
taken over and controlled or destroyed
when the Communists succeed in either forcing or wheedling themselves into power. These are as much the objects of the prevailing Hukbalahap or
Communist rebellion and intrigues as
the government itself.
Now our government, in protecting
itself, is also protecting these institutions. And I believe the government
will continue to do this job as a matter of course. But don’t you think that
without the government giving up the
work our private organizations should
themselves take up the fight directly
from their end of the struggle?
Let us see what the government is
doing to fight Communism. First and
foremost is the armed campaign
against the Huks. All indications show
there will be no let-up in this phase
of the struggle until the last Huk or
Communist is finally disarmed or rendered harmless. Judicial proceedings
to bring the dissidents to justice are
also being undertaken.
Then there is the PACSA, the
President’s Action Committee on Social Amelioration, charged with the
work of providing immediate relief
to needy displaced people in Huk-infested areas, as well as in localities
where its help may be needed in addition to the normal function of the
Philippine National Red Cross and
local relief agencies.
The Committee on Un-Filipino Activities, the CUFA, is a legislative
body investigating the over-all aspects of the Communist movement and
other activities that can be properly
called un-Filipino. It serves as an organ dedicated to the refutation of the
whole Communist philosophy and an
agency of exposure against subversive


individuals, groups or associations
seeking the destruction of our constitutional liberties.
It would seem that by these functions the government is covering all
fronts necessary for its protection—
the PC for the armed front, the
PACSA for the economic front, and
the CUFA for the ideological front.
The fact, however, is that the government’s position will never be completely secure unless the people behind it, those that are not directly
concerned with the administration of
state affairs, are organized to forestall recurrence or behind-the-line
machinations of the enemy.
Now the matter of organization of
private enterprises against the Communist movement should not be undertaken by the government itself,
but should be left to ther respective
initiative. And I believe this can be
started only with the realization that
while the government has been established for the protection of all legitimate institutions within our national
jurisdiction, it devolves as a natural
right upon such institutions to adopt
their individual protective measures.
Let us take the Philippine Chamber of Commerce as a particular instance. This was organized for the
protection and promotion of the business and commercial interests of all
that are affiliated to it. Now what
aspects of the Communist movement
affect trade and industry? Does the
PCC investigate this problem and
thereafter apply needed measures to
prevent Communism from infiltrating
into the business community or using
the weaknesses of the economic system as leverage for attacks on the social order?
It is not known that the PCC or any
other business association does this,
although once in a while some business man or commercial executive
comes out with a warning against
Communism. But what good are mere
warnings when it is within the pow

er of the business world itself to seek
and dish out practical information
that tells what use Communism is
making of private enterprise itself to
attain Communism’s ends? It is as
good in business as it is in any undertaking to say that if you know the
true nature, aim and methods of your
enemy you can beat him.
But it seems that business intelligence here is being employed only in
the discovery of commercial knowledge, in the expansion or recession of
trade. While a global Communist
movement rages close to and inside
the Philippines itself, seeking to completely abolish the natural and very
desirable system of free enterprise,
our business men are content to merely follow the usual promotional processes, little knowing that if they do
not stir themselves against the insidious and aggressive efforts of Communism the government itself can do
very little to maintain their permanence as a free and democratic group
in the social order.
But what can Big Business in this
country really do in the national
struggle against Communism? What
must we all do to coordinate our efforts? In a report of the Committee
on Socialism and Communism of the
Chamber of Commerce of the United
States, the following are prefaced:
“The master-minds of Communist
strategy, especially since the time of
Lenin, have insisted that the labor
movement must be moved steadily
leftward, radicalized and infiltrated.
Without a leftist labor movement the
Communists stand small chance of
gaining the objective of a revolutionary destruction of our way of life.
“For this reason top management
in American industry and commerce
must concern itself with this problem. Sound industrial relations as
practiced by the foreman, the division
head, the industrial relations executive and top management may serve
(Continued on page 20)


June, 1949


Page 11


ERECOB BOEU
“The Wine of Indeependence Has Not Only Made a Great Many
of Us Heady But Also Fault-Finding,” This Observer Believes
By Lieut NOLI R. REYES


S THE TWO FLAGS met halfAway on the flagpole, everybody
stood still, trying to feel the significance of a flitting immemorial second of history.”
That was how a newspaper reporter fittingly described the emotion that
surged in the hearts of the spectators
when the two flags—the Filipino and
the American—kissed in the middle
of the pole in front of the grandstand
as the late President Roxas hoisted
the Sun and Stars and High Commissioner MeNutt hauled down Old Glory.
That happened on a fateful day on
July 4, 1946 when the great American government gave this country
its political independence and incidentally closed dts last chapter on
Philipine soil.
All eyes were misty then...
For as the Filipino flag waved majestically in the breeze, everybody
could not but look back to the infamy of the Occupation. No one on
such a momentous occasion liked to
think of those ghastly days, reviving
poignant memories of want, hunger,
and desolation. But a retrospect of
the pattern of ignominy they etched
found contemplation on such a day,
for triumph could only be sweet after recalling the heartaches preceding
it.
Every Filipino could have thought
then: I wish that I were blind to the
grotesque memory of Japan. But the
story is there: inevitably I went
through all the pain. I was a hapless eyewitness to that long, dark, and
uncertain night of captivity after
Japan trampled these sacred shores
and visited upon my home the blight
of tyranny. By right of conquest the


Philippines was hers, but by right of
divine heritage the Philippines remained as a living symbol and a flame
in the warmest nook of my heart. Everywhere tears formed in little pools
in Filipino eyes. I, too, shed profuse
tears because of the irreparable loss
of my country and government that
I had learned to love more than life
itself. I realize now how much that
government had become part of myself, only after it had been taken
away from me...
That was a little less than three
years ago.
Thus the government we lost some
eight years ago to the aggressor has
been retrieved at the price of blood
and life. From all considerations the
sacrifice was costly. But it meant
freedom regained and the return to
a way of life which we have enjoyed
since the Castilian rule faded out of
these shores. And most important
of all, we became a distinct race once
again.
Today we have as much freedom as
we desire. Having so much we have
become freedom-conscious more than
ever. When we feel that our rights
are being transgressed, we shout our
voices hoarse to the high heavens that
we are being robbed. More often
now we invoke the Constitution when
we suspect an encroachment on our
prerogatives. This is the consequence
of once losing our freedom. Losing
it to virtual slavery, we fully realized how great it is to be free.
Freedom and this government are
one and the same thing. Verily this
polity is the monumental finale, as-it
were, of well-nigh five decades of American tutelage and guidance, tem

pered in lavish measure with the ingredients of unequivocal democracy:
a way of life as only the American
people know and enjoy it. This is
the distinctive legacy of American
rule. Call it "imperialism" if you
must, but it was magnanimous
throughout nevertheless.
Yes, indeed, we have that much of
democracy—and the freedom that
goes with it. Freedom from fear,
from want, of the press, and of
speech: we have all aplenty.
We talk too such—this freedom
stands out prominently among the
rest.
After we lost this government in
the early forties, our mouths were
gagged; we could not openly talk
about our misfortune. We simply
contained the pain of loss. Then
when he regained it, we lost the feeling attached to its real significance
and we are now talking more than is
necessary to the extent of almost
shattering it to pieces. The sting of
the scathing tirades we hurl against
it rocks its very foundation. We
sing its rottenness to the four corners of the globe. We cannot gather the dirt in our own backyard and
let it stay there.
The world must know the filth and
smell the pungent odor about us: this
is what we talk too much about.
This government is not perfect, no,
not by any means. Like others the
world over, be they young or old, it
has its frailties, shortcomings, and
imperfections. But notwithstanding
all these defects, we have a government that does not smack of Utopia.
Which means that it has a tangible


Page 12


KHAKI and RED


meaning because of the things it lacks.
For these things are those that make
the common tao feel that this government is his own—to improve and
to perfect if possible.
How many of us realize that good
government cannot be achieved in the
twinkling of an eye? How many of
us realize that there is no royal road
to perfection, that there is no path
strewn with roses to sovereign maturity? A seed can only grow into a
tree after years of painstaking care
and will bear fruit only after more
years of suspenseful waiting. How
many of us are aware that in working towards a common objective, we
must follow a gradual and, at times
painful, process towards its realization?
The sensible Filipino citizen may
well think in this vein: I like this
government. When something goes
haywire in it, I can speak out my
mind. And I have done so many times.
I fumed against the Surplus Property
Commission once. Luz and Corvera
were sentenced to jail.
I gave vent to my feelings against


Fabre. The law is now on the warpath against all Chinese who entered
this country illegally. And there are
several Congressmen now squirming
in their seats.
Tanada exposed Avelino in the Senate. The interlude that followed in
the upper chamber of the Congress
caused no small amount of flurry not
only in this country but also abroad.
In no time at all Avelino was deposed
from the Senate presidency. The incident was far from disgraceful; it
was an unmistakable sign of our political maturity.
I have spoken against other ills
within the framework of this government and something is being done
about them. This government is good
enough for me. The trouble with
some loud-mouthed demagogues is
that even when the rot is being removed, to them the ill remains within the core. Why, this is a perverted way of looking at things. If we
keep on looking at them in this perspective, we will be going to the dogs.
No other past administration had
done a more relentless house-cleaning,


and without regard for the big names
involved.
And so the story of a bad government goes on and on...
The wine of independence has not
only made a great many of us heady
but also fault-finding. Nothing seems
good anymore; everything seems suspicious and dirty. Certainly it is getting to be a bad national habit, this
indiscriminate mass-opinion of unpleasantness within this government.
But surely we have a government
that exists in concrete form, no matter how imperfect it is. Surely it is
not one linked with the "grotesque
memory of Japan.” Surely it is not
somebody else’s government.
There is a pathetic chapter in our
national life that we detest to recall.
The heartaches and the tears that
were written across the pages should
teach us a good lesson: that not to
have any government at all is much
worse than a government which may
be bad but which we can run by ourselves alone—even like hell, who
cares?


Encore of the Month


Our Pride and Our Honor


Three Years Ago This Historic Address Was Delivered by
President Manuel Roxas at the Inauguration Ceremonies
of the Philippine Republic at the New Luneta, Manila


MY COUNTRYMEN:
 N historic drama has just been
Aunfolded before our eyes. The
American flag has been lowered from
the flagstaffs in this land... not in
defeat, not in surrender, not by compulsion, but by the voluntary act of
the sovereign American Nation. The
flag which was first raised in conquest here has been hauled down with
even greater glory. The Stars and
Stripes will no longer fly over this
land, but in the hearts of 18,000,000
Filipinos and in the eyes of many
millions more in this part of the world
the American flag flies more triumphantly today than ever before in history. Some hundreds of yards from


here at Fort San Antonio Abad, the
American flag was first planted in
1898. As its brave colors fluttered
down from the flagstaff a moment
ago, the cycle of history had completed a full turn. In the culmination
today, America justified her destiny.
For America, today’s act of renunciation was the climax of triumph...
for enlightenment, for democratic
values, for liberty. We mark here
today the forward thrust of the frontiers of freedom.
I have raised the Philippine flag
to wave henceforth alone and unshadowed over the entire Philippines.
American sovereignty has been withdrawn. It has been transferred and


is now possessed in full measure by
the Filipino people.
We have thus reached the summit
of the mighty mountain of independence toward which we and our fathers
have striven during the lifetime of
our people.
As the spokesman for America predicted half a century ago, the Filipino people now look back with gratitude to the day when God gave victory to American arms at Manila Bay,
and placed this land under the sovereignty and protection of the United
States.
The birth of this nation is attended today by dignitaries from many
lands. It is attended by the personal


June, 1949


Page 13


representative of the President of the
United States, by leaders of the Congress and of the armed forces and
other high officials of the American
Government.
The President of the United States
has proclaimed our independence.
The Republic of the Philippines has
now come into being, under a constitution providing a government which
enthrones the will of the people and
safeguards the rights of men. The
historic event has been completed.
There remains for us only to evaluate the significance of what has occurred.
There are moments when men
should pause in their humbleness and
look beyond the passing shadow of
events to see the towering magnitude
of the forces which have been brought
to bear upon the affairs of current
time. I judge this such a moment,
and I am humble before it.
We who are gathered here personify, but no more than that, the act
of establishing a new nation. All of
us are mere symbols of the millions
of men, and the hundreds of hopes
which are involved in our passing
pageant.
It can be said that the eyes of the
world are upon us. But the world is
not listening especially to the brittle
words we say, words which pass
quickly from hearing and fade soon
from even the printed page. The peoples of the earth see in this occasion
a magnificent flowering of the human
spirit, an interval of grandeur in an
epoch in which the grandeur of unselfishness is rare indeed. The peoples of other nations are listening to
the words uttered here not so much
as words but as sounds which have
echoes in the human soul... mystic
sounds unlimited by time or language... sounds which ring in intimate harmony with the voices of freedom heard.. now remote... now insistent... since the dawn of human
history.
This occasion, this event which happened here, responds to a cry which
is common to all mankind. This cry,
the cry for freedom, for liberty, and
for dignity resounded in ancient
times from the hillsides of Greece;
in the Middle Ages, from the high
plateaus of Bohemia and the green
countrysides of Britain; in the beginning of modern times, from the canals of Venice, from the narrow streets
of Paris; and finally and most memorably, from the bright new world
which began on the western shores
of the Atlantic.
(Continued on page 30)


TROCLAMAILION
Of Philippine Independence
WHEREAS the United States of America by the Treaty of Peace with
Spain of December 10, 1898, commonly known as the Treaty of Paris, and by
the Treaty with Spain of November 7, 1900, did acquire sovereignty over the
Philippines and by the Convention of January 2, 1930, with Great Britain did
delimit the boundary between the Philippine archipelago and the Sfate of
North Borneo, and whereas the United States of America has consistently
and faithfully during the past forty-eight years exercised jurisdiction and control over the Philippines and its people, and
WHEREAS it has been the repeated declaration of the legislative and executive branches of the Government of the United States of America that full
independence would be granted the Philippines as soon as the people of the
Philippines were prepared to assume this obligation, and
WHEREAS the people of the Philippines have clearly demonstrated their
capacity for self government, and
WHEREAS the act of Congress approved March 24, 1934, known as the
Philippines Independence Act directed that on the 4th day of July immediately
following a ten year transitional period leading to the independence of the
Philippines the President of the United States of America should by proclamation withdraw and surrender all rights of possession, supervision, jurisdiction,
control of sovereignty of the United States of America in and over the terrifory
and people of the Philippines except certain reservations therein and thereafter authorized to be made and on behalf of the United States of America
should recognize the independence of the Philippines, now therefore, I Harry S.
Truman, President of the United States of America, acting under and by virfue
of the authority vested in me by the aforesald Act of Congress, do proclaim
that, in accord with and subject to the reservations provided for in the pertinent provisions of the existing acts of Congress, the United States of America hereby withdraws and surrenders all rights of possession, supervision, jurisdiction, control or sovereignty now existing and exercised by the United Sfates
of America in and over the territory and people of the Philippines and on behalf of the United States of AmericaI do hereby recognize the independence
of the Philippines and as a separate and self-governing nation and acknowledge
the authority and control over the same of the Government instituted by the
people thereof under the constitution now in force. In witness whereofI have
hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America fo
be affixed. Done at the city of Washington this fourth day of July in the year
of our Lord nineteen hundred and forty-six and of the independence of the
United States of America the one hundred and seventy-first.
By the President
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Dean Acheson
Acting Secretary of State


O
I Am a Filipino
AM A FILIPINO — inheritor of a glorious past, hostage fo the uncertain fufure. As suchI must prove equal to a twofold task — the task of meeting
my responsibility to the past, and the task of performing my obligation in the
future.
am sprung of a hardy race... Across the centuries the memory comes
rushing back to me: of brown-skinned men pufting ouf to sea in ships thaf were
es frail as their hearts were sfouf. Over the seal see them come, borne upon
the billowing wave and the whistling wind, carried upon the mighty swell of
hope — hope in the free abundance of the new land thaf was to be their home
and their children’s forever.
am a Filipino born to freedom, and ! shall nof rest until freedom shall have
been added unto my inheritance — for myself and my children’s children — forever.—CARLOS P. ROMULO.


Page 14


KHAKI and RED


houghts from Rizal
Excerpts from Jose Rizal’s Work Including Noli Me
Tangere, El Filibusterismo, Filipinas Dentro de Cien Anos,
La Indolencia de los Filipinos and Shorter Works Compiled
by Leopoldo Y. Yabes, Writer and Bibliographer


You, what are you doing for the
land that gave you existence, that
supports your life, that affords you
knowledge? Don’t you realize that it
is a useless life which is not consecrated to a great idea? It is like a
stone wasted in the fields without becoming a part of any edifice.


If our country has ever to be free,
it will not be through vice and crimes,
it will not be so by corrupting its
sons, deceiving some and bribing
others. Redemption presupposes virtue, virtue sacrifice, and sacrifice love.


The just and the worthy must suffer in order that their ideas may be
known and extended. You must shake
or shatter the vase to spread the perfume, you must smite the rock to get
the spark.


Governments are established for
the welfare of the peoples, and in order to accomplish this purpose properly they have to follow the suggestions of the citizens, who are the ones
best qualified to understand their own
needs.


Within a few centuries, when humanity has become enlightened and
redeemed, when there are no races,
when all peoples are free, when there
are no tyrants and slaves, colonies
and mother countries, when justice
rules and man is a citizen of the world,
the pursuit of science alone will remain, the word patriotism will be
equivalent to fanaticism, and he who
prides himself on patriotic ideas will


doubtless be isolated as a dangerous
disease, as a menace to the social order.


Resignation is not always a virtue;
it is a crime when it encourages tyrants: there are no despots where
there are no slaves.


Always I have loved our unhappy
land, and I am sure I shall continue
to love it till my last moment...
My career, my life, my happiness, all
have I sacrificed for love of it. Whatever my fate, I shall die blessing it
and longing for the dawn of its redemption.


I will never be the one to encourage the multitude to get by force what
the government does not think proper to grant. If I should ever see the
multitude armed, I would place myself on the side of the government.
A sunburnt man turns the ground
to sow the seed; he is a laborer. He
also contributes in his modest but useful way to the glory of the nation.


I love our country ... not only
because it is the duty of every man
to love the country to which he owes
its existence and to which he will no
doubt owe his final rest, not only because my father and my mother taught
me, but also because my fondest recollections cluster around my country,
because to it I owe and shall ever owe
my happiness.


When our people is unprepared,
when it enters the fight through fraud


and force, without a clear understanding of what it is doing, the wisest attempts will fail, and better that they
do fail, since why commit a wife to
the husband if he does not sufficiently
love her, if he is not ready to die for
her?


I wish to show those who deny us
patriotism that we know how to die
for duty and principles. What matters death, if one dies for what one
loves, for native land and beings held
dear?


So much power in the hands of men,
ignorant men filled with passions,
without moral training, of untried
principles, is a weapon in the hands of
a madman in a defenseless multitude.


We need criticism to keep us wide
awake. It makes us see our weakness
so that we may correct it.


Genius has no country; it bursts
forth everywhere; it is like light and
air, the patrimony of all: cosmopolitan as space, as life and God.


The glory of saving a country is not
for him who has contributed to its
ruin.


Evils are not remedied by other
evils.


A man ought to die for his duty and
his principles.


Justice should seek to do good by
rewarding virtue and educating the
criminals.


June, 1949


Page 15


ILClO LS EUSMuru
The Head of the Criminal Investigation Branch, PC, Discusses
a Subject Much Debated upon Since Taruc Made Himself Scarce


By Major CELSO M. ALIKPALA"


AN MANY occasions in the past
Oand up to the present, seathing
criticism has been levelled at the Philippine Constabulary for its alleged ineptitude to apprehend Luis M. Taruc
in his mountain hideout. People have
often asked the question: “Why can’t
Taruc be caught and made to answer
for his many crimes?” I wish the critics would read what a great poet once
wrote: “If to do is as easy as to say,
chapels should have been churches,
and poor men’s cottages should have
been kings’ palaces."
It seems, however, to be a reasonable enough question if we consider
the general impression that the man
Taruc is the moving spirit behind the
Hukbalahap movement. That was true
long ago when he actually held the
reins alone and fired the imagination
of his gullible followers with grandiose and utopian dreams of epochal
land reforms whereby his followers
would without much fuss get lands to
till and keep them for themselves and
their progeny. That was during his
heyday when, following the Moscow
line, he preached on equal distribution of wealth so that no one would
live in poverty.
The government, cautiously watching his moves from the sidelines, beat
him to his plans, and turned the tables on him by decreeing the 70-30
crop-sharing basis. This was the government’s antidote to the peasants’
clamor, inspired and instigated by
Taruc, for an equitable representation
in the division of the produce. The
landowners nodded their heads in approval of the arrangement; the peasants thought it fair enough.
The 70-30 crop allocation was just


“Maj. Alikpala, a constant contributor
to   , is the chief of
the Criminal Investigation Branch,
G-2 Section. PC.


LUIS M. TARUC
“A lunatic with a lunatic mentality.”


the beginning of a series of agrarian
reforms planned by the government.
Did Taruc show any sympathy for the
government effort at improving the
lot of the masses? No, instead he kept
on issuing statements containing the
usual party-line cliches about the forces of reaction and western imperialism and such, stubbornly maintaining the government was really against
the welfare of the masses. He continued the barrage of anti-government
accusations, intensifying his attacks
when he fled back to the hills to live
once more the life of the Hunted outlaw.
Coming back to our original theme:
What of Luis M. Taruc? Why hasn’t.
the Philippine Constabulary caught
up with him yet? Is he so slippery
that the Constabulary is outsmarted


by his movements? Is he so well hidden in the deep mountain fasthesses
that it would be impossible for the
government forces to get him?
A few months back these questions
gave a big headache to the top brass
of the Constabulary. Fact was that
they actually spent a good part of
their precious time studying ways and
means of ferreting out the Supremo
from his mountain hideout. In one
way or another, it was thought then
that his capture would ease up the
Hukbalahap problem.
But things have changed much since
then.
Luis M. Tarue is no longer a tremendous personality to reckon with.
The original, genuine Hukbalahap
crusade for agrarian reforms is a
thing of the past. What was once a
peaceful cause, pursued within the legal restrictions of constitutional government, has lapsed into plain banditry where the peasants who upheld it
now wantonly kill innocent people,
rape young women, and sack isolated
barrios.
Luis M. Taruc has ceased to be a
Huk—the name is a misnomer. He is
a bandit pure and simple, roaming the
mountains like the rest of his ilk, with
nothing in his mind but an insane
obsession to overthrow the present
existing order. He is a lunatic with a
lunatic mentality.
Things have changed so fast that
Taruc no longer occupies an important space in the agenda of the Philippine Constabulary. He may be captured, but the “bandit movement" will
continve. He may be killed but another Taruc, perhaps more brutal, will
rise from where he fell. For there
are Casto Alejandrino, Jose Lava,
Jose "Dimasalang” de Leon, Fred Laan, and countless others who, it can
be presumed, are scheming and plotting against each other, thinking of
the day when they would step into


Page 16


KHAKI and RED


Tarue’s shoes. Deduced from the intrigue that at present rocks the
"Huk" ranks, Taruc has ceased to be
the recognized leader in the enemy
command. Each leader, not excepting
Taruc, thinks that he is the big
“cheese.” In fact, each has his own
command which gives separate “orders” distinct from the directives of
the others. "Alexander Viernes" and
his men mercilessly murdered Mrs.
Quezon and some members of her
party—and Taruc denied he gave the
order. Manila dailies were splashed
with copies of his letter denying the
knowledge of the ambuscade. Who
could have given the order?
There is plausible reason to believe
that power in “Huk” circles is not
lodged in one man now. If power
does not emanate from one single individual who is the acknowledged
leader, what can this mean? Simply
this: The enemy ranks are suffering
from disintegration and confusion. It
simply means that each individual
leader moves according to his own


schedule and plans, regardless of the
rest. It simply means that, against
present PC punitive operations, it is
the "survival of the fittest” for each
individual leader.
The picture is changed completely.
Who cares where Taruc is? Who cares
what he is doing or preaching? He has
been injecting nonsense into the ignorant mind all along anyway. Today
he is a mere cog in the entire outlaw
machinery. Like the rest of the men
who have consistently defied the law,
he is running for dear life. And who
cares if he dies? The Constabulary is
not particularly after him now. It is
after every dissident leader’s followers. To dissociate them from the fold
is to detach them from the influence
of their leaders. To harass them and
make them realize the futility of further resistance is to destroy their belief in their leaders. To make them
see the senselessness of a hunted life
is to make them wish to return to the
ways of peace.


When all these shall have been done,
the perverted movement will be nothing but a minor disturbance. For a
man without any followers can not be
a leader. Perhaps he will fight alone
but that doesn’t make sense a bit.
After reading this article, would
you still ask why the Philippine Constabulary has ceased wasting it valuable time trying to apprehend Luis
M. Taruc? Could you see why it is
much wiser to cut the branches and
merely leave a useless stump standing? It would be so easy then to chop
it into firewood.


Man is born to trouble, so what of
it? The philosophers themselves have
but three answers—forget it, avoid
it, grin and bear it. But men have
tried and will continue to try to resolve it.—Paul B. Sears


Questions are never indiscreet. Answers sometimes are.—Oscar Wilde



THE WORLD'S FINEST
MOTORCYCLE


Philippine Distribution
MACONDRAY & CO., INC.


China Bank Bldg., Manila


Tel. 2-95-27


ao, Pleasure-Bound


the Year Round
2
E

 SJUUBVSD


Powered with a modern high-performance Vertical Twin
engine . .. amazingly comfortable, safe and easy to handle.
Use of special alloy metals has reduced weight to only 280
pounds.


A brilliant new lightweight model combining performance,
safety and ease of control. An all new, extremely lightweight single cylinder engine on a "man-sized” motorcycle.
Fully deluxe . . . total weight—only 240 pounds.


June, 1949


Page 17


A 
a Laguna
This is the Story of How Three Churchmen Were Horribly Murdered
by Bandits Who Had Plans to Overthrow Roxas’ Administration
By Capt. ARTURO J. CLEMENTE

yT WAS shortly before the presidential elections in 1946 in a monthly
routine conference of provincial intelligence officers of the then Military
Police Command when Lt. Col. Napoleon D. Valeriano, the then executive
officer of G-2, expressed his opinion
that should Manuel Roxas come out
as president, the MPC had better oil
its guns as there would be a Huk revolution.
The prognostication came true. The
elections were held in April and Roxas emerged triumphant. The first
signs of rebellion in Laguna were
noted a month later.
I was stationed at the headquarters
of the Laguna military police command as intelligence, investigation
and operations officer when the Huks
started their uprising in Laguna.
In May, 1946, Laguna MPC headquarters for the first time received a
report from an informant at Cavinti
who identified himself as one who had
helped the Constabulary before the
war during the hectic days of Asedillo and “Capitan" Kulas. Among other
things, the report made mention of
the plan of some dissident leaders to
revolt in a short time. The names of
the leaders were disclosed. Most of
them were cohorts of Asedillo and
“Capitan” Kulas who were pardoned
by President Quezon after the bloody
uprising in 1935.
To abort the planned revolt, our
command raided the barrios indicated
in the report as the bulwark of the
dissidents. In one single raid alone


“Capt. Clemente is the chief of the
Intelligence and Investigation Branch,
G-2 Section, PC.
Page 18


at barrio San Buenaventura, Luisiana, we confiscated four machineguns,
36 rifles, and hundreds of rounds of
ammunition. Inasmuch as there was
no overt act of rebellion at this stage,
we could not book the dissidents for
any other crime mere serious than
illegal possession of firearms. Luckily for them, the prescribed penalty for
such crime was not as heavy as it is
now. Each of the accused then was
fined P25.00 by the court.
The raids by the MPC appeared to
have served to fan the flames of rebellion in the dissidents. They blamed
the members of the Iglesia ni Cristo,
a religious sect, for tipping off the
MPC about the hidden arms. What
added fuel to the relations between the
dissidents and the sect followers was
the support by the Iglesia adherents
of Roxas’ candidacy while the Huks
supported Osmena.
On June 4, 1946 at Cavinti, 15 days
after our raid on San Buenaventura,
three ministers of Iglesia ni Cristo
met a horrible death in the hands of
the Huks. It was a fine Sunday morning. On their way from Sta. Cruz, the
provincial capital, to Cavinti, the three
holy men were accosted by 20 dissidents, they were hog-tied and murdered one by one at an isolated spot
in barrio Malabu, Cavinti, a kilometer from the town. After stripping
the victims of their Sunday attire,
the Huks buried the three men in a
common grave which the victims
themselves were forced to dig before
their execution.
There were no witnesses to this
brutal crime except the perpetrators
themselves. On that tragic day, the
three ministers were supposed to return on the same day to Sta. Cruz.


Their failure to appear gave the supervising minister in Sta. Cruz dire
misgivings. He reported to me late
that evening about the three men’s
disappearance and expressed his fears
of their fate.
The unearthing of the crime fell
upon me as the chief MPC investigating officer in the province. “We will
send our operatives tomorrow,” I told
the supervising minister to calm his
fears.
The following day, Monday, a detail of investigators was sent out to
Cavinti. They had practically no lead
to follow. After much painstaking
sleuthing, however, my operatives
presently brought in six suspects. The
six men were grilled at headquarters.
Protracted investigations, questionings and cross-questionings at first
brought us nowhere.
The then provincial commander, Lt.
Col. Elpidio L. Reymundo, lent a hand.
In no time, the former crack staffman of the late Col. Guido of the prewar intelligence division of the Constabulary, was able to extort confessions from two of the six suspects.
After we were convinced with the
truth of their revelations, the two
men led us to where the bodies of the
unfortunate churchmen were buried
by their murderers.
We recovered the decomposed bodies of the trio, badly battered, their
hands tied behind. A post-mortem examination showed they were beaten
to death. As a matter of fact, the
murder bat was recovered from the
same death-hole. The dissidents’ bitter grudge against the lglesia ni Cristo was poured on the three ministers.
I filed a criminal complaint against
20 men for multiple murder but only
KHAKI and RED


two of them were arrested in addition
to another who fell into the MPC
dragnet later. The three were convicted. The rest of the gang suffered
no retribution until later. This was
the beginning of the chaotic and murderous careers of the dissidents in
Laguna. There followed up to the
present a series of crimes, bizarre and
horrendous, as a result of which the
Huks have to live the lives of the
hunted.
They staged raid after raid on several municipalities, robbing the municipal coffers of money and the inhabitants of their food and valuables,
waylaying trucks and killing people.
all in the guise of overthrowing the
government of Roxas and establishing a new one in its stead that will
ostensibly provide the people with a
"new democracy” where everybody
would be equal and the rich would be
liquidated. That, according to the
confessions of captured Huks, was
what they were fighting for.
But fate did not allow them to realize their absurd dream for all of the
17 priest-murderers at large were
killed one by one in encounters and
commando raids that followed. Among
those accounted for later were Ricardo Protestades alias Belen, and Salvador Nolasco alias Robert Owing.
Both were commissioned “brigadier
generals" of the Talban regiment soon
after they went in hiding from prosecutors in the Iglesia ni Cristo mur

der case. The two "generals” later
led rapacious bands of Huks that
committed the most notorious atrocities in Laguna.
On June 10, 1946, six days after
the Iglesia ni Cristo murder, while
the 17 killers were yet to be accounted for, Col. Pedro Villegas held a meeting at barrio San Antonio. Longos,
Laguna. Col. Villegas is a recognized
full colonel of the Hukbalahap guerrilla outfit of Southern Luzon. He
was one of those convicted of sedition with Crisanto Evangelista and
pardoned after serving a portion of
his sentence. In that meeting they
decided to overthrow the government
and change the name of their Huk
organization to "Taliba nang Bansa”
or “Talban" in short. Villegas was
made the highest commander of this
“revolutionary movement.”
Shortly before the meeting, the report came that Villegas and his cohorts were to meet in barrio San Antonio. The report came on time for
us to raid the group amidst deliberations. Only one, however, was apprehended. He was a one-legged war
veteran. A recognized guerrilla captain, he was supposed to be a patient
at the V. Luna hospital but went absent without official leave (AWOL)
from the hospital in order to be able
to take part in the conspiracy. The
rest of the "war council" numbering
11 men successfully eluded arrest.
The minutes of the meeting was seized


from the one-legged captain whom I
will now call Captain “Puts” for purposes of identification. Brought to
headquarters, Capt Puts at first refused to tell the truth. He tried to
convince us that the meeting was for
the purpose of making the arrangements for the next town fiesta celebration. The minutes was written in
abbreviated words that could only be
read and interpreted by Capt. Puts.
After languishing for about two
days in our jail, (I had a right to detain him because he was AWOL from
his organization), during which time
he came to believe that we had a
strong case against him, Capt. Puts
approached me on the third day. He
told me that he would tell the truth
but that we must save him from prosecution in order not to jeopardize his
rights as a veteran. He pledged to
serve the government by pointing out
his confederates in the plot.
We could not support a case for
conspiracy and proposal to commit rebellion without the testimony of an
eyewitness. In view of this consideration and in conformity with criminal procedure allowing the prosecution to drop an accused who is the
least guilty to become a witness for
the government, we acceded to make
Capt. Puts a state witness.
His confession was substantially as
follows: That they were 12 plotters in
all, that Pedro Villegas was elected
(Continued on page 36).


PC SOLDIERS like the above deploying somewhere in the lush jungles of Luzon help abort attempts of Communisttinged bandits te defy the authority of the State. These are the nemesis of the so-calied “Army of Liberation.”


June, 1949


Page 19


POEMS OF FREEDOM


God speed the year of jubilee,
The wide world o'er!
When, from their galling chains set free,
The oppressed shall vilely bend the knee
And wear the yoke of tyranny,
Like brutes, no more:—
That year will come, and Freedom’s reign
To man his plundered rights again
Restore.


God speed the day when human blood
Shall cease to flow!
In every clime be understood
The claims of Human Brotherhood,
And each return for evil, good.
Not blow for blow:-
That day will come, all feuds to end,
And change into a faithful friend
Each foe.
God speed the hour, the glorious hour,
When none on earth
Shall exercise a lordly, power,
Nor in a tyrant’s presence cower,
But all to Manhood’s stature tower,
By equal birth!
That hour will come, to each, to all,
And from his prison-house the thrall
Go forth.
Until that year, day, hour arrive,
If life be given;-
With head and heart and hand I’ll strive
To break the rod, to rend the gyve,
The spoiler of his prey deprive,—
So witness heaven!
And never from my chosen post,
Whate'er the peril or the cost,
Be driven.
—WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON


c.


They set the slave free, striking off his chains;
Then he was as much of a slave as ever.
He was still chained to servility,
He was still manacled to indolence and sloth,
He was still bound by fear and superstition,
By ignorance, suspicion, and savagery.
His slavery was not in the chains,
But in himself.
They can only set free men free,
And there is no need of that:
Free men set themselves free.
-JAMES OPPENHEIM


Organizing..
(Continued from page 11)
as a check to Communist infiltration.
But this is not enough, as the following analysis reveals (“Communists
Within the Labor Movement, The
Facts and Counter Measures," Washington, D.C., 1947).
“Furthermore, management alone
cannot solve the problem. The cooperation of anti-Communist workmen
and labor leaders is indispensable. The
disclosures along with the recommendations in this report, should be of
help to those who are aware of the
nature of the problem, and who wish
to do something about it.
Meantime, every effort must be
made to set forth the facts of Communist infiltration and strategy in all
fields—government, literary, entertainment, education and wherever the
Communists are at work. Countermeasures in all these fields must be
taken simultaneously so that each effort will reinforce the other.
Judging from available literature
the Committee on Socialism and Communism is a permanent investigating
and research body of the Chamber of
Commerce of the United States. In
1948 it published "A Program for
Community Anti-Communist Action,
an intelligent guide for popular discussion of the problem. If our Philippine Chamber of Commerce can establish such a commission and produce literature suited to the local situation I am quite certain the widespread lack of knowledge and the accompanying trepidation for Communism will be dissipated to our great
advantage.
The same function can be called
upon the other private institutions.
The labor unions, no less than the union of capitalists,, owe it to themselves
to learn what is the true nature, aims
and methods of Communism.
Private educational, professional or
social organizations, too, can follow
suit so they will know to what state
they will be reduced under the Communist system and accordingly act to
help prevent the strengthening of
Communism.


One of the lessons of the many revolutions which the countries of Europe have experienced during the past
nineteen years was that the revolutionists often profited least by them.
M. V. Fodor


Pay no attention to what critics
say. There has never been set up a
statue in honor of a critic.—Sibelius


Page 20


KHAKI and RED


O


Murllal
Ol OOMALAMLSLAA
(Excerpt from a speech by President Harry S. Truman on his inauguration
day on January 20, 1949)


Communism is based on the belief
that man is so weak and inadequate
that he is unable to govern himself,
and therefore requires the rule of
strong masters.
Democracy is based on the conviction that man has the moral and intellectual capacity, as well as the inalienable right, to govern himself with
reason and justice.
Communism subjects the individual
to arrest without lawful cause, punishment without trial, and forced labor as the chattel of the State. It decrees what information he shall receive, what art he shall produce, what
leaders he shall follow, and what
thoughts he shall think.
Democracy maintains that government is established for the benefit of
the individual, and is charged with
the responsibility of protecting the


rights of the individual and his freedom in the exercise of his abilities.
Communism maintains that social
wrongs can be corrected only by violence.
Democracy has proved that social
justice can be achieved through peaceful change.
Communism holds that the world is
so deeply divided into opposing classes that war is inevitable.
Democracy holds that free nations
can settle differences justly and
maintain lasting peace.
The differences between Communism and Democracy do not concern
the United States alone. People everywhere are coming to realize that
what is involved is material well-being, human dignity, and the right to
believe in and worship God.
I state these differences, not to


draw issues of belief as such, but because the actions resulting from the
Communist philosophy are a threat to
the efforts of free nations to bring
about world recovery and lasting
peace.


I believe that the great virtue of
the state is to allow the maximum
number of people to live the fullest
possible lives, so long as they do not
harm others.
I am prejudiced in favor of democratic government—not merely as we
know it already, but the greater democracy which we can develop, in
which more and more of us participate
in our government and more and more
of us enjoy its benefits.—Gilbert Seldes


RscRo


X
X
K


7ke
Greatest
Gio
07
Earth!


BORIA


K
X
X


ELECG PHILIPPINEINDUSTRIAL EOUIDMENT COMPANV
III 13TH STREET PORT AREA TELEPHONES 2-69-562-69-57


Page 21


Compliments


of
ATAYDE BROTHERS
(Successors fo JUAN ATAYDE)
LICENSED CUSTOMS BROKERS


Room 308-310 — Maritima Building
121 Dasmarinas, Manila
Tel. No. 2-84-41


June, 1949


 PO G MULCS OOSO


The Military Welfare Service of the PNRC Helps Bolster
Servicemen’s Morale, Serves Their Various Social Needs
By Sgt. JUAN M. EDUARTE


RED CROSS GIRLS chat with some PC soldiers relaxing in a bivouac area
during a lull in government operations.
They are great morale-boosters,
help soive the personal problems of the servicemen.


IT IS interesting to note that right
A at General Headquarters in Camp
Crame is an agency that helps constabulary personnel in matters pertaining to social amelioration, recreation and material aid. We cannot
overlook the benefits derived from the
Military Welfare Service at PC Headquarters. Attractive, energetic Miss
Rosa Ortiz is in charge of the unit.
The Philippine National Red Cross,
acting in close cooperation with commanding officers of the armed services and working through its chapters
and other community agencies, is conducting a program of home service
for patients. It also provides for maximum assistance to military personnel
being discharged and desiring assistin the proper filing of claims for government benefits, gratuities or backpay allowances.
To discuss the multifarious activities of the Military Welfare Service
of the Philippine National Red Cross
is quite a task. At best, we can only
deal with the important accomplishments, objectives and problems of the
MWS.
In fact, wherever there are members of our armed forces, the Red
Cross workers are also there, or standing by to assist them as soon as military arrangements permit. Wherever
a serviceman’s family is, the Red
Cross must also be. Wherever there
is suffering and people needing aid,
the Red Cross must offer its services
when conditions permit. In any hospital throughout the Islands, there
are social workers serving through
the Red Cross. There are recreation
halls in different constabulary and
army posts, camps, stations and hospitals.
The MWS representative trained in
recreation work carries on a group


work program to help maintain the
morale of servicemen. He assists the
military recreation officer by planning, organizing and promoting recreation activities such as sports,
games, entertainments, workshops,
arts and crafts, music, dramatics, libraries and game rooms.
The vast and diversified social service program requires, for its effective functioning, not only a well-integrated organization but a competent staff of executives, specialists in
many fields of work, professionally
and technically qualified, and an even
greater staff within the clerical,
stenographical and custodial classification. Recruiting, training, and plan

ning this staff has been and continues to be a task. The cooperation extended by schools of social work, social agencies, by commerce and industry, and by the professions is readily
recognized to be enormous, and for it
the Red Cross is very grateful.
The program today consists of two
major parts: That for servicemen
and that for civilians. The pregram
for servicemen—that is, Services for
the Armed Forces—includes military
and naval welfare service, hospital
service, and all the supplementary
services that make the work of these
two programs possible. They are integrated with the Home Service of
the chapters of different provinces.


Page 22


KHAKI and RED


ANOTHER ROLE of the Red Cross girls, shown above, is the distribution
of relief supplies to refugees from the Huks. This mission is sometimes risky
and the PC provides the security measures to protect the girls.


The work of the Military Welfare
Service representative is based directly on the more personal and social
needs of the servicemen. "Nothing
disrupts an Army so quickly as no
news, bad news or worry.” The MWS
representatives go with the troops to
help keep them in communication with
home, to help them bear the bad news
they may receive, and to prevent them
from becoming worried or upset over
personal or family problems.
Although families may not physically follow their servicemen where
duty demands, they usually remain
very much in a soldier’s mind. The
kind of letter the serviceman receives,


or does not receive, determines to a
great extent the kind of soldier he
makes. Sometimes a serviceman, because of anxiety due to the uncertain
existence he leads, misinterprets news
from home. At other times, there may
be very real problems about which to
worry.
Troubled by either real or fancied
problems, bothered by minor worries
or major tragedies in his own life or
that of his family, he needs an understanding person to whom he can
talk, someone whose attitudes are not
created by military needs. Some of
the MWS representative’s time is
spent in just listening but listening


in a skilled, sympathetic, balanced,
sensitive manner that means asking
the appropriate question at the right
time and making the helpful comment
or suggestion it is most needed.
But the MWS representative can
do more than this. As one of his resources, she has the surest possible
means of communication. He can and
does find out for the serviceman if
the illness at home is really of a serious nature, or if it just seems to
be that way in the letter the man received. He can send through messages of sympathy and comfort for
the serviceman when there has been
a death in the family. He can enlist
the assistance of the home chapter
when a serviceman’s wife is to have a
baby, needs surgery, or other medical care. If the soldier thinks that
his business back home is being ruined
by bad management, the MWS representative can communicate with the
local chapter to investigate and obtain some kind of help or an adjustment for the worried man.
Besides the problems created by
bad news from home, there are more
personal troubles—the kind that come
from one’s inner self. A serviceman
may be fearful about going into battle
lest he may not measure up to being
a good soldier he would wish to be.
Whatever his fear, more than one
man has found himself and has had
his self-confidence restored by talking through with his MWS representative. There are also servicemen who
believe themselves to be in the wrong
spot for their particular abilities. This
is a difficulty the MWS representative
can call to the attention of the man’s
commanding officer, without prejudice and with assurance of consideration.


Now Mild Can a Cigarette Be? Try a Gamel and See!


NTIR. NEN, LIOHIEn, DAIOMIER PACKAGL


June, 1949


Page 23


The Investigating Officer
Modesty, Diligence, Integrity — These are Only a Few
of the Traits an Investigating Officer Should Have
By Capt. EDUARDO P. BAHIA
Chief, Law and CI Section
Philippine Constabulary School


“Strike not thoughtlessly a nest of
wasps, but if you strike, strike hard.”
mPHOSE incomparable words of
Goethe, true for all men, are
above all true for the investigating
officer. He should possess the vigour
of youth. If he would succeed in each
case he will have to devote himself
completely and continually to his task.
An investigator must be energetic
when he faces an impudent witness
or an accused person who is hot-headed and aggressive or when he makes
an arrest without having his staff or
assistant to aid him. The task of an
investigating officer is not one in
which an advance can be made little
by little, along clear and regular
routes—there is always a new problem to tackle. A work half done accomplishes nothing.


Another quality demanded of the
investigating officer is honesty and
self-denying powers. It is not enough
for him to possess legal and other requirements. Knowledge alone is not
everything. He must be unostentatious,
honest, and self-denying, giving up
all thoughts of grandstand play. The
brilliant defense of a case by counsel
or the accurate summing-up of a
judge, all meet the applause and admiration of the public, but such
triumphs are not for the investigating officer. The work of an investigator ought to make neither noise
nor sensation; suffice it that the culprit is discovered at any price. He
will be put to task for the slightest
and most pardonable mistake, while
his case and his merits are seldom
acknowledged. He must be satisfied
with having done his duty in the only


possible way. Beyond this he must
not lose sight of the old adage “Virtue
is its own reward.”
“Exactness," or accuracy of work,
is of so much importance in all
branches of research; this accuracy
is equally imperative in the work of
the investigating officer. But what
is to be understood by accurate work?
It consists in not trusting to others
but attending to the business oneself,
and even not trusting oneself and
going through the case again and
again. In endeavoring to verify the
facts for himself the investigating
officer must personally examine localities, make measurements and comparisons, and so form his own opinion.
Countless cases could have been
saved if people did not base their conclusions upon premises furnished by


AE
ARMIY &. NAVY TAILORING


...known for
Quality. Cuto Saat Covano

AU. Take AAdl Kiad, Of


CAPS, CAMPAIGN RIBBONS, INSIGNIAS,
PATCHES, ETC.


PORTILLOS


313 R. Hidalgo, (Near)
Quiapo, Manila
Cor. P. Gomez


Manila - Grace Park - Bacolod - Iloilo


Page 24


KHAKI and RED


others, take as established fact what
is only a remote possibility, or as a
constantly recurring incident what
has only been observed once. Depositions of witnesses can be rendered
more accurate by experiment and ocular demonstration. Suppose a witness
declares, "when once I see a man I
always recognize him again.” "Did
you see the man who went out as you
came in?” You ask him. “Certainly
I saw him very well,” he answers.
"All right, go and pick him out from
ten other persons.” A witness estimates an important distance at, let
us say, 200 yards: let him be brought
out of doors and say how far might
be 100, 200, 300, 400 yards; if now
these distances be measured, one can
easily judge if and with what degree
of accuracy the witness can judge
distances. Such checks give the most
remarkable results; whoever practices them will soon be convinced that
their importance cannot be exaggerated.
An investigating officer cannot advance a step without utilizing the
agency of men, hence to enable an officer to work with accuracy he must
have a profound knowledge of men.
A treatise on the knowledge of human
character, teaching how really to
know men, has not yet been written
and probably never will be; but certain methods and principles can be indicated in particular cases. A witness will tell nothing to an incompetent investigating officer, while
the very same witness will make precise, true, and important statements
to an investigating officer who can
read him at a glance and knows how
to handle him.
If the investigating officer wishes
to khow men, every individual who
enters his room must become an onject worthy of study from the first
moment. The best way to fill his diary will be to write down observations
on himself and others. As a rule we
find no difficulty in remembering the
impression made upon us by the actions of others and not easily forget
the discovery of the mistakes we have
made as regards them. “The best employed money," says a philosopher,
"is that of which we have been defrauded, because with that money we
have purchased the circumspection
necessary to life."
If the investigating officer possesses the special qualities we have just
discussed, the next most important
matter, when he starts work, is to
discover the exact moment when he
can form a definite opinion. Upon this,


success or failure often depends. If
he should come to a definite conclusion too soon, a preconceived theory
or opinion may be formed, to which
he will always be attacked with more
or less tenacity till he is forced to
abandon it entirely: by then his most
precious moments will have passed
away, the best clues will have been
lost—often beyond the possibility of
recovery. If on the other hand he
misses the true moment for forming
an opinion, the investigation becomes
a purposeless groping in the dark and
a search devoid of aim.


When will the investigating officer
find this true moment? It is hard to
lay down a definite rule: all that can
be said is that the investigating officer must set to work under the guidance of basic principles of criminal investigation and that the decision must
not come to him “all of a sudden"
but must be formed step by step.
There is an old saying that the investigating officer can often make of
good use, namely, “Cherchez la femme,” (Seek the woman.) Sounding
like a slogan in a movie, every experienced investigator will vouch that


ANNQUNCANG.
AUGUST 28, 1949 DRAW
(Based on a Sales Quota of P2,500,000)


FIRST PRIZE................ ₱150,000
75,000
SECOND PRIZE..............
37,500
THIRD PRIZE ...............
6 FOURTH PRIZES at
72,000
₱12,000 each ................
1 CHARITY PRIZE .......... 22,470.75


And Thousands of Other Prizes.
Cost of One Booklet of ten tickets —P31.25
plus Twenty Centavos for Internal Revenue Stamps.
Order by mail should include Ninety (90) Centavos for
registered airmail expenses for the first booklet and thirty
(30) Centavos for every additional booklet, if mailed together. Authorized agents make a profit of P8.55 per booklet
sold, besides the five (5) per cent seller’s prize plus one (1)
per cent bonus if full quota is subscribed, for selling any of
the winning tickets from the First Prize down to the Eighth
and Charity Prizes.
TICKETS ARE NOW ON SALE
SAVE A LFE AND WIN A PRIZE
Philippine Charity Sweepstakes
Tels.:
General Manager
2-73-55
1893 Rizal Avenue, Manila Asst. Gen. Manager 2-73-91
Administrative Officer 2-78-72
TUNE IN: Station DZPI at 4:45 to 5:00 P.M. every Sunday for
Philippine Charity Sweepstakes program


June, 1949


Page 25


it carries a large portion of truth.
The proper procedure is to endeavor
to look for a woman as may have an
influencing factor in the crime.
Finally, it is a part of the business
of the investigating officer to indicate to his men the persons who can
give information about important
crimes. They may be drivers of public conveyances, messengers, prostitutes, etc. In investigation parlance
these persons are termed Sources of
nformation. Police authorities in the
United States are of the firm belief
that no police department can function without the cooperation of its
sources of information. The FBI is
also a strong advocate of this precept,
it being claimed that all the scientific equipment in the laboratory will
be useless without someone pointing
out the suspect, upon which the said
equipment may be used. The importance of the sources of information
is manifest for three reasons: Firstly, they are not in regular employment and generally possess time and
opportunity to observe their neighbor’s business. Secondly, the criminal
usually has relations with them before and after the crime. After the
commission of a crime, a suspect will


be in funds and will want to get away
quickly. He will engage a public conveyance. Hs will probably employ a
messenger to send off letters, or make
purchases for him. And finally he
will need amusement and distraction
and will have recourse to a prostitute.
Thirdly, each class forms a body of
which the members have very extended relations with one another. A taxidriver knows nearly all other drivers,
a jeep thief knows other jeep thieves,
a prostitute knows other prostitutes.
In consequence of these relations,
what one knows the other learns, and
a police officer can therefore generally obtain from them the information he wants.
But in this, he will not succeed if
he only starts, on the day following
some big case to make the acquaintance with these classes. This he
must have done long before, he must
know these people and possess their
confidence; then and only then can
he obtain information on the points
he wishes to know about. He ought
not indeed to manufacture satellites
and spies, but simply take measures
to bring a number of persons into
cooperation with himself in the service of justice.


INDEX TO ADVERTISERS


Page
H. E. Heacock Co.................. 2
Universal Trading ................ 3
Goodyear Tire & Rubber ........... 4
International Harvester ........... 3
Manila Trading & Supply ......... 6
Macondray & Co., Inc. ...........17
Atayde Brothers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
PIECO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .21
Canels .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
A. Laun .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Portillo's . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Philippine Charity Sweenstakes . . . .25
Manila Lighter Transportation .... 26
.26
Manila Steamship Co., Inc.
Northern Luzon Co. ... . . . . . . . . . . . 27
China Banking Corporation ....... 27
...2.
Gregorio Araneta, Inc.
Manila Jockey Club ... . . . . . . . . . . . 31
33
Erlanger and Galinger, Inc.
.34
O.E.S. & S. Co., Inc.
.35
Caltex, Inc. ............
B. F. Goodrich ....
.37
41
Motor Service Co., Inc.
United Motors (P.I.) Inc. .........43
Shell Company of P.I. Limited ....44


MANILALIGHTER TRANS, INC.
and
CUSTOMS BROKERS
SUBSIDIARY
ARTURO FIGUERAS
CONTRACTOR
GRAVEL . SAND . FLLING


Room 305 — Trade & Commerce Bldg.
Tel. 2-64-72
123 Juan Luna, Manila


Get the traditional Elizalde service..
TSS “MAYON"—Sails for Cebu, Maribojoc, Zamboanga, Cotabato and Davao—every fortnight.
MS “BOWLINE KNOT”—Sails for Cebu, Maribojoc,
Zamboanga, Cotabato and Davao — every fortnight.
MS “VIZCAYA"—Sails for Iloilo—every Tuesday
MS "LANAO”—Sails for Pulupandan—every Tuesday
MS “VENUS”—Sails for Iloilo—every Thursday.
MS “ELCANO” — Sails for Pulupandan — every
Thursday.
MS “BAZTAN"—Sails for Cebu and Cagayan de Misamis—every Thursday.
MS “BISAYAS”—Sails for Iloilo and Pulupandan—
every Saturday
MS "SORSOGON"—Sails for Bulan, Legaspi, Virac,
and Tabaco—-weekly
All sailings from Pier 6, North Harbor
For passage and freight apply to:
MANILA STEAMSHIIP CO., INC.
Elizalde & Co., Inc., General Managers
ELIZALDE BLDG.
TEL. 2-69-31
MUELLE DE LA INDUSTRIA


Page 26


KHAKI and RED


PO SrOhis


The second
t of Camp Murdge the defenders
phy bowlers to
of Camp Crame on June 16 at the PC
bowling alleys,
amp Crame, Quezon City, resulted in another setback
for the invaders when teams I and II
of the AFP were both rolled back in
crushing defeat
 the constabulary
duck pinners. Team I of the Armed
Forces of the P
pines was defeated by the score of 1580-1494, while
team II of the
bowed to the PC
defenders by the score of 1526-1498.
The previous week, both teams of
of the Philippines
he Armed Fon
from Camp Murphy were likewise depine Constabulaeated by the
ry bowlers with Lt. Ramon Mendoza,
PC Signal as star player.
The result o
he games on June
16:


AF


am


Maj. Pinto


9I


96


277


10


05


206


109


107


310


101


96


292


09


92


119


323


301


86


196


523


1494


118


117


340


apt. Guzman


36


170


A


5


10


112


326


.Castel


18


108


319


.Mendoza


 96


123


314


Capt. Carillo


II1


111


571


1580


AFI


Comdr. Castro


83


100


281


Capt. Bulaclac


111


313


Capt. Carzon


107


104


334


Lt. Guzman, S.


103


89


273


Lt. Guzman, C.


3


38


Lt. Rotor


97


114


211


480


502


518


1498


PC

Team


II


Maj. Monzon


83


104


107


294


Capt. Lachica


102


126


100


328


Capt. Carillo


125


95


220


Capt. Baldia


36


98


184


Lt. Crisostomo


101


102


90


293


Lt. Rivera


105


105


Lt. Santos


104


104


497


525


504


1526


BE PREPARED
TRAVEL LICHT
BE ALERT
WITH
The NEW LIGHTNING ADDING MACHINE
Portable and Desk Model
Easy to Operate — Fast and Accurate
Adds up to P99,999.99
PRECISION BUILT for all purposes and people
Adds...... Substracts. . . . .. Multiplies
Clearance of figures with one stroke


“Exclusive Representatives in the Far East”:
NORTHEN LUZON COMPANY
54 A. Lake St., San Juan, Rizal
Tel. No. 6-82-75
The Lightning Adding Machines fits every person’s
purse.
The Philippine Constabulary are at ease in the field
with accuracy — Lightning Adding Machine.
Get your Lightning Adding Machine
at Once


CHINA BANKING CORPORATION
Manila, Philippines
Incorporated under the laws of the Philippines
Current & Savings
General Banking
Accounts & Fixed
& Exchange
Deposits
Transactions
Safe Deposit Boxes
For Rent
(Rental for larger boxes substantially reduced)
Correspondents in all the Principal Cities
of the World
Branches:
Head Office:
China Bank Building
Shanghai & Amoy
hina
Corner Dasmarinas &
Juan Luna, Manila
Cebu City, Philippines


June, 1949


Page 27


on
ma
EMINO BLRATAN


Facts


and


Figures


Presented to


Show


How


Veterans


are Served


by


the U. S.


Veterans


Administration


BY


T. L. SINCLAIR


ROONER or later a military man’s
9 services to his country are ended.
Then what? Before that day perhaps
he does not stop to think about what
happens or who cares.
Suppose he loses his life while in
the service, or suppose he simply
leaves the service with an honorable
discharge or because of wounds or
sickness. In these cases, a democratic
government usually has an organization whose responsibility is to be
concerned with what happens to him
or to his dependents. If he dies in
battle, there are the members of his
family to be taken care of; or if he
voluntarily leaves the service, there is
the problem of his adjustment to civilian life.
As a matter of fact, veterans’ benefits, administered by an agency authorized by a national government,
are a form of insurance against the
day when a soldier’s or sailor’s service for his country is ended.
Veterans’ benefits are generally of
three types: to surviving dependents;
to disabled veterans; and, to some extent, to able-bodied veterans. These
are usually designed as support given to citizens by the people of a country who appreciate what may have
been lost or suffered as a result of
patriotic service. Death pension to
surviving dependents, disability compensation to disabled veterans, and
some form of aid to able-bodied veterans to help them for a period in
their adjustment again to civilian
life, are benefits awarded to the degree that a people may be indebted
to individuals.
To those in the Philippines who
fought wth the Armed Forces of the
United States, American benefits have


been extended in the same manner
that they are applied in the United
States. Benefits administered by the
U.S. Veterans Administration, similar to any where a government expresses the wishes of her people, as
Brig. Gen. R. B. Lovett, Manager of
the USVA in the Philippines, has often pointed out, are those which have
been regulated through laws passed
by the United States Congress.
Most people think of veterans’ benefits as privileges given to veterans
themselves, but this impression is far
from true. In the Philippines, for
instance, over two-thirds of USVA
veterans’ benefit payments, in total
amount to the largest number of beneficiaries, go to surviving dependents of Philippine Armv, Recognized
Guerrilla, or regular U.S. Armed Forces members. Among 46,540 checks
mailed by the USVA last month. 34.-
738 were sent to widows, orphans, and
dependent parents of deceased servicemen. The total amount of these
checks to dependents was P5,790,131.-
46 out of a total P8,952,445.96 disbursed generally in payment of veterans’ benefits. Disabled veterans received P1,278,704.98 in 4,916 individual payments for the month. Veterans in training received 6,842 subsistence allowance payments in the
amount of P1,655,854.04. Veterans
themselves then receive only a small
proportion of the benefits paid out in
favor of veterans, while the great
amount spent goes to those left helpless by war.
In another respect, USVA ablebodied veterans are relatively little
favored by further limitation of their
benefits. The law quite fairly provides that benefit payments to disabled


veterans and surviving dependents
will continue as long as the support
appears to be needed — for the lifetime of widows and orphans who lost
all means of support, to parents as
long as they have no income, and to
disabled veterans until they are recovered from their disabilities. As
for those relatively few able-bodied
veterans who receive rehabilitation
education and training, they are not
considered so much to be government
dependents and are soon expected to
take entire care of themselves. Based
in certain ways on length of service,
not to exceed 4 vears in any case,
the period of their rehabilitation
training is expected to be completed
by 1956 when the education and
tra'ning program will be closed.
Actually then, the total amount of
American taxpayer’s money spent on
those veterans, as compared to other
beneficiaries who, need more, will finally be very small, since payments
to others will continue long after
able-bodied veterans are back on their
feet.
In the beginning of expanded operations by the US Veterans Administration in the Philippines, applications
and claims came slowly, much more
slowly than in the United States; because few persons knew much about
their eligibility for benefits and the
wartime destruction of records had
made it difficult to submit necessary
evidence in a sound claim. The required procedures, which may seem
rather complicated, are necessary in
each case for record purposes and to
determine entitlement so that only
rightful claimants may receive their
due. Today, the Veterans Administration receives many cases every day
and processes them much more rapidly. A well educated young veteran
will have no trouble following instructions, but an illiterate widow
still needs the patient assistance of
a USVA Contact Representative, one
of several who are stationed throughout the provinces to help claimants
in the filing of their applications and
preparing their supporting papers.
In a few years, most claims will
have been settled and education and
training for living veterans will long
since have been completed; but still
payments to beneficiaries in pension,
compensation and insurance will continue helping those in the Philippines
who need support, because the war
left them at some permanent disadvantage as disabled veterans or as dependents with no other means to keep
up with the economic progress of the
country.


Page 28


KHAKI and RED


UMOR
b
thi
the operator?
Orderly: Hello,
re, this is the
elephone Open
ope
rde
umber.
ry
has been in the
0
vt.
h
months. Pretty
fo
retty nurse.
vt. Alisto: No
S&
Very Shin
rass (on the
llo, I want to
phone):
t Caros.
peak to Li
ivate: Sino
Tesh Y
iyooon?
nt Constancio
3: Caros,
Moy Caros
hintay ka mu2: A, si Co
na,
ST"
"g
or the Very Fresh
(Curtains dov
Young Private
S&
A mother wa
loud to her
young daughten
le across the
tears."
phrase “blood, s
You know
quotation
ne asked.
comes from, do
"Oh, sure,” the little girl said.
"From the mar
rites."
S* O 2&
Radio Operator
arlie to Baker,
harlie to I
how do you hear
me? Over.
Receiving Part
 baker around,
want to speak
the cook?

nstructor: Squ
trigger gently and you w
rely hit the
bull’s eye.
rainee: But where’s the bull, sir?


VA
he
FOUN
ATION ISSUE
of
  
in August
commemorafing the foundation
anniversary of the
PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY


SMH-2


When Sikatuna and Legaspi made the Blood Compact, they made history. For a liffle Blood from each
cemented the friendship of fwo races.
Instances like this become rarer and rarer. Today
you offen have to give a lof to get a lof — except in
SANTA MESA HEIGHTS where e LITTLE CAN LITERALLY BUY A LOT!


Invest in SANTA MESA HEIGHTS


J. Araneta Bldg.
343 Echague
Tels. 3-25-25 & 3-28-26


Real Estate DDepartment
GREGORIO ARANETA, Inc.


Tune in on the Gregorio Araneta Amateur Hour on Friday over DZPI from
8:15 to 9:00 p.m.


June, 1949


Page 29


Our Pride..
(Continued from page 14)
The revolutionary doctrines so immemorably phrased and immortally
achieved by the early Americans had
not sprung full-grown from the
American soil. They were convictions which had been distilled from
the product of centuries of thought of
struggle and of sacrifice. On the
shores of the Galilee, 2,000 years before, a people small in numbers had
defended the dignity of man and the
glory of God. In the shadows of the
towering Alps the heroic Swiss had
fought for home and freedom against
the ruthless tyrant. These events
and a thousand more went into the
makingof the American Revolution.
The labored thoughts of centuries of
scholars, the lyrics of a thousand
poets, the insurgence of numberless
philosophers, all contributed to the
ferment of ideas which found final
form in the America of 1776.
American democracy was established. The miracle was that it succeeded. And with its success the eternal
search for freedom took new heart
and courage. In France the human
spirit broke its bonds only to be subdued again by military despotism.
The Old World was shaken to its
foundations. Anxious kings and princes took violent steps against the doctrines of liberty. But freedom did
not die, the struggle for freedom did
not end. It gained new impetus as
the American democratic experiment
continued to flourish, to give hope to
men who loved liberty in every land.
Gradually democracy moved irresistibly westward across a vast continent until it reached the shores of the
Pacific.
Nor did the broad ocean stay the
westward surge of the pioneers of
liberty. They planted its seeds in this
land... seeds which bear today their
richest fruit.
So as we embrace our national freedom, we must see in it, as other peoples of the world do, not alone the
product of our struggles and strivings, not alone the altruism of America, but also the final product of the
world’s age-old quest for liberty. We
owe to our own heroes... to Rizal, to
Bonifacio, to Mabini, to Quezon, to
Del Pilar and to many others a gratitude of memory, both deep and abiding. But in this supreme moment
we must likewise pay tribute to the
great apostles of freedom of many
lands who contributed to our independence and nationhood, just as
surely as if they had lived and died


on our soil. Kosciusko, LaFayette,
and Simon Bolivar were all soldiers
of liberty, equally with Washington,
Jefferson, and Franklin D. Roosevelt.
The origin of our liberties reach
far back into antiquity, but it was
America, who, through the past two
centuries, incubated the concepts of
freedom and the equality of men,
which have now found such firm lodging in the Philippines.
Long before the coming of America to the Philippines, our aspirations
for nationhood had been influenced
by thoughts and doctrines originating in the United States. The philosophers of our several revolutions
were inspired by the Declaration of
Independence, the Virginia Bill of
Rights, and the Federal Constitution.
Our patriots of those early days demanded the rights of free speech and
of free press and of self-government.
We well recall those who died here
on the altar of religious freedom.
When the first Philippine Republic
was proclaimed, its constitution provided for a representative democracy.
The Philippine Declaration of Independence borrowed even the language
of the great American charter of liberty.
When American troops landed on
these shores in 1898, they found in
full cry the yearning for freedom.
American control had to be spread by
force of arms throughout the Islands.
But the conquerors spoke strange
words into Filipino ears. They said
that America had come not to exploit
but to teach, not to tyrannize but to
lead, not to own but to liberate. To
our great surprise and to the wonder
of the entire world this promise was
kept. The benevolent stewardship
was discharged with scrupulous regard. The successive spokesmen
America sent here reiterated and emphasized the intentions of the United
States to educate the Filipinos for
freedom.
General Arthur MacArthur, the
gallant chieftain who led the first
armies of occupation, early won our
confidence, for he spoke to us not as
the Captain of a conquering host but
as a friend and liberator. Americans
have maintained that role ever since.
The presence here today of the great
son of that first leader adds scope and
significance to the present hour. The
name of MacArthur will be forever
emblazoned in the pages of our history.
Our independence missions to the
United States received without exception kindly and sympathetic hearings.
Our aspirations for independence


were given consistent support and encouragement. In 1916 the Jones Act
promised us freedom as soon as we
should be ready for it. In 1933 and
1934 that promise of independence
became a compact between two peoples. The Filipinos, subdued and conquered in 1900, were accepted in 1934
as partners in agreement. The mighty nation whose power awed the
earth, whose wealth and substance
had won a great conflict in 1918, offered us our independence, promised
to restore to us our national birthright and took steps to prepare us for
our national freedom.
Then came the war. General Douglas MacArthur directed that heroic
defense which has become a legend in
military history. The Filipino people thronged to the colors to do battle for their motherland. They continued to resist under the American
flag even after that flag was lowered in temporary surrender. When
General MacArthur at the head of his
valiant legions of liberation returned
in 1944, his forces were swept up
in a tidal wave of gratitude and were
carried forward on a mighty current
of acclaim and support. The scattered remnants of his Filipino forces
of 1941, their ranks filled out with
the heroic guerrillas, flocked to his
standards and added fury to the successful assault upon the enemy.
The world cannot but wonder today as we become a nation. A new
era has come to the Orient. The first
democratic Republic has been established in this quarter of the globe.
Freedom has been granted our people, a freedom requested by peaceful
petition and freely granted by the
American Congress. There are members of that Congress here today and
among them are men to whom our obligation of gratitude is deep and everlasting. We will never forget their
long and ardent labors for our liberty and welfare. They are heroes of
our history and of our people. Their
place in our hearts is secure.
And now we must turn our eyes
from the past and inspect as well as
we can the dim and uncertain future.
From this day forward our international responsibility is absolute.
As we are the masters of our own
destiny, so too we must bear all the
consequences of our actions. If we
surmount the difficulties that beset
us, if we conquer the obstacles which
bar our way, our people will grow
great in the eyes of men. But if we
strut with false pride upon the world
stage, if we berate with bombast our
friends and benefactors, if we lend,.


Page 30


KHAKI and RED


for reasons of political expediency,
comfort and encouragement to the
enemies of peace and freedom, if we
invite poverty, chaos and disorder to
inhabit our land, we will break faith
with our noble past and imperil our
national future.
No longer are we protected by the
mantle of American sovereignty. No
longer can we look to America to
shield us from follies or excesses.
There is no redress for our actions
beyond the immutable laws of justice
among nations. Our period of apprenticeship is past. We are an adult
in the council of nations. Our decisions must be gravely made; they
will be gravely judged. Our war-time
heroism has commanded the respect
of the world. We dare not sacrifice
that respect.
From this day forward, it is not
the leaders of Government alone who
will be judged. By the actions of
our Government, the Filipino people
will be appraised. Our actions in the
next years will determined the estimate the world will place upon our
national character. Heavy is the
weight of responsibility we bear as
we start out upon the dangerous paths
of independence. The ever-present
guide is gone. We must find our own
way, with the instincts we have in

herited, with the wisdom we have acquired.
Words must cease to be substituted
for thoughts and judgments. In a
troubled world where our alliance
with one group of nations or another
might help determine the fate of mankind, we cannot afford to hesitate or
choose capriciously.
We cannot be
epicures at the international table.
We must select our fare, and adhere
to that selection. Our alliances must
be firm and unshakeable. Our loyalties must be strong and enduring.
I judge that our choice has been
made. In the presence of our honored guests today, in the presence of the
representative of the sovereign American Nation, I state my firm conviction that we have already subscribed
irretrievably to the principles of the
American Declaration of Independence and the American Constitution.
Those principles are now embodied in
the basic law of our land. We are
committed to the cause and the international program of the United
States of America. We are pledged
to the support of the Four Freedoms.
We are in the atomic age. We cannot stay the swift advance of time
even if we would. The world shrinks
with each passing hour. Wings carry men across deserts, oceans and


mountains. The wide waters have
ceased to bar access to our land. The
stratosphere is now an avenue for
swift flight or swift destruction.
In such a world we cannot retreat
within ourselves. We cannot live in
unconcern for the world’s opinion.
We cannot bar from our shores the
products of other lands. We cannot
build on principles of isolation. Today the affairs of Trieste must be
our concern. Today we, too, have an
interest in the Mediterranean. The
problem of Palestine is our problem.
The Poles and the Czechs are our
neighbors; their fate concerns us as
intimately as the destiny of China,
the future of Manchuria or the welfare of Malaya. The world today is
one.
While we gain the glorious gift of
freedom, it is accompanied by a charter of obligations. Today the concept of independence is overshadowed
by the dynamic growth of international interdependence. On all fronts
the doctrine of absolute sovereignty
is yielding ground. Heavier and heavier grows the pressure of the world’s
anxiety for peace and security. That
pressure is directed against the principle of total sovereignty. We have,
by our membership in the United Nations, already surrendered some of


Compliments


of


Manila Jockey


OM


JOSE WARREN
MANAGER


2000 FELIX HUERTAS, STA. CRUZ, MANILA


June, 1949


Page 2


tige. There are many nations aspiring to world recognition. There are
many peoples who merit the sympathy and understanding of mankind.
There are few who are poorer in
wealth of goods and economic power
than our own new-born Republic. In
both Asia and Europe, the small nations tremble in the shadows of insecurity or are pawns in the insidious politics of power. Freedom, if
it ever existed in many of those lands,
has been erased. Famine, actual starvation, stalks the streets of cities and
the by-roads of countrysides. What
help they receive to avert epidemic
and hunger must wait through the
long processes of international consultation, and is subject to the moves
and counter-moves of conflicting interests. America is the source of almost all of the assistance furnished
the stricken areas of the world; and
the American Congress, appropriating with troubled and divided conscience for the bare relief needs of
these lands, looks askance at the political complexions of the governments
in some of those areas. We, of the
Philippines, are spared that trial.
American aid to us is direct and
whole-hearted.
In other parts of the world, nations
not fastened in the iron control of
fear are locked in internal chaos, with
civil war rampant and governments
holding power by the tyranny of
might.
The Middle East writhes in ferment. Africa is a political battleground, the Iberian Peninsula seethes
with unrest... only the western hemisphere, the lands and peoples of
the New World, are relatively free,
secure and without fear... the New
World and the democratic British Dominions overseas. Only these of the
small nations of the earth are content in their security. And for these
nations, through one means or another, the United States is the guarantor. Their security is a measure of
the unselfish power of America. In
the western hemisphere, the stability of governments, and their freedom
from interference and coercion is the
result of the Good Neighbor Policy
and the Monroe Doctrine. The British Dominions, for their part, owe a
large measure of their security to
geographic position within the American defense sphere.
Any doubts which may still linger
in some quarters of the earth as to
the benign intentions of America
should be resolved by what she has
so nobly and unselfishly accomplished
here.


our sovereignty. It called upon to help
in the enforcement of peace, we must
supply that help. We have, as have
other nations granted the right of the
United Nations to utilize our land
and our resources, if required for the
purposes of international security.
The cry for a World Federation of
Nations is again welling from many
throats. Should this come to pass,
our sovereignty would be further cur

tailed. We cannot obstruct that development. In the world of nations
we lack the authority of power. We
must depend on the world’s conscience
for our protection and salvation.
But we have yet a greater bulwark
today... the friendship and devotion
of America. That friendship, which
is the greatest ornament of our independence, raises us far above the
level of our intrinsic power and pres

U.S. ARMY TOP BRASS call on Brig. Gen. Alberto Ramos, Chief of the Philippine
Constabulary, at Camp Crame. In left panel, Maj. Gen. George Shea, new Commanding General of PHILCOM, uses his right hand to emphasize a point as
General Ramos listens in rapt attention. In right panel, General Ramos himself
gesticulates with his left hand as Maj. Gen. Jonathan Anderson, present chief
of JUSMAG and former PHILCOM chief, faces his host in all seriousness.


THE MONTHLY HOP of the PC Officers Club was held at the clubhouse on June
i with the G-2 Section as hosts in the let’s-get-acquainted social. Special guest
was Mayor Nicanor Roxas seen at left dancing with Carmen Rosales, popular
movie actress. At right, Mayor Roxas stands at the sidelines with General Ramos
and Lt. Col. Macario Asistio, G-2 chief and overall boss at the affair, looking on
with some amusement at the antics of the younger guests.


Page 32


KHAKI and RED


Should we in the Philippines disdain the support of this modern Colossus whose might is the hope and
strength of the world? No free nation today can, to its advantage, scoff
and snarl at the United States, whose
broad shoulders bear the awful
weight of world peace. Subtract the
influence of the United States from
the rest of the world, and the answer
is chaos. Perhaps we have not
fully understood what has taken
place in the past five years.


There have been withdrawn from
the balanced scales of world power
the might of Japan in the East and of
Germany and Italy in the West. The
attrition of war has diminished the
strength of Britain and broken almost
entirely the authority of France. China is in the agonized throes of national rebirth. There are only two
major poles of power in the world today... Russia and the United States,
both of them bestriding the oceans,
facing Orient and Occident. Not


since the Peace of Rome was broken
by the onslaught of the barbarians
twenty centuries ago has there been
a comparable situation. The mind of
man can scarcely conceive of its implications. The world may well shudder, contemplating the possible consequences. But men of goodwill in
many lands, desperately loving peace,
have brought forth the United Nations, noble in concept, and worthy in
purpose, a hopeful answer to the prayers of the humble peoples of the earth.


For Speed ... Durability . .. Smooth Action And
Effortless Typing, This Famous Ball Bearing Type Bor
Con't Be Surpassed. You Get Better Results With Less
Effort . .. On a Smith-Corona!


The only

EA
ol 1t5 kind in the worid


EACH "IYPE BAR" ON
A SMITHCORONA
RIDES ON 15 INDIVIDUAL BALL BEARINGS


ADAth.


BEARO


call 3-21-61 for a demonstration


June, 1949


Page 33


We are members of the United Nations. Even as a Commonwealth, we
signed the charter of that organization. It was Franklin D. Roosevelt’s
strong desire that we should be considered a nation among nations even
before our independence, even while
our land was in the clutches of the
enemy. The signature of Manuel
Quezon is affixed to the Declaration
of the United Nations. Today, we
may well rededicate ourselves to the
ideals of the United Nations, to the
preservation of peace and the promotion of justice among men.
But as we pledge ourselves to this
world organization, it is well to bear
in mind that today the United Nations is no stronger than its strongest
power, and that it is the leadership
of the United States which has given
to this body its soul and strength.
The world cannot but have faith
in America. For our part, we cannot but place our trust in the good
intentions of the nation which has
been friend and protector for the past
48 years. To do otherwise would be


A SAFE
and a


FILING
CABINET...
in one complete unit


Also available in 2, 3, & 5 drawers with or without concealed safe.


SOLE DISTRIBUTORS
O.E.S. &. S. CO., INC.


673 Dasmarinas (Gibbs Bldg.)
Tel. 6-72-36 MANILA


to foreswear all faith in democracy,
in our future, and in ourselves.
As we pursue our career as a nation, as we churn through treacherous
waters, it is well to have a landfall,
that we may know, our bearings and
chart our course. Our safest course,
and I firmly believe it true for the
rest of the world as well, is in the
glistening wake of America whose
sure advance with mighty prow breaks
for smaller craft the waves of fair.
The Philippines aspires to greatness. We seek, along with all other
nations, for glory. We seek eminence
among the peoples of the earth. But
we will not sacrifice peace to glory
We will not trade the happiness of
our people for national fame. We
will not yield freedom or liberty for
economic well-being. We will search
for, and I trust we will find, that happy formula for security, for friendship and for dignity that can be combined with the elevation of the economic status of our citizens, and with
the preservation of our liberties in a
world of peace and equal opportunity for all nations.
We are a troubled people. Our economic goods are destroyed and our
homes and buildings are in sham
bles. We must rebuild a levelled land.
Against a background of destruction,
we acquire our sovereignty, we receive our national heritage. We must
perform near-miracles to bring prosperity to this, our land. The work
of two generations was reduced to
rubble in the passionate moments of
war. Now we must rebuild in months
what was created in decades. Time
wields her whip-lash over us. Delay
and decay stand in impatient turn at
our door. Swift must be our actions
lest the dynamics of chaos overtake
our efforts. To succeed in this imperative, we have the assistance and support of the United States. Without
that assurance, our prospects would
be bleak and grim.
In all this we will maintain the implacable substance as well as the noble forms of democracy. We will stay
our progress, if it is necessary, to
permit time for democratic counsels.
We are determined to reflect in the
actions of government the will of the
majority of the people. We will move
with the speed indicated by the people’s wisdom. We will eschew the
symbols and shibboleths as well as the
motives of dictatorship. We cannot
avoid the process of pause and advance which is the democratic way.
Laws and institutions are more certain guides than the unchecked will


of men, however benign their purpose.
In our economic life, we will continue to embrace, as we have in the
past, free but guided enterprise. That
is our system. We will defend it
against the deceptive allures of communism, of militarism, and of fascism. We will not give comfort or
countenance to those anti-democratic creeds. Proponents of these views
will be protected in their right to hold
and openly to advocate them. They
will not be protected in subversive
schemes to destroy the structure of
this nation or of its free institutions.
Alien anti-democratic "isms" will not
be permitted to misuse the priceless
privileges of freedom for the systematic destruction of liberty.
We have surveyed at length our relations with the United States and
with the rest of the world. We have
discussed the significance of our nationhood in transcendental and in immediate terms. But this nation is
above all a nation of people. Its Government exists by the consent of the
governed, and seeks to express the
will of the governed. The welfare
of all the people must be our primary concern. The toil and sacrifice we
have laid out for ourselves must be
directed not for the exaltation of the
state, but for the elevation of all our
citizens, for their greater happiness,
for their economic security, for their
well-being, for the attainment of
greater opportunities for their children. The sweat of the toiler’s brow
nust be fairly and fully rewarded.
The products of enterprise must flow
in proper measure to those who participate in all the processes of production. There must be neither masters
nor serfs in our economic system.
As we stand at this moment, facing
the thorny path of the future, trying
our first unaided steps on the road
which leads to tomorrow, let us take
comfort in our national sturdiness and
courage. We are 18,000,000 strong.
Our people bear well the burdens of
adversity. The national spirit is one
of humility, of gentleness, and kindly brotherhood. Stout of heart and
firm of purpose, prudent and wise
in the deep wisdom of nature and of
God, our people have great reservoirs.
This land, this child of freedom, has
great responsibilities to America. We
are a staging area of democracy in
this part of the world. But whatever
our role in history, of one thing we
may be sure the Filipino, strong
in his faith and steadfast in his lo(Continued on page 42)


Page 31


KHAKI and RED


You are invited...


To write for    articles of opinion, events of
significance taking place in your outfit, vignettes, sports and
social items. Do you have any idea of how to persuade the
people to cooperate more fully in the common effort to maintain peace and order? What de you think are the most critical needs of the Constabulary at present? Is there any aspect in your work, any outstanding episode in your operations which you believe would be of interest to the readers?
Do you have an outstanding weightlifter or unbeatable chess
player in your battalion? Did your technical sergeant’s wife
bear triplets? ... These are only samples of the kind of
materials we need in   .


Officers and enlisted men and civilian employees of the PC
may feel free to write on any subject for   .
Our only requirement is that the contributions should be of
GENUINE INTEREST to the readers, written in simple
straightforward English, and typewritten double-spaced.
Photographs in clear black and white that tell a story are
also welcome.
Submitted manuscripts and photographs will, of course, be
rejected if in the opinion of the editors they do not merit
publication.
Address all contributions to The Editors,   ,
PC General Headquarters, Camp Crame, Quezon City.


EVAS



CALEX


USE CALTEX STAR KEROSENE * — TODAYS
MOST DEPENDABLE HOME FUEL!


* Whether you ask for "kerosene" or "ges” — insist
on STAR KEROSENE


OA
m


A QUALITY PRODUCT OF CALTEX (PHILIPPINES) INC.


June, 1949


Page 35


Huk Revolt in Laguna
(Continued from page 19)
the supreme commander for Southern Luzon, that they agreed to launch
a revolution to overthrow the government of Roxas by means of force, that
each of the leaders in attendance
promised to contribute arms and men
from 100 to 500, and that they changed the name of the Huk organization
to "Taliba nang Bansa” or "Talban."
He also interpreted the minutes
which proved to be a corroboration to
the aforesaid confession. A case of
conspiracy and proposal to commit rebellion was immediately filed against
Villegas and his companions, using
Capt. Puts as a witness.
The months and years to follow
were rebellion in action. In no time,
I amended my complaint from conspiracy and proposal to commit rebellion
to rebellion. Capt. Puts faithfully
came across with his part in the deal.
Today he is retained in the active
service in recognition of his valuable
services towards the eradication of
his former Huk brothers-in-arms.
Later, Capt. Puts figured as a star
witness for the government in the first
rebellion case that reached the Court
of Appeals: the case of “The People
versus Benito Cube” wherein the appellate court in November, 1948 outlawed the Huks or Taliba nang Bansa
of Southern Luzon as an illegal association whose aims are to overthrow
the government besides convicting the
accused. In the same case, it reaffirmed the Supreme Court’s doctrine
in the "People versus Sadam" that
mere membership in a rebel organization without participation in  armed
encounter makes one guilty of rebellion.
The Talban devoted the month of
July to prepare for "war.” On August
7, 1946, the Talban occupied and robbed the municipal building of Majay
jay. After sacking the town, they
switched on the same day to the town
of Magdalena. They emptied the
treasury of all cash contents, the municipal treasurers reported. A Huk
spokesman, however, claimed-that not
all the cash contents were taken. For
this reason the provincial auditor of
Laguna refused for some time to approve the treasurers’ claim for relief
My findings as an investigator supported the claim of the two treasurers.
Later the dissident band sacked the
town of Lilio. They held the town at
bay for two hours, even held a meeting in the public plaza. They were
careful to block all exits so that nobody could notify the MPs of the go

Letter from
LINDA TARUC
(As reprinted from The Sunday
Times, June 12, 1949).
ERRORS OF COMMUNISM
Communism is a sin against the
Ten Commandments of God because
Communists aim to deprive their fellowmen of their private property
through unjust means. It is revolutionary in character, planning an
upheaval of society and a radical
change in the existing order.
Communist idea is most impracticable and nonsensical. Even if the
state gave the same amount to everybody, inequality would arise in a
short time. This system would penalize the industrious and talented
by depriving them of their personal
incentive.
Communists are generally atheists.
Communism would do away with religion, family life, authority and social order. Communists would reduce man to the level of lower animals destitute of all that develop his
higher nature. The members of a
Communist state would become virtual slaves with no rights of their
own. They would be worse than machines.
NOTE: I have no relation with the
Huk supremo Luis Taruc. I have a
different ideology. I’m a Catholic.-
LINDA TARUC. Sta. Cruz, Manila.


ings-on. Cash in the municipal treasury, typewriters, firearms belonging
to the police, and rice stocks kept by
the municipality for distribution were
all stolen, not to mention the personal effects robbed from the houses of
local residents.
In November, 1946 the Huks plundered the town of Nagcarlan because
Mayor Pablo Arceta refused to give
them any aid. Twenty municipal policemen chose to fight it out with
about 120 Huks rather than abandon
their posts. Two policemen were
killed in the encounter at the municipal hall, and Mayor Arceta, the chief
of police, and a patrolman were taken prisoners by the Huks.
The towns in the Baybay coast of
Laguna continue suffering the same
fate. The lives of many officers and
men have been sacrificed but the Huks
are paying with much more casualties.
For sure, the forces of the Constabulary will get all of them in the end.
The PC as a guardian of peace insists
that no one can abuse the rights, the
honor, and the property of another
man without in the end suffering for
his crimes.


Letters
(Continued from page 8)
The Editors
KHAKI and RED
The PC, like the rest of the police
agencies of the Philippines, is confronted with various problems in the
maintenance of peace and order.
One of its greatest ills is the discipline and training of its personnel.
Higher headquarters has done its best
to get rid of undesirable members but
it has not done enough as provided
for in Circular No. 33 MPC, dated 11
June 1947. The procedure therein
provided has plenty of formalities and
requirements so that that until now,
units in the field could not so easily
get rid of its undesirable personnel.
Why not make a short cut by just
requiring all provincial commanders
and company commanders to submit
the names of undesirable enlisted men
and officers and let GHO do the rest?
In turn, civilian volunteers could be
recruited as in the prewar constabulary where more disciplined and efficient soldiers were produced.
The PC which is delegated with the
investigation of grave cases encounters various problems which could
easily be minimized if GHO would do
something about it. One such problem
is the hostile attitude of the public
in general to give information and
provide material witness. A witness
faces many inconveniences before and
during the trial. He has to spend for
his own transportation and subsistence. Why not set aside funds to take
care of this? If higher headquarters
can raise money for its clubs, chapels
and other things, why could it not set
aside money for this important undertaking?
In the past, the provincial headquarters was provided with the socalled intelligence fund. This fund
did help a lot in the investigation.
Through the use of such fund the provincial headquarters could appoint informers and provide them with stamps
and stationery so that they could
easily send reports to headquarters.
There are also cases wherein suspects
have to be followed and shadowed.
How can our informers and investigators work effectively without the
necessary funds?
In general, the Philippine Constabulary has done much with so little.
But the suggestions respectfully presented herein would be able to do
much to improve things.—CANARES
ABAN, 1st Lieut. Inf. (PC).


Page 36


KHAKI and RED


2
A
E
SE
E
S?
2
SEL
LE
SE

-9
E
O

F8
EE

$19

S E
g
6is

E
S
6o
Mnn
E EEO


NNNHENEEEEEEEHEDEEEEEEE DESDIBOEEP MEED O       O EEOD


S


EJ


SE
O


"8
2
s2
*


26
E

20
S




At the First
Social Meeting
By (Mrs.) AMPARO O. ACAB
Y INDER the able management of
U Mrs. Felicing Sauco (Program
Committee) and Mrs. Elizabeth Campo (Refreshments Committee), the
first social meeting of the PCWC was
successfully held on June 11 at the
PC Officers Club, Camp Crame, with
Lt. Jose Campana’s PC Band furnishing the music. The program was preceded by a brief visit to the nursery
and home extension classes with our
adviser, Mrs. Brigida Ramos, and the
guest of honor, Mrs. Trinidad F. Legarda, leading.
Our active president, Conching
Martelino, spared no detail in enlightening everybody about the projects
of the club. The rooms adjoining the
nursery class are now furnished with
kitchen utensils and tables. We expect the home extension class to function before the end of the month under the management of Mrs. Gloria
Monzon, chairman of the Committee
on Social Graciousness.
There are actually two nursery
classes held daily. The first class of
30 children, from 8-10 a m. and the
second class of 42 children, from 10-
12 a.m. Miss Soledad Santos is the
persevering little teacher of these preschool age children. The little tots are
supplied with pencils, papers, nursery
books, and crayons free. Besides the
milk donated by Mrs. Consuelo Perez,
wife of Speaker Perez, the nursery
classes also get a subsidy of P40.00



LO VVOLLBE


monthly from the National Federation
of Women’s Clubs. Our guest of honor proved a gem, when in her overwhelming enthusiasm to help the good
cause, she decided then and there that
the UNICEF (United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund)
Feeding Program should be extended
to families of PC enlisted men. There
was a look of complete comprehension
in her eyes when she explained further to the members of the Club how
this feeding program should be worked out.
In the latter part of her very interesting talk, Mrs. Legarda delighted
the audience with her sisterly advice
on how women should exercise the
right of suffrage intelligently and to
the best advantage of the country.
She clearly brought out the fact that
if she ever goes into politics, it shall
be for the purpose only of using her
political influence in furthering her
labors as a social worker. She said
she "intends to enter politics on a
high plane, not to go down to the level of dirty politics.” “But,” she emphasized, "I am not a candidate yet.”
Through this column, we the members of the PCWC are extending our
heartfelt thanks to Mrs. Trinidad F.
Legarda for all the help she (as representative of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs) is giving our
Club.
(Continued on page 40)


Mrs. TRINIDAD F. LEGARDA
UNICEF aid for PC families.


The little members of one of the two PC nursery classes are shown posing for the photographer in admirable
aplomb (left panel.) At right is Miss Soledad Santos, the teacher, handing out glasses of mill to the tots at recess.
Milk is donated by Mrs. Eugenio Perez.


Page 38


KHAKI and RED


SLOS BLOLLON
EVZ CHAPTER ORGANIZED
By (Mrs.) MARIA ESTRELLA VILLAROSA
Secretary, PCWC. Eastern Visayan Zone PC


ENE sunny afternoon on May 10,
1949, a sizeable number of officers’ ladies answered the telephone
calls of Mrs. Flora R. Oppus, wife of
Colonel Angel Oppus, Commander of
the Eastern Visayan Zone.
Appropriate setting for such a gathering was the airy and modern PC
Recreation Hall in Cebu City. The
ladies listened to Mrs. Oppus as she
read the communications from General Headquarters at Camp Crame,
pertinent to the reorganization of the
prewar Philippine Women’s Auxiliary Association into the PCWC.
Monthly dues, annual quotas, and
membership were also explained.
Highlight of the meeting was the
election of officers. The following
were elected:
Mrs. Paz Inovejas, President; Mrs.
Marciana S. Francisco, Vice-President; Mrs. Maria E. Villarosa, Secretary; Mrs. Carina L. Magbag, Treasurer; Mrs. Arcadia Sabalones, Auditor; Mrs. Resurreccion R. Revilles,
Sgt.-at-Arms; Mrs. Paulina J. Garces, Sgt.-at-Arms.


Board of directors: Mesdames Iluminada V. Martelino, Gloria Hawkins,
Helena H. Navarro, Gliceria A. de
Leon, and Jacinta S. Mercado.
Mrs. Flora R. Oppus is the club adviser.
The officers, still waiting to be inducted into office, held their first informal meeting especially called by
Mrs. Oppus to discuss important business. The first important topic
taken up during the meeting was the
holding of a send-off party for Mrs.
Hawkins, a member of the club’s
board of director. The Hawkinses
were leaving for Tuguegarao where
Major Clifford Hawkins is the new
zone dental surgeon.
Mrs. Oppus proposed the holding
of an afternoon mass and novena for
Our Lady Mediatrix of All Grace at
the PC Chapel beginning May 22nd
up to the 31st; and a general communion in the morning of June 1st.
Everything was carried out successfully as planned by the adviser and
the different committees.
During the mass the officers’ la

PCWC President
Issues Appeal
The Philippine Constabulary Women’s Club whose revival was initiated
by the able lady of our PC Chief, Mrs.
Brigida P. Ramos, aims to promote
the welfare of the PC personnel in
general, and the families of enlisted
men in particular. As ladies of the
PC officers, we should all try to make
this organization as successful if not
as good as its prewar predecessor.
Every tiny bit of help is needed.
The club officers alone can not make
a go of things. Every member should
lend a hand.
General Ramos in his talk during
our induction ceremonies issued a
challenge and expressed the hope that
our club would not be another example of "Ningas kugon."
We have accepted the challenge and
let us show, not to the General alone
but to every one else, that we will not
give up, not until we have accomplished the task we have imposed on
ourselves.
Let us all therefore work and strive.
CONCEPCION CALDERONMARTELINO
President, PCWC.


dies sang the “Ave Maria,” the
“Salve," and other appropriate songs
lovingly dedicated to Queen Mary,
Mother of God, our all-powerful intercessor.


The officers and members of the PC Women’s Club, Eastern Visayar Zone chapter pose fer a picture at the PC Recreation Hall, Cebu City. They have on top a series of activities.


June, 1949


Page 39


How busy is the
PE WOMEN


"5


CESD.


PARELY two months in existence
since its organization last March
18, the PC Women’s Club can now
count with certain accomplishments—
concrete and real. Our adviser, Mrs.
Brigida Ramos, lost no time in inspiring the club to undertake different projects. Hers is a busy mind
with varied interests—interests particularly dedicated towards making
the club render valuable service. Driv.
en by an overwhelming enthusiam for
a good cause, the club has initiated
projects for the welfare of PC men
and their families.
We have lately opened a club, a library, and a nursery class for children
of enlisted men. The class started on
April 8, 1949 and is held from 9 to
11 every day except Saturday. At present there are 48 pupils under Miss
Soledad Santos. A glass of milk is
given each child free of charge everyday during recess. Milk is donated by
Mrs. Consuelo S. Perez, wife of
Speaker Perez. The first week of June
we opened another class for pre-school
age children. This class opens at
8:00 a.m., so that starting June 6
there are two classes, one from 8 to
10 and another, from 10 to 12. We
were able to get from the National
Federation of Women’s Clubs of the
Philippines a cash aid of forty pesos
a month for one school year starting
this month for our nursery classes.
The books in our children’s library
are all from the National Federation
of Women’s Clubs also. We have at
present 150 volumes. By the end of
this month we will be getting another
100 volumes.
A place appropriate for home extension classes is being put up now.
We expect to have it opened very soon,
not later than the second week of June.
In these classes, food preparation, food
preservation, home decoration, dress
making, and child care will be taught
to wives of PC enlisted men. These
classes, like the nursery class, are given free. In her desire to enhance the
opening of the classes, Mrs. Ramos
volunteered to make donations of her
own. A similar class will also be
opened in the near future for ladies


of officers in the Philippine Constabulary.
In line with the PC Women’s Club
projects for the welfare of PC enlisted men, we thought it wise to have a
grade school within the camp. It was
unanimously agreed in our last meeting on May 18, to request General
Ramos, the PC chief, to make representations with Mayor Nicanor Royas of Quezon City for the opening of
a barrio school for children of enlisted men within Camp Crame. We
are earnestly hoping we shall succeed in this matter.
In this last meeting it was also
agreed to put up another nursery class
in view of the inadequacy of the nursery class at present being held. Inasmuch as these classes are held for
the benefit of children of enlisted men
in the PC, we decided to solicit a cash
aid of P100.00 from the monthly earnings of the PC Officers’ bowling alleys.
A request was sent at once to General Ramos soliciting his authority to
grant us this monthly sum.
In order to make the PC Women’s
Club truly national and embracing in
its scope, circular letters have been
forwarded to the wives of PC zone


commanders. These ladies were instructed to organize PC Women’s Club
chapters in provinces within their respective zone. A province may organize a PC Women’s Chapter if it has a
minimum of 15 members. If less than
15 the ladies in a particular province
will be members of the zone chapter.
Provincial chapters, however, must be
part and parcel of the zone chapter.
As one writer puts it: "Live together on terms of mutual affection."
Thus the PC Women’s Club plans to
help boost the PC Band so it can once
more attain its prewar fame and prestige. For this purpose, a music concert will be held at the Rizal Memorial Stadium sometime next October.
Our untiring president, Mrs. Concepcion Martelino is leaving no stone unturned to make this affair a success.
Well, folks, this is all for now. Indeed, the PC Women’s Club is a very
busy little bee. We’ll give you more
information on our activities next
time.—AMPARO. O. ACAB


At The First..
(Continued from page 39)
Miss Soledad Santos is a real paragon of patience with her pre-school
age pupils. In less than ten days, she
was able to teach them the Bahay Kubo folk dance which amused the audience. Little Teresita Gozun, daughter of Col, and Mrs. Modesto Gozun
rendered a piano, selection.
General Ramos, just back from an
inspection trip in the provinces, dropped in just as the gathering was obut
to break up.





The interior of the chapel of the Eastern Visayan Zone, PC, in Cebu City.
The religious activities of the zone are centered in this chapel.


Page 10


KHAKI and RED


9
P. O. Box 4282,


Tel. 2-65-27
230 13th ST, Port Area
Manila


GENUINE AND REPLACEMENT PARTS
FOR ALL MAKES OF CARS & TRUCKS
Wagner
GARAGE EQUIPMENT


AMERICAN HAMMERED
PISTON RINGS


LUBRICATING
EQUIPMENT


ACCESSORIES
&


TOOLS


WAGNER-LOCKHEAD
BRAKE FLUID & PARTS


ELECTRICAL
TOOLS


Besides these world famous trademarks
we carry in stosk what we sincerely be

PROVINCIAL INQUIRIES GIV.


lieve to be the largest selection of auto

EN PROMPT AND CAREFUL


mobile parta and accessories.


ATTENTION. WRITE TO US


Our prices are reasonable because we
operate our business on large turnover
with amall profit.


FOR FULL INFORMATION


HAMLLA SAMIKLOILAIL CLASSIO,
SOON 10 THRILL MANILA FANS


Hamlet, universally acknowledged
to be William Shakespeare’s greatest
masterpiece, is quoted and referred to
every day, wherever the English language is spoken, by countless thou

sands of people who have never read
the play. This alone is proof that,
from the day it was written, the story
of Hamlet has gripped the world’s
imagination, and the beauty and


strength of its writing has colored
the everyday speech of the ordinary
man and woman in the street.
When he made Henry V, Oliver was
able to present it as a pageant of brilliant splendor and fast-moving action
without in any way sacrificing the
more serious undertones of the story.
In Hamlet he has not only been faithful to Shakespeare’s masterly story—
perhaps the first great psychological
drama ever written—but has also infused into it a speed and urgency and
movement that is wholly cinematic.
And what a story this is! Staged
amid all the grandeur of the Royal
Court of Denmark here is a tale of
murder and intrigue, of revenge and
treachery, of love and suicide, of madness and despair, of fatal delay and
even more fatal action.
Hamlet, the noblest work of England’s greatest dramatist, has passed
into the world’s store of literature.
This film, the achievement of England’s finest actor and most imaginative director, is now offered to the
world in the sure belief that it will
take its place among the historic presentations of this historic drama.


Two scenes from “Hamlet,” a movie epic that will entertain Philippine
cinemaddicts starting next month.


Our Pride..
(Continued from page 34)
yalty, will support his nation, come
what may. This daughter land of
America, sprung from the hardy stock
of Asia, will not be awed by difficulties. It will live and endure the
shocks of time. This is our faith, and
this is our resolve. With the help of
the Divine Providence, our steps will
be illumined by the shining countenance of truth and of righteousness...
our spirits will be eased from the
weariness of toil by the grace of
knowledge that our people’s happiness is our goal.
".
Our independence is our pride and
our honor. We shall defend our nation with our lives and our fortunes.
As a poet wrote long ago:
Let independence be our boast
Ever mindful what it cost.
Ever grateful for the prize,
Let its altar reach the skies.


Page 42


KHAKI and


Peasant news for you!
BO


Yes, for you the new Dodge is really
pleasant news. It is so much better than
ever .., in so many ways.
For example, you can drive all day without
touching the gearshift lever . . . or using the
clutch! That is because of the sensational
new GYROMATIC* Transmission. It does
all the shifting for you . .. automatically.
Besides that, the GYROMATIC Transmission lets you select the time you want
to change to another gear. And it combines
with All-Fluid Drive to give you smoother
acceleration, too.


Here is additional pleasant news! The
beautiful streamlined styling of the new
Dodge does not sacrifice your comfort,
convenience or safety in any way.
You will also be pleased with the smooth
performance of the improved L-head
engine. And the new "sea-leg” shock
absorbers give you a softer, safer ride over
rough roads and around curves.
These are but a few reasons why the new
Dodge is pleasant news for you. Come in
and see it today!


NEW BEAUTY...with extra comfort.
Seats are chair-height .
and wider than ever. You
have plenty of comfort ...
and plenty of room.


NEW BEAUIY . . . with extra vision.
Larger windshield, lower
hood, lower front fenders
give you better view of
the road ahead.


"Extra equipment on Dodge “Coronet" models only.
ON DISPLAY AT
NTE—
UNILED MOTORS (P.IJ, INC.
ECHAGUE-AYALA, MANILA, PHILIPPINES, TEL. 3-26-21


Hereitis..the new


mes now run clean
because of revolutionary
Ng
E


Here’s an oil that constantly works to
clean your engine and keep it clean.
Don’t be alarmed when Shell X-100
darkens quickly. Be pleased! That’s
the detergent additive, “X” Safety
Factor, doing its work. Gummy deposits from piston rings and valves are
removed. These harmful impurities are
dispersed as minute particles through
the body of the oil, thereby enabling
the engine to function efficiently.
The detergent “X” Safety Factor in
Shell X-100 removes all the hardest
deposits from your engine. Shell X-100
prevents new deposits from forming.
Your engine remains free from accumulated dirt and carbon impurities. So
you use less oil! Remember a clean
engine is a powerful engine.


GRLREE SHELL K-IOOMOTOR OIL
CCO SHELL STATIONS SAeMOKete


OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY


IN THIS ESUE
X
Was a Jap
afrocity Vicfim
X
Symposium on
somnel Discipline
X
nd with a Name


ctober 1949
50centavos


c




POMME


Mkan


Instead of placing thouAD
A
sands of lubricants in a
the market, UNION OIL
COMPANY developed a few outstanding
products of wide utility. You will save
money by concentrating on a minimum number of these all-purpose oils and greases.


TICAIIICICIMCITICICATITICITIICITEACATIICACILACAITICATLICITICICITIICIIICALITICACOO


Distributors:
THEO. H. DATIES & CO., FIR BAST ITD.
Tel. 4-79-41
6th Floor, Ayala Bldg., Manila
SMITH BELL & CO., LTD.
F. E. ZUELLIG, INC.
CEBU CITY
BACOLOD—ILOILO
GENERAL AUTO SUPPLY
BATANGAS, BATANGAS


TICIUIICITIIEITIEICITIICATITESITIICIIICITIACITIISICIIIGACITAATINATIIEATIEN


October, 1949


Page 3


Outstanding styling and


outstanding gasoline economy are only two of its
many features! See it—
drive it—and you’re sure
to say, "It’s MERCURY
for me!”


Features of the roa dhagging 1949 MERCURY: A powerful new
S-cylinder V-type engine
with plenty of “get up
and go!” Front coil
springing. A truly restful “comfort-zone” ride.
Easier steering. “Supersafety” brakes. Softer,
broader seating. Increased all-round visibility.


There’s an extra thrill
to owning this handsome
MERCURY! It’s that amazing
mileage you get! Owners report
17, 18, 19 miles per gallon—and up!
They claim it has the thriftiest power
plant of any car in its class. And it has?


Page 4


KHAKI and RED


This Monthr's Cover


OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY


CONTENTS


Ambassador Carlos P. Romulo, the
man featured in this month’s cover picture, is the newly elected president of
the United Nations general assembly.
His election to the highest post in the
international organization is a signal
tribute not only to the little man, a brilliant statesman, a gallant soldier, an
able journalist, an eloquent orator, and
an ardent nationalist, but also to the
young Republic of the Philippines. The
event marks the recognition of the
Philippines as a nation that has come
into its own as a power in world affairs.
More than ever, the Filipino diplomat
bears watching. Undoubtedly, the UN
presidency is not the apex of his career.
Many an admiring and grateful countryman believes Romulo is a man to be
reckoned in the next elections for the
presidency of the Philippines and that
when the event comes, he can count on
the overwhelming support of the Filipino people.
The cover photo shows one of the
many demonstrations of gratitude showered on Ambassador Romulo the last
time he was in Manila. He stands at
attention preparatory to receiving the
Philippine Legion of Honor award at a
ceremony at Camp Murphy. Note the
Philippine Constabulary colors immediately behind him.


OCTOBER 1949


Vol. 1, No. 7


Features
TRAINING PC MEDICS .... . ...
7
WHAT I THINK OF PERSONNEL DISCIPLINE

8
(A Symposium)
POINTERS TO OFFICERS
9

By Maj. Gen. Guillermo B. Francisco
ROMBLON PC COMBATS CRIME

12
REPORT ON A FISHING COMMUNITY
13
By Capt. Felixberto A. Ligutum
I WAS A JAP ATROCITY VICTIM
........ 14
By Maria Blanca
THE NEED FOR GOOD LEADERSHIP
17
E
By Capt. Isidoro D. Dino
BAND WITH A GREAT NAME
18
By Capt. Alfonso A. Calderon
GENERAL RAMOS ADDRESSES PRISON WARDENS
20
PRIMER FOR PATROLS (Concluding Installment)
21
E
By Lt. Col. Nicolas Gabutina
TWO CONFLICTING IDEOLOGIES
23
By S/Sgt. Benjamin S. Liggayu
BOUQUETS FROM GEN. LOVETT
23
* .
THE IMPORTANCE OF RADIO IN THE CONSTABULARY
32
By Sgt. Juan M. Eduarte
PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY (Poem)
34
By Lieut. Oscar T. Juco


Regular Departments


LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
6

EDITORIALS
 
PC WOMEN'S CLUB SECTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... 18


Published monthly on a nonprofit basis by the General Headquarters, Philippine
Constabulary. Business and Advertising Manager: Capt. Alfonso A. Calderon.
Editorial and advertising offices: Camp Crame, Quezon City—Tel. 6-87-31—242.
Entered as second-class mail matter at the post office at Manila on April 9, 1949.
Suescription rates: Philippines, P6.00 the year; foreign countries, P12.00. Articles
and photographs submitted for publication may not be returned, in case of rejection, unless they are accompanied by self-addressed envelopes and sufficient
postage. Opinions expressed in signed articles do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Philippine Constabulary. Photo credits: All photographs appearing in this
issue were taken by the PC Signal Corps.


Letters
to the Editor
Sir:
Until now enlistment from among
civilian volunteers has been suspended. What could be the reason behind
that suspension? As was proved before the war, the Philippine Constabulary produced good soldiers even
from among the non-Christian tribes.
They started as recruits; and this was
possible because a civilian volunteer
after undergoing his recruit training
would be fully adopted to the rigors
of military discipline. He would gradually adopt ways that are conducive
to military life.
At present we still have members
in our command who we may say are
unfit but are not yet replaced even
after their term of enlistment has
terminated. Unit Commanders in the
field are of course responsible for
this. This year most of the previous
enlistment will soon expire. All unit
commanders should be aware of the
provisions of Cir. 32, dated 8 November 1948, par. II-3 which provides
for the qualifications of an enlisted
man "who may re-enlist” Strict compliance with this provision will surely
do away with all the unfit now in our
command.
With regard to enlistment, why not
authorize all units in the more peaceful provinces to recruit so that we
can have enough materials to replace
other units who may be depleted subsequent to the termination of the enlistment of all those found unfit?
CANARES ABAN
1st Lieut. Inf PC
X


Sir:
I read with interest the letter of
gratitude by Dr. Manuel Lim, Chairman of the PNRC. I wish to inform
the reading public that due credit for
the material of my article entitled
“The PC and the Red Cross” came
from Miss Rosie Ortiz. I could not
have given full details without her
aid.
Please accept my humble tribute to
those who helped me fulfill my desire
to serve the public interest.
Sincerely yours,
Sgt. JUAN M. EDUARTE
Provost Sergeant
Camp Has, GHO PC
(Continued on page 27)


Editorials


No "Bloodbath'
PHE elections next month have evoked fears of considerable "bloodbath" in
A view of the heated points of controversy among the different party candidates and the unprecedented nationwide interest in the polls.
The apprehension has been particularly enhanced by ill-advised utferances
of revolution and rebellion on the part of certain candidates.
It is true that the November elections are the first to be held since the
Philippines became independent. We are confident, however, that the Filipino
people, being at heart a peaceful people who are circumspect and reasonable
in their ways, would not stand for any acts of subversion by any group of
desperate, cantankerous individuals.
The Philippine Constabulary, as a national police organization, will see to
it that the people’s exercise of suffrage will not be hampered by the unpatriotic
acts of such individuals. With utmost impartiality and unflagging defermination,
the Constabulary command will act so that the incidence of disorder is reduced
to the minimum, despite the existence of difficulf factors prevailing in the country
in this post-war period.
The coming elections will constitute a test of the ability of the young Republic to hurdle a political crisis. There is every reason to believe that the
country, with President Quirino at the helm, will pass the fest.


XXX


The leyte Landing and, Mario Blanca



MPPHE fifth anniversary of the landing of General MacArthur’s forces on Leyte
E this month recalls once more those delirious moments our people went through
at the sight of the first American troops come to liberate the country from three
years of a regime of terror unparalleled in Philippine history.


Quite appropriate with the observance of the historic event, KHAKI AND
RED features in this issue the exclusive story of a woman who had the ill forfune.
of falling into the hands of a rapacious, lust-crazed mob of Japanese soldiery in
the chaos that was Manila in the pangs of liberation.
Her horrible experiences with the beasts in human form had their counterparts
elsewhere in the country where the Japs flaunted even the elementary rules of
warfare. Thousands of people the likes of her who were rendered helpless victims
of Japanese brutality would not soon forget the physical and moral ordeals they
had gone through.
It is well that, sympathizing with the feelings of the people, the Administration
has itself maintained a firm, uncompromising atfitude against any step that would
make Japan a power once more. If has been rightly arqued that as human nafure.
never changes, so would the innate disposition of the Japanese barbarian mentality never reform, regardless of the democratizing and civilizing strictures of the
MacArthur stewardship. No amount of exhortations by "practical-minded" persons
would soften the hearts of the Maria Blancas foward the supposedly contrite "Sons
of Heaven," who even now show signs of intransigeance under the benevolent
suzerainty of General MacArthur.


Page 6


KHAKI and RED


TRAINING PC MEDICS


The Constabulary Prepares Men in the Art of Healing
Aside from Instruction in Soldiery and Crime Busting


PHE history of the Medical Field
Service Section of the PC School
may be traced to the early period of
liberation in July 1945, when a school
for the medical personnel of the Military Police Command was organized
at the MPC (AFWESPAC) Training
School in Alabang, Rizal, under the
pioneering supervision of Major Jesus T. Mendoza, MC. The training
course covered a period of six weeks
and after two institutional terms, the
school was transferred to Del Monte,
Bukidnon. Following the training of
two more batches of medical personnel, the school in Bukidnon was closed
sometime in December 1945.
The need for such important medical training was, however, felt and
could not for long be denied. On January 6, 1947, the school, which was
renamed the Medical Field Service
Course, was revived in Bamban, Tarlac, under the commandant of the Military Police School. The class ended
on 12 April 1947, with 44 graduates.
The principal problems encountered
in Bamban were the inadequate water
supply, sanitary installations, and
lighting facilities. It was considered
imperative to transfer the school elsewhere.
May 17, 1947 found the school at
a new site in Camp Crame, Quezon
City. With an enrollment of 47 students it was decided to provide a specialist training course. The first two
weeks were devoted to basic subjects
and the next three weeks to technical
subjects. From the sixth to the fifteenth week, the students were divided into six groups and placed on further TDY in V. Luna General Hospital and in the 12th Station Hospital
in Batangas where they took up specialist training along the following
services: X-ray, dental, surgical, laboratory, nursing and hospital administration. It was gratifying to know
that all the students showed proficiency in the training as evidenced by


their high scholastic records at the
end of the course on August 30, 1947.
The next school term opened on
September 15, 1947 at the same site.
The course of 14 weeks was devoted
to basic, technical, tactical and administrative subjects. Of the 45 students
enrolled, 40 successfully completed
their training on December 18, 1947.
On February 23, 1948, the Medical
Field Service Course began its first
term under the Philippine Constabulary School when the MPC assumed
its prewar name, the PC. Thirty-four
graduates were turned out. Two students flunked. Since then, the school
under the PCS has terminated with
success the second and third classes,
each with 37 MFSS graduates.
Very soon, the present class will
turn out new graduates who, like their
predecessors, will leave for their respective assignments to apply the
four-month training they have acquired with patience and diligence.
It would not be amiss to mention too,
that the failure of some students to
complete successfully the course was
mainly due to their having low educational attainment and could not fully cope up with technical subjects.
The scope of training is directed
into three objectives: the basic, the
technical, and the tactical training.
The basic training is fundamental to
every Filipino medical soldier’s education and is disciplinary in character. Here, the student takes up such
subjects as organization and functions of the medical service of the
AFP and of the PC, medical installations in TO & ZI, litter drill, personal and sex hygiene and first aid.
The technical training embraces subjects appropriate to the medical unit.
Among the subjects taught are elementary anatomy and physiology,
care and management of common diseases, medical and surgical nursing,
and materia medica and pharmacy.


The tactical training refers to the
movement and employment of the medical units in the field.
The present staff of instructors of
the MFSS is manned by the following officers: Capt. Vitaliado B. Arrieta, MC, chief of section; Capt.
Agustin B. Lucero, DC; 1st Lt. Buenaventura A. Cube, MC; and 1st Lt.
Oscar T. Juco, MC. The mechanism
of instruction is based on modern
training steps which follow in sequence: preparation of the lesson by
the instructor; presentation of the
lesson by explanation and demonstration; application by the students to
develop skill by repetition; examination in the form of oral or written
questions, performance test or observation; and discussion or critique to
sum up and clarify the important
points which have been developed in
previous steps.
With the whole-hearted support of
the chief surgeon, Col. Joaquin Sanchez, MC, and the PCS commandant,
Lt. Col. Jose J. Jereza, Inf., the MFSS
is assured of accomplishing its mission—to prepare better soldiers in the
medical field service.


War brings out noble qualities -
heroism, self-sacrifice, love of country, but to no greater extent than
the constructive activities of peace.
Leading a charge against enemy fire
is no more heroic than leading an expedition to the North Pole. A dying
soldier is no more self-sacrificing
than the doctor who succumbs — less
dramatically, perhaps — to dangerous experiments undertaken in the
interest of humanity. — N.A. CRAWFORD.


October, 1949


Page 7


yyhahia
OF PERSONNEL DISCIPLINE
Three Officers Give Their Viewpoints on a Vital
Subject of This Month’s Khaki and Red Symposium


Major HOSPICIO B. TUAZON,
Southern Luzon Zone Operations Officer, PC:
In a police organization like the
Philippine Constabulary where discipline is the element most needed if it
is to serve the purpose for which it
was organized, the maintenance of
personnel discipline is quite a problem
and its magnitude rises in direct proportion to the increase of personnel
and vice versa. As discontented cows
give only sour milk so much inefficiency will be displayed by a unit
where discipline is below par if not
absent. To solve the discontent and
dissatisfaction of the members of the
corps:
1. Divorce the Constabulary from
political interference. This will eliminate the destructive intervention of
politics in matters affecting the internal government of the national police force.
2. An inviolable policy on promotion based upon seniority and merit
be promulgated. The far-reaching effects on morale of "patronized" promotions are astronomical and disastrous.
3. Frequent changes of assignment
must be avoided if any member is doing all right in his present station.
This, however, should not be prolonged as it will develop familiarity
and fraternization between civilians
and police authorities which lessens
the effectivity of the latter, so much
so that the particular officer or enlisted man becomes partial in the performance of his duties for having too
many “compadres" around him. The
lethal virus of this relationship will
vitiate the moral fiber and finesse of
police agents.


Major CONRADO BANAL, Inf
(PC), Headquarters, Southern Mindanao Zone:
Military discipline is defined as the
state of order and obedience among
military personnel resulting from
training. By this definition it is very
evident that progressive training is
the best means to maintain personnel discipline.
True discipline is inspired and attained only by confidence and affection, never by fear. In order to obtain the best results in the training
of the men we must first gain their
confidence. We must know them, understand their character and spirit,
show interest in them, their work and
general welfare and, without undue
familiarity and loss of absolute authority over them, automatically become
their friend and leader.
Frequent drills of short duration
should be an integral part of the
training of the men, for drill is the
foundation of disciplinary training.
It instills in them the habit of smartness, precision, and obedience. It develops the essential qualities of loyalty, team work and esprit de corps.
Moral education in the form of
barrack or classroom lectures plays an
important part in progressive training. These lectures should have as objective the inculcation of moral principles, military courtesy and discipline, leadership, esprit de corps, history of the organization, hygiene and
sanitation, articles of war, etc. which
are essential to discipline. Obedience
is the product of understanding and
understanding is based on knowledge
or education. Therefore, to obtain active obedience, the men must be
trained mentally, physically and morally, for training means efficiency
and discipline in any language.


1st Lieut. M. T. FRAGANTE, assistant zone adjutant, Headquarters,
Northern Mindanao Zone, PC:
Discipline is mutual recognition of
authority necessary in civilian and
military life. That authority, to maintain discipline, must show the living
how fast and how much it is doing
for the dependents of the military
dead and disabled. For the offenders
it must give swift and just punishments — not frequently postponed
trials. The meritorious must have
their due: a kind word, a commendation, or a recommendation for advancement—no basketing, no filing
of such recommendations without
having them approved or disapproved
and informing those concerned. It
should provide opportunity for the
soldier to express freely his gripes
and what he thinks best can improve
his lot. Add to these proper messing
and provisions for recreation and relaxation, and you have a sound formula for maintaining personnel discipline.


   is YOUR
magazine ... help keep it
alive by soliciting the help of
businessmen in your community to advertise in the magazine .. it brings effective
advertising returns.


Page 8


KHAKI and RED


Pointers to Officers


Address delivered at the graduation exercises of the
third graduating class, officers course, Class '40 of
the Philippine Constabulary School at Camp Crame
on Octber 15, 1949.


By Maj. Gen. GUILLERMO B. FRANCISCO, PA, (Ret.)


GRADUATING OFFICERS:
You have come to the termination
of your special training for Constabulary service. You have been taught
and have thoroughly acquainted yourselves, I am sure, with the intricate
phases of the duties imposed upon
you as Constabulary officers. You
are expected to perform your duties
with vigor and enthusiasm, to the
best of your ability based on what
you have learned in this school. You
will soon go back to your stations
to renew your work equipped with
more improved knowledge of how
to execute the delicate mission entrusted to you as Constabulary officers. It may happen that your sta

tion is in some distant place which is
remote to social amenities, or in a
place where social activities will
take a great part of your time, or
still in some other place where you
will be kept busy in the field in continuous military operation against
lawless elements. There are also
instances which will require the use
of your good qualities in the center
of politics in provinces where utmost tact and diplomacy need to be
displayed. But wherever and whatever your assignment may happen
to be, the opportunity always arises
for you to display the best in you
in the service of the government and
the organization to which you be

long, specially if you yearn for excitement, honor, and an honorable
position in the eyes of your countrymen. Whatever errors or wrongdoings unworthy of a gentleman
anyone of you may commit will reflect adversely not on the individual
alone but on the Constabulary organization as a whole.
When you receive an order from
your superior don’t limit yourself
to obeying it literally, but execute
it with a spirit of accomplishment.
Follow the policy of your superior
and give your most loyal support to
further it. It may happen that orders may be against your personal
beliefs and ideas, but when it has
been decided to follow a determined
policy, you are duty bound to carry
it out and you should not, with your
conduct, embarrass the full achievement of such order. Officers may
have new ideas and may find things
in a rut because of the so-called
“customs of the service.” While you
may be following the established
regulations and wishes of your superiors you could, however, do a great
service by pointing out what things
you sincerely believe require a
change, thus asserting your individuality for your own advancement
and that of the service.
As a former officer of this beloved
and venerated organization, the
Constabulary, I have this privilege
of giving you a realistic view of the
functions of a peace officer whose
sworn duty is to maintain public
order and protect the life and property of the inhabitants of the country.
One of the primary functions of
the government as prescribed in our
Constitution is the maintenance of


General Francisco shown addressing the officer - graduates at the auditorium of the
PC Officers Clubhouse on October 15, 1949.


October, 1949


Page 9


HONORARY MEMBERSHIP FOR GEN. RAMOS
PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
331 Avenue G
Redondo Beach, California
August 16, 1949
To: Brigadier-General Alberto Ramos,
Chief of the Philippine Constabulary,
Quezon City, Republic of the Philippines.
Dear General:
It gives me great pleasure to inform you that our board of directors,
acting under the provisions of Section 4, Article III of our Constitution, have
elected you as an honorary member of this association. I am enclosing herewith your membership card.
You will be pleased to know that the book, “The Story of the Philippine
Constabulary” is now in the press and should be ready for distribution some
time in October. A complimentary copy will be sent to you at that time.
Cordially yours,
H. H. ELARTH
Secretary-Treasurer


a national police, and as you know
very well, police functions are for
the welfare of the inhabitants by
guaranteeing their peaceful and orderly life. In the performance of
your duties perforce it will bring
you in close contact with the people,
from the highest to the lowest, with
the rich and poor, with enlightened
and the ignorant alike, and the success of your work depends in a great
measure on how you will deal with
the different classes of people.
You will come in contact with
various local officials who should
be given all the respect due
their position. It may come sometimes that you will need to see
“Tenientes del Barrio" and you will
find that these humble oficials
small cogs of the government machinery — are a great help in your
work. With diplomacy and tact you
will be able to get from them valuable informations needed in the investigation of a case or of a crime
assigned to you for investigation.
When you find any local official not
doing things the way you wish them
done, don’t be deluded into thinking
that the reasons advanced by your
supposedly cultured mind are superior. Be sympathetic with the local
officials and show sincerity of purpose in helping them. That courageous character and honest dealings
make persons perfect gentlemen
should be the guiding beacons of the
officer in his relation with the local
officials. And by so doing matters
will take care of themselves, the officer will command the respect of
the people who will consider him as
a friend or as a leader. You should
uphold the majesty of the law. Exert
your maximum efforts to enforce
the law but bear in mind that you
are not to punish with bodily harm
anyone trespassing it. You should
not commit any kind of torture on
anyone for the purpose of extracting
confessions. You should analyze
carefully, when a crime has been
committed, before accusing a person
in court, whether the suspect really
had committed the crime and not to
make any arrest just because a
crime has been committed, for the
purpose of aiming at a high record
of arrest regardless of the weakness
of your evidence or the absence of
evidence at all. If you have that
idea in mind, it may result that you
may commit another crime. In accusing a person you should satisfy
your own conscience that he is really
the guilty person as proven by
evidence you have on hand. This is


insofar as the commission of grave
crimes is concerned. In the case of
misdemeanors ordinarily this is handled by the local police but as a
matter of good policy I may venture
to suggest that a police officer
vested with the power of discretion
should try to help out the violator
of law or ordinance if the circumstances may warrant and not to accuse him on mere technicalities of
law. To make myself more clear, I
might cite an example: An automobile traveling on the highway at
night without light is evidently
committing a violation of law. But
sometimes you may find that such
an automobile was forced to travel
under that condition either because
the electrical system of the automobile got out of order during the trip
or because the driver was forced to
make the trip in that condition for
some circumstances beyond his control. That being the case, the police officer should scrutinize fully
the merits of the case and explain to
the operator of the automobile that
the purpose of the law in providing
that automobiles traveling at night
should be provided with light has no
other object but for the protection
of the public as well as of the driver
and his passenger. If the circumstances so warrant, this is an opportunity for the police officer to
extend a helping hand to the
driver by allowing him and if possible helping him secure even oil lanterns so that he can continue his
trip to his destination with more
security. In my long years of service in the Constabulary, I found out
that helping attitude of police officers in the matter of minor viola

tions of law or ordinance had gained
the sympathy of the people. The
people should look to the peace officers as their helpers and protectors
in time of distress. Do not merely
be technical in the enforcement of
law. I am afraid that its strict adherence may give a contrary result
to the purpose for which police authority is applied.
In the present period when subversive elements seem to have increased as numerous cases of overt
acts against the government are being reported and there is a clamor
that the people have lost faith in
the government, the situation calls
for determined and concerted efforts on the part of the Constabulary. This organization constitutes the first line of defense in
preserving the stability of this government, as well as the safety of the
citizens in affording protection to
life and property. The Philippine
Constabulary, as the national police
force, is playing a very important
role in the life of the nation. Officers should be conscious of the
magnitude of their responsibility in
bringing about a state of political file
to the people in this country safe
and undisturbed, and the guarantee
of their inalienable rights under the
Constitution. Together with this
problem the government is confronted with the inroads of communism. It is a problem of major
proportions. It should be met
squarely and I believe it cannot be
brushed aside nor quelled by using
only strong-arm methods. The Constabulary as the national law enforcement agency should be the instrumentality to gauge the feeling


Page 10


KHAKI and RED


of the people, what their grievances are, their desires and reactions,
and afford them complete protection and assurance of security
There is no reason for communism
to thrive in our country because
this is an ideology that negates the
fundamental freedom of the individual in his personal efforts as well
as in his religious belief. The Constabulary should be prepared to serve
as an effective agency of propaganda of the government in combatting the menace of communism
and, for that purpose, the officers
should be well trained in convincing
the people thru enlightenment. It
should avoid as much as possible
rash and violent methods in that
work. It should not take for granted
that a person branded as a communist is a bad person. That per

son may possibly have grudges
against the government for injustices, imaginary or otherwise, and
that is the opportunity of the officer to enlighten him, correct injustices or help him in the redress he
may be seeking, if there is one, and
bring such man within the folds of
the government. There is the tendency of many of our Constabulary
officers to jump to the conclusion
that persons affiliated with communism should be dealt with harshly with bullets. If this people claim
that communism is a good thing, the
officers should be prepared to demonstrate that it is not so and that
the democratic form of government
that we are now enjoying is better
if not the best. I believe that some
persons who had gone communists
or joined the Huks had been en

ticed by mere propaganda and not
by principles. The Constabulary is
of great help to the government in
its fight against communism by
means of propaganda. The work
partakes of the nature of a religious
mission to convert people who got
astray from the straight and narrow path of righteousness. Constabulary officers stationed in all
nooks and corners of the country
in contact with the different levels
of society can serve as effective representatives of the government to
enlighten the people on what communism really stands for. In performing your duties in the community you should impose upon yourself a stern norm of conduct of
good behavior unassailable in your
honesty and courageous in everything that means good and healthy.
You should be absolute in the name
of a good cause. By showing such
example and that of your command
as model citizens, you will be helping your government in combatting
propaganda of the communist. There
had been talk of communism, socialism, Fascism and capitalism. I am
not going to attempt to make a dissertation on the question of communism but I may give you some
pointers about these different
isms”. In broad terms they are
economic systems intimately related
with the government systems.
The distinguishing characteristic
of communism is common ownership
by the government of all kinds of
property used in the production of
anything needed in the life of a nation and its people and the distribution and marketing thereof. This
government ownership may be accomplished through violent method,
by revolution, disturbances and social unrest as advocated by communists or through evolution as
advocated by socialists. On the
other hand Fascism is a system in
which private ownership is recognized but the government has a complete control of production, marketing and distribution of any product produced in the State. The
property owners cannot dispose of
their property without the consent
of the government. The distinguishing character of capitalism is for
free enterprise, private ownership
of property, of private determination of what to do with the products
and how much is to be produced
with only such government regulation as is necessary to protect the
general welfare.
(Continued on page 20)


ThE URADUATLO
Capt. Domingo S. Alvarez ........ 126th PC Co, Hermosa, Bataan, (CLZ)
Capt. Jose V. David .. .. . . ....... Ha. SLZ, Camp Diliman, Q0
Capt. Dionisio M. Garcia ......... Ha. Neg. Or. Prov. (WVZ)
Capt. Nunilon A. Protasio ...... 35th PC Co, San Jose, Antique, (WVZ)
Capt. Leoncio O. Pundavela ...... AIst PC Co, Tacloban, Leyte (EVZ)
Capt. Magin F. San Juan ........ 6th PC Co, Vigan, Ilocos Sur (NLZ)
Capt. Jose A. Valdez ........... 95th PC Co, Sta. Rosa, NE (CLZ)
1st Lt. Marcelo F. Alvarez ....... 102d PC Co, Bamban, Tarlac (CLZ)
1st Lt. Avelino J. Battad ........ Ha. Ilocos Sur Prov. (NLZ)
1st Lt. Teodorito F. Beltran ...... 19th PC Co, Camp Makabulos, Tarlac
(CLZ)
1st Lt. Pio M. Berenguel ........ 33rd PC Co, Pasig, Rizal (SLZ)
1st Lt. Ceferino C. Carrasco ...... 123rd PC Co. Jolo, Sulu (SMZ)
1st Lt. Quintin G. Hechanova .... 66th PC Co, Camp Andres, Sulu (SMZ)
1st Lt. Luis C. Herrera ......... Ha. WVZ. Iloilo City
1st Lt. Alfredo L. Lachica ...... 37th PC Co, Bogo, Cebu (EVZ)
1st Lt. Licerio T. Lagahit ....... TIst PC Co, Camp Andres, Sulu (SMZ)
1st Lt. Avelino L. Larroza ....... 118th PC Co, Dadiangas, Cotabato (SMZ)
1st Lt. Capal M. Macalangcom .... 1224 PC Co, Tugaya, Lanao (NMZ)
1st Lt. Lope M. Marigsa . . .. . .. . 10th PC Co, San Isidro, NE (CLZ)
1st Lt. Pacifico M. Ruiz ........ 88th PC Co. Anyatam, San Ildefonso,
Bulacan (CLZ)
1st Lt. Maximo D. Sabado ....... 118th PC Co, Dadiangas, Buayan,
Cotabato (SMZ)
1st Lt. Lope G. Villarin .. ....... AAth PC Co, Camp Leon Kilat, Tanjay,
Neg. Or. (WVZ)
2d Lt. Genaro L. Alforque ...... 85th PC Co, Tagbilaran, Bohol (EVZ)
2d Lt. Onofre M. Alzate ......... 31st PC Co, Tiaong, Quezon (SLZ)
2d Lt. Mangacop B. Bangcola .... Ha. Lanao Prov. (NMZ)
2d Lt. Marcos Ed. Betacura ...... 113th PC Co, Sexmoan, Pampanga (CLZ)
2d Lt. Carlos Jalandoni ......... 37th PC Co, Bogo, Cebu (EVZ)
2d Lt. Erdulfo G. Pagala ........ 18th PC Co, Lingayen, Pangasinan (CLZ)
2d Lt. Leonidas R. Maloles ...... Ha. SLZ, Camp Diliman, Q0
2d Lt. Amado B. Santos ......... 104th PC Co, Paete, Laguna (SLZ)
2d Lt. Corobong S. Tanog ....... 121st PC Co., Camp Keithley, Lanao
(NMZ)
2d Lt. Manolo P. Topacio ........ 109th PC Co, Kumintang, Batangas,
Batangas (SLZ)
2d Lt. Asgali S. Usman ......... 21st PC Co, Iba, Zambales (CLZ)
2d Lt. Juan B. Valdez ........... 120th PC Co, Davao City (SMZ)


October, 1949


Page 11


ROMBLON PC COMBATS CRIME


With Hammer and Tongs, a Brave Little
Outfit Went After Murderers and a Faker


mHE PC command of Romblon now
sports a feather in its cap with
the solution of three notorious cases
of crime this year.
After stirring a mess of trouble in
various provinces in more than a year
of elusive evasion from the authorities, Jose Aguilos, alias Jose Angeles, who posed as an intelligence officer of the Philippine Naval Patrol
as a front in the smuggling of aliens,
was trapped by Capt. Ananias D.
Diaz, Romblon provincial commander,
and his men.
On April 24, 1949, the Romblon PC
first caught up with Aguilos when he
appeared in Badajoz. The ChineseFilipino mestizo answered to the description of a previous alarm received
by provincial headquarters to look
for the wanted man. The man calmly introduced himself to a sergeant of
the 83rd PC Company on patrol at
the Badajoz municipal building, as Lt.
Jose Aguilos, intelligence officer,
Philippine Naval Patrol. The “intelligence officer” went scot-free.
He then proceeded to Odiongan
where Capt. Diaz and his men finally
apprehended the impostor. Taken in
for rigid questioning, Aguilos broke
down and confessed to participation
in the alien-smuggling racket. Maybe
the persons victimized by Aguilos
would want to give him a lot of rope,
but the Romblon PC gave him more
for his collective and lucrative occupation.
Three criminal cases were filed
against Aguilos in the court of first
instance of Romblon, namely, usurpation of official functions, illegal possession of firearms, and using a fictitious name. In contrast to his pre

vious smug and self-assured disposition, Aguilos now is a picture of remorse and faces a life of woe and misery behind prison bars.
The Romblon PC pulled an ace once
more when, mustering its full resources on a round-the-clock mission,
it ferreted out the perpetrators of the
murder of a clothes vendor in Looc.
There were no witnesses at the commission of the crime, no corpse found,
and even tell-tale evidence was not
available. Using their best sleuthing
ability and with the cooperation of
the people, the Constabulary tracked
down the murderers in an isolated
place. The dismembered corpse of the
victim was exhumed. Smooth coordination, coupled by resolute determination to clinch the case, brought the


perpetrators of the murder before the
bar of justice.
A more complicated criminal case
was tossed into the lap of the Romblon PC early this year. One night
in March 1949, the people of Badajoz
were thrown into a panic when a policeman mowed down a bureau of public works employee with his Thompson. Because of the ticklish situation,
the provincial governor had to place
the police control of the town under
the Constabulary. Buckling down to
work, the PC studied the different
angles of the case and subsequently
repudiated the original homicide theory. After establishing a chain of circumstantial evidence, they came to
one inescapable conclusion — murder.
The case is pending decision in the


Capt. Ananias D. Diaz, Romblon provincial commander, center, is shown with members of his staff. Flanking him to the left is Ist Lt. Damaso C. Quioco, adjutant,
supply and FO, and to the right, 1st Lt. Jose C. Tanedo, I and I officer. Standing,
l. to r,: S/Sgt. Aurelio Fabella, chief clerk; Col. Simplicio Sano, driver; Pfc. Salvador Tuminez, clerk-typist; T/Sgt. Rodrigo Mindo, finance clerk; Cpl. Luis Abello,
I and I clerk; Pfe. Bienvenido Morron, msg center clerk; and Pfe. Jose Menes,
office orderly.


Page 12


KHAKI and RED


local court of first instance. Whatever be the outcome of the case, the
Romblon PC does not allow itself to
be licked, politics and other considerations notwithstanding.


Report on a Fishing Community


Besides conducting purely criminal
investigations, the PC of Romblon is
doing its part in checkmating subverBy Capt. FELIXBERTO A. LIGUTUM
sive and dissident activities. The officers and men continue to discharge
their official functions and meet


their peace and order problems with
practical realism. That is PC efficiency and competence in Romblon.


Col. Garcia Inspecis
Cagayan PC Command
Col. Ceferino Garcia, zone commander, Northern Luzon Zone, made a
surprise inspection of the Cagayan
PC Command on August 23-25, 1949.
The advance party composed of the
members of his staff arrived in Tuguegarao at 5 p.m. on August 23. The
following day the zone commander
together with Col. Dionicio arrived in
camp. Col. Garcia inspected all records of the command and the different offices at PC headquarters.
Dinner was served for the visiting
officers at the Lavides Hotel and an
impromptu dance was given in their
honor at the Paredes Square Garden
in Tuguegarao.


Fourteen persons were caught fishing with dynamite by the 125th PC
Company, stationed at Malangas,
Zamboanga during the period covering from July to August of this year.
In spite of lack of equipment and facilities and considering the geographical location and circumstances of this
area, a PC plainclothes patrol effected the arrest.
Fish dynamiters are prevalent in
places where the means of transportation either by sea or by land are
poor. The operational area covered
by this command, that is encompassing from Punta Flecha, Margosatubig to Tungawan, Kabasalan, Zamboanga has no roads both in the interior and along the coasts. The only
available medium of transportation is
small launches plying casually between inhabited places. Such trips
depend on the availability of passengers.
The fishing industry in this area
is highly developed not only by Filipino businessmen but also by the Chinese who control the greater part of


the industry. The income of the two
municipalities under this command,
Margosatubig and Kabasalan, especially the latter, derives about one
third of its revenues from the fishing industry. Almost all the people
along the coasts are licensed fishermen. There are, however, those who
flaunt the law by fishing with dynamite. Because it is an easy method
of hauling bountiful catch and get a
handsome income, these dynamiters
risk their lives and also are liable to
arrest.
The ocean beds and bottoms from
Punta Flecha to Kabasalan, Zamboanga are fertile grounds for fishing.
Fish are abundant and supply is continuous the year around. The Igat
Bay located in front of the town of
Margosatubig is a natural fish coral.
At night the bay is like a city full of
glittering lights shed from the fishermen’s lamps. In the morning, the
fishermen converge on Margosatubig
proper to sell and dispose of their
catch.
This distant and isolated spot in
Mindanao is a little paradise. The people are peaceful and cooperative with
the civil and Constabulary authorities. Food is abundant and a constant
supply of fresh fish is available every
day at minimum prices. Although the
majority of the inhabitants are fishermen, the people have time to cultivate their farms to supplement their
income for a decent livelihood.
In the interest of the general welfare, the prolific fishing beds and
bottoms should be saved from fish depletion caused by irresponsible fishermen. Unless the law-enforcing agencies entrusted with the enforcement
of the fisheries law perform their duties accordingly, the fishing industry
here is bound to ruin.


Fourteen fishermen apprehended while fishing with dynamite in the waters of Kabasalan and Margosatubig. Zamboanga are shown seated in the first and second
rows. In the back row are Capt. Ligutum, writer of the accompanying article; the
chief of police of Margosatubig; Sgt. Jorge Torres; Cpl. Elino Nillas; and Pfc.
Nicomedes Sugarol, who effected the arrest.


There is an urgent necessity for
PC units stationed along the coast to
be provided with fast motor craft to
make the campaign against illegal
fishing more effective.


October, 1949


Page 13


I Was a
PIO
Jap Atrocitu Vietim
This is a True Story of 37 Days in the Hell That Was
Intramuros During the Liberation, as Narrated by a
Young Woman Who Herself Lived Through the Nightmare


By MARIA BLANCA"


MFHEY talk of giving the Japs a
chance to rise again. General
MacArthur has shown to be quite generous in his administration of occupied Japan a scarce four years after
the "surrender". They talk of the revival of Japanese missions to other
countries and the resumption of
neighborly relations with Japan. Maybe America has reasons of her own
to be forgiving. But here in the Philippines thousands of people who saw
what the Japs have done and who suffered from their beastly brutalities
during the three dark years of the
enemy occupation, will not, cannot so
soon forget—and forgive.
I speak for the legions of victims
of the yellow-bellied beasts in that era
of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, so-called.
At the outset, I wish to say that I
am a good Christian and have always
believed in the noble virtue of human
forgiveness. I come from a respectable Spanish family which is steeped
in the teachings of the Catholic faith.
I know that the act of forgiveness is
a divine virtue. But precisely because
I am human, the incredible acts of
bestiality I have witnessed and suffered in the hands of a people who
pass as human beings have made me
modify my ideas of Christian forgiveness. What happened in the premises
of a holy place, the San Agustin
church, in Intramuros during the
first two months of 1945 made me
drastically revise my ideas of the human personality.
* For obvious reasons, the author of
this article uses a fictitious pen name.
Details of the narration are authentic
and are preserved in official archives.


My grandparents were Spaniards
of moderate means who migrated to
the Philippines from southern Spain
at the turn of the century. They found
the Philippines a congenial place to
live in and decided to settle here permanently. My parents likewise came
to like this country and they put up
their residence in an old but sturdy
apartment in Intramuros where I was
born 24 years ago.
The Japanese occupation caught us
in the same place in the Walled City
and despite the rigors and hardships
we encountered during those difficult
days, we decided to stay in Manila
and make the best of everything. By
sheer act of Providence, my family
was never seriously bothered by the
Japs during the three years after
Pearl Harbor—until the middle part
of January 1945 when a Jap patrol
came to our house and partly in sign
language and partly in their monkey
gibberish, made us understand that
we should vacate the house the next
morning.
We explained to the Japs we had no
place to move to right away. They,
however, located a house nearer the
San Agustin church and ordered us
to transfer there. The new place was
too small for the nine members of
our family and our furniture. But we
made the best of the situation. Some
members of my family stayed in the
church and we stored most of our furniture in a corridor next to the church
patio.
At the time, the frantic Jap movements in the Walled City showed
something was brewing. All civilians
inside Intramuros were by then for

bidden to leave the area and Jap sentries with drawn bayonets were posted at the exits of Intramuros day
and night. My brothers told me more
machinegun emplacements were put
up in strategic points throughout the
Walled City, especially atop Letran
College.
On February 6, we decided to move
the entire family to San Agustin
Church so that we could be together
in a bunch in the event something
critical would come up. The evening
of that day started what proved to be
a series of nightmarish incidents
which I shall never forget to my dying day. Early that evening, several
Japs, whom I believed to be marines,
entered the church and with the aid
of lighted candles moved around the
church premises. With the soldiers
was a Filipino civilian wearing a
shirt in red and brown print and an
arm-band on which was written Japanese characters. He apparently was
helping the soldiers look for girls.
At the first indication of what the
Japs were trying to do, my folks tried
their frantic best to hide me in a nook
of the crowded church but I was eventually located later that evening. A
short stout Jap with a saber dangling
from his waist came upon me while I
was cringing behind my mother next
to a wooden pillar. My folks were in
helpless dismay. Mother stood up-between me and the Jap and supplicated
to him in Spanish and Tagalog and
broken English to have pity on us.
The brusque Jap, however, brushed
her aside with a carnal leer, saying in
pidgin English that the old woman
was not the one he wanted. He point

Page 14


KHAKI and RED


ed his pistol at my back and directed
to me to proceed upstairs. Several
other uniformed Japs, some with sabers and pistols and others with rifles, moved around apparently on the
same lustful quest.
About five other girls among the
refugees inside the church were similarly taken away that night and
brought upstairs to the rooms of the
priests, each girl dragged by a grinning, driveling Jap. The soldiers perfunctorily ordered the priests out of
the rooms before we girls were pulled
inside, one to each room with a Jap
beast.
The bare thought of the events that
night at San Agustin makes me sick
even now. Oh, the utter horror and
agony of those moments! When I returned to my folks inside the church,
I wanted to hit my head against the
concrete wall and end it all. My mother tearfully counselled me to have the
strength and the will to bear my sufferings.
During the succeeding nights we
learned from the other people inside
the church that the Japs repeated the
visits and picked up several girls from
the hundreds of poor devils impri

soned within that hallowed place. At
least seven other girls, four of whom
I knew quite well, were taken upstairs
by the Japs the next two nights. My
mother and I moved to the other side
of the patio. As soon as darkness set
in, I hid underneath a pile of pillows
and mosquito nets wrapped over two
clothes-chests, thus eluding the Japs
from then on.
On the morning of February 8, the
Japs ordered all civilian males among
the refugees to step outside. The
same Filipino with a white arm-band
helped the Japs line up the men 18
years of age and over outside in the
churchyard. An old man, a German,
was the only male adult left behind
and was not bothered at all. I understood the men were marched to Fort
Santiago where, after three days of
torture and rigid questioning, they
were released and returned to the
church. My two brothers, however,
were taken to Fort Santiago and did
not return anymore. We did not know
how many more of the men were
brought to the dungeons and never
seen again.
I clearly remember that it was on
the same night that big fires started


in Intramuros. The skies all around
glowed red and bright. The Japs apparently became more depredatory
and fierce. They ransacked the belongings of the refugees and picked
up anything they took a fancy to, especially watches. A gold wrist watch
was roughly taken away from a blind
elderly Spanish mestiza. At first the
Jap said he wanted to barter the
watch with a chicken. The blind woman calmly refused, saying the timepiece remained her only valuable possession after she lost everything. The
Jap pulled the watch from her wrist,
anyway, and kept the chicken to himself.
Another Jap soldier approached my
sister-in-law and asked her for drinking water, saying he was thirsty. My
sister-in-law gave her a glassful of
water from a small earthen jar we
brought to our place of refuge from
our home. Without thanking her, the
Jap drank from the glass and strode
away. A short time later, he came
back, pulled my sister-in-law and
brought her upstairs to one of the
priests’ rooms.
More girls were taken up the following nights.
I don’t know to this day how I was
able to escape from further molestations by the Japs. Several adults of
our refugee group made representations with the Filipino wearing the
Jap arm-band against the beastly acts
of the Japs but he said he could not
do anything.
The heavy shelling of Intramuros
began on February 22. Shrapnel flew
inside the church and killed some refugees and wounded others. The Japs
did not provide medical treatment for
the wounded. Two Filipino physicians among the refugees, one of them
killed later by a piece of shrapnel,
kept themselves busy attending to the
wounded with the scanty first-aid
equipment they carried from their
own supplies.
Long before the shelling and shortly after we moved into the church
premises, many refugees had died
from lack of food. Even the papaya
trees in the churchyard were torn
down by the starving refugees for
their leaves which they cooked in an
attempt to fill their empty stomachs.
Small children would go around the
refugee groups and gape with open
mouths at the people partaking of
their scanty meals rationed out in
driblets from day to day by each family who had stocked up in anticipation
of their captivity inside the church.


“The Rape of Manila” is a canvas in oil portraying a Manila artist’s, conception of
the chaos in the city during the liberation. Survivors of Jap atrocities, like the
author of this article, are shown in the painting walking among the ruins led by
an American soldier of the liberating troops. Note the fatal victims of Jap barbarities lying lifeless in the foreground.


October, 1949


Page 15


On the morning of the 23rd, the
Japs put up machineguns at the windows of the church and at the door.
The Japs ordered us to gather our
things and place them outside in the
churchyard. The shelling from outside the Walled City had grown severe. At 3 o’clock that afternoon, a
Jap captain told the leader of our refugee group to instruct all the people
to get out of. the church since the
church would be bombed by the Americans within an hour. After the
bombing, the Jap said, we might return.
The leader of the group, a Filipino
doctor, went out first and headed a
long line of bedraggled refugees not
knowing what was to happen next.
The Filipino doctor was later shot
dead by a Jap sniper just when he
stepped beyond the gates of Intramuros. I saw his lifeless body lying on
Cabildo street when I was with the
wretched file of refugees marching
out of the Walled City. There were
other bodies of Filipinos strewn
around on the streets beyond the gate.
We passed by Letran College timorously and on to the open area outside
of the walls until we reached the Metropolitan Theatre at Plaza Lawton.
It looked like we had finally regained
freedom. But I still had some dread.
Although the streets and the plaza
appeared to be deserted, there were


Gen. Yamashita, center, was hanged by
the U. S. Army in the Philippines in
1946 when he was found guilty of command responsibility for the crimes committed by his men during the occupation. Photo shows his surrender to
American troops in Kiangan, Mt. Province in 1945.


apparently Jap snipers on the walls
behind us following our movements
on our way out of the accursed Intramuros area.
Finally, upon reaching Real street
beyond the Metropolitan Theater, we
saw several American soldiers deployed behind damaged buildings. The
American GI’s looked shabby and dirtsplotched in their olive drab combat
gear but they were all guardian angels heaven-sent, as far as our wretched, miserable group of refugees was
concerned. The GI’s told us to go
straight ahead. We proceeded to a
gasoline station at the foot of Ayala
bridge. Presently, a massive-looking,
dark-olive painted truck, so different
from the dung-colored trucks of the
Jap beasts, came up and stopped in
front of the gasoline station. A pleasant-looking American non-commissioned officer who looked as if he was
only 18, helped us into the truck
which rumbled through the city’s debris to Welfareville where we stayed
and recuperated..
Today, more than four years after
the horrible events in San Agustin
Church, the physical wounds we had
suffered might have healed but the
pain and the agony of those days and
nights with the yellow beasts, the
utter horror of it all will haunt us to
our dying day.
The Japs have not been sufficiently punished. America would feel different if she had suffered as much
as we did in the hands of the Jap
savages for three long years of oppression, torture, murder, looting, and
rape.


CARRYING OF FIREARMS
RESTRICTED DURING
ELECTION PERIOD
In a move to insure peace and order before, during and after the general elections on November 8 when
political feelings are expected to run
high, Philippine Constabulary headquarters announced that private persons who possess firearms are prohibited from carrying such firearms outside of their respective residences for
a period of 15 days before the elections up to 10 days after such elections. The prohibition is in line with
the provisions of Executive Order No.
101 issued by the late President Roxas on November 4, 1947.
Only police officers and those
charged with the duty of preserving
peace and order are excepted from the
prohibition. Violation of the restriction shall subject the offenders to arrest and immediate confiscation of
their firearms. Merchants and other
persons who in the course of their
business need to carry their firearms
should obtain a special permit for
each travel or trip they make from
the nearest Constabulary headquarters in order that they may carry
their firearms outside their residences.
All law-enforcement agencies of the
government have been directed to
wage an intensive campaign against
the carrying of firearms during the
prohibited days.


You Are Invited.
To write articles and vignettes for    on subjects of
general interest taking place in your ouffit or within your territory. Phofographs in clear black and white print that tell a story are also welcome.
Candid shots have story value. Manuscripts should be written in simple,
straightforward English and typewritten double-spaced. All materials for
publication should be mailed directly fo the Editor,   ,
GHO, PC, Camp Crame, Quezon City.


Earn Money in Your Spare Time
By soliciting advertisements and subscriptions for   .
Aftractive cash commissions await the enferprising serviceman. For further defails, communicate with Capt. Alfonso A. Calderon, PRO, GHO,
PC, Camp Crame, Quezon City.


Page 16


KHAKI and RED


The Need For Good Leadership
PC Chaplain Analyzes the Qualities of Leadership
with Stress on the Immutable Spiritual Values


OOD leadership is the greatest
need of the world today. Great
and saintly leaders are the call of the
hour. Yes, there is an urgent need
for leaders who know by heart and
practice the principles of justice and
charity; who will sacrifice their personal interest and well being for the
welfare of the people and the glory
of God; whose character and integrity are above reproach. We need
"leaders who understand that there is
no better conquest than victory over
oneself; leaders who seek first the
kingdom of God and His justice, and
put into practice the law that it is
only dying to the life of the body that
men live to the life of the spirit;
leaders who will readily burn away
the feeble bonds of feeble interest
which tie down our energies to the
world; leaders who (fearless like John
the Baptist) will arouse our enfeebled
nature out of the sleek dream of unheroic purpose; leaders who will gain
victories, not by stepping down from
the Cross and compromising with the
world, but who will suffer in order
to conquer the world."
This is the type of leaders that the
Filipino people wish to have in order
to make this country a safer place
to live in and a citadel of democracy
and freedom.
What is leadership? It is defined
as “the art of imposing one’s will
upon others in such a manner as to
command their obedience, confidence,
respect and wholehearted cooperation.
It is the capacity to direct control and
influence others in definite lines of
action or movement and still maintain high morale.” This definition of
leadership is applicable to any human
endeavor. Thus an army officer is a
leader who has the ability to hold the
confidence of his officers and men,
to generate enthusiasm for a definite


By Capt. ISIDORO D. DINO


action, and to guide wisely the efforts
of others in carrying out his policies.
A physician is a leader who commands
confidence in his work and scientific
researches in alleviating the ills and
infirmities of the human body. A professor or teacher is a leader who in
the field of education, arts and sciences, exercises a tremendous influence
over the men and women who look to
him for wisdom and truth. The priest,
the lawyer, the engineer, the businessman, the writer and the journalist are
leaders in their own line of calling.
People look up to them for guidance
and leadership.
Two Kinds of Leadership.—Leadership may be good or bad depending
upon the course of action pursued by
the leader and carried out by his followers. Good leadership guides subordinates to the attainment of a noble
purpose, the realization of patriotic
and good ideals. In short, the good
leader leads his men to do something
for the welfare of his family, country
and people. Whereas the bad leader
inspires and leads his men to do evil,
such as public disturbance, commission of crimes, and other acts contrary to law, to the standard norms of
human conduct, and to the commandments of God.
Bad Leadership: A Menace to the
People.—Bad leadership is a menace
and a peril to the country and people.
A leader who does not know that all
legitimate authority comes from God
will never have due respect for authority. Out of ambition and selfish
motives, he may lead his men to revolt or insurrection against the duly
constituted authority causing thereby
disturbance of peace and order in the
community, death and bloodshed to
many. A badly trained Catholic military leader, who does not know the


correct and true meaning of courage,
is liable to commit in time of war the
reckless imprudence of leading his
men to slaughter causing unnecessary
death. It is not improbable that he
might misinterpret the true meaning
of freedom. He does not know the
correct stand of the Church on education, marriage, science, social order
and other matters of paramount importance. He is liable to commit heresy, and poison the minds of his men.
If it is a crime to kill people by giving
them poisonous food, it is no less a
crime to mislead people by erroneous
teachings. His views on these subjects will be respected and accepted
by his followers or students because
of his influence over them. Another
point is his way of living. As a badly
trained Catholic, he lives not in accordance with the teachings of the
Church. As a consequence, his followers will in the long run fall into
erroneous ways of living because of
his bad example. There lies the evil
and danger of a badly trained Catholic leader.
Good Leadership: An Asset to the
Country.—It is plain enough that
good leadership requires on the part
of the leader sufficient training in
his particular field of endeavor, and
a good working knowledge of the
standard norms of human conduct in
a Catholic country like the Philippines. He must be well acquainted
with his rights, privileges, duties and
obligations as a citizen. It is for him
to know also the principal dogmas,
teachings and practices of the Church
to which he belongs, and observe them
strictly both in public and private life.
Then and only then can he become a
good leader, an asset to his country
and people, and a worthy member of
the Church.


October, 1949


Page 17


IONE
33
AI
MAI DO
the rest!
Customs Brokers
* Warehousemen
Trucking
Packing & Crating
*Freight Forwarding
* Ship Husbanding
"Cargo Superintendence
Armored Car Service
* Air Cargo Agents
e
MR. R. L. BARY
LUZON
BROKERAGE
COMPANY
Durham Bldg.. Port Area


PC WOMENG


Band with a Great Name


By Capt. ALFONSO A. CALDERON


N Sunday, October 30, the walls
of the Rizal Memorial Coliseum
echoed to the music played by a
band which prides itself with a
great name and a glorious past. Music-lovers from all over the country,
from Batanes to Sulu, flocked to the
Coliseum to hear the Philippine
Constabulary Band at a special benefit concert, its first really big
performance since before the war.
The concert was sponsored by the
PC Women’s Club under the energetic leadership of Mrs. Brigida Ramos, wife of the PC chief and the
club’s honorary president, and Mrs.
Concepcion Calderon-Martelino, the
club’s president. Proceeds from the
concert will go to the funds of the
club to be used for its welfare work
among PC families.
Organized 47 Years Ago
Avid music-lovers will remember
that it was William Howard Taft,
first American civil governor of the
Philippines and later President of
the United States, who first organized the Philippine Constabulary
Band. That was on October 15,
1902, exactly 47 years ago on the
15th of this month, and one year
after the organization of the national police organization the name
of which it bears up to this day
But while it was Taft who conceived
of the idea of organizing a Filipino
band, the task of putting together
the great team was undertaken by
Lt. Col. Walter H. Loving. Loving’s
name became a synonym for great
music in the islands and is inseparably linked with the name of
the band he painstakingly organized
and brought under his baton to
world-wide fame.
Scarcely a year after its organization, the band played in a concert
for two visiting members of the St.
Louis Exposition Board. After hear

ing the band go through several
finely-played pieces, Dr. William P.
Wilson and Dr. Gustave Niederlein
asked Governor Taft to let the band
play at the Exposition the next year.
The governor consented and in 1904
the band, alongside the world’s best
bands at the time, reaped overwhelming praise from music masters. It received the second prize
in the Exposition’s international
band concert. Sergeant Pedro Navarro, soloist of the band, was
awarded a bronze medal for his
splendid performance. On the eve
of its departure for the homeland,
the band was offered a sum of
$14,000 for 14 more concerts to be
played in New York City with expenses free. It was a good offer
but the band had to sail home the
next day.
When Taft became United States
President in 1909, he gave the band
the rare honor of alternating with
the famous Marine Band in playing
at his inaugural ceremonies. Mrs.
Taft also requested the band to
play at the first public reception at
the White House. From there, the
band played its way into the great
American cities of New York, Chicago, San Francisco, Philadelphia,
Atlantic City, New Jersey, and lastly, at the Seattle Exposition.
In 1915 Col. Loving went on extended leave in the United States
and in his place was named the
youthful Sergeant Pedro Navarro.
Navarro piloted the band through
performances in Hongkong, Shanghai, Yokohama and Kobe on its third
trip abroad to the Panama Canal
Exposition in San Francisco, California. There it was ranked by the
crities of the day as among the
world’s best bands. John Philipp
Sousa, renowed composer, inspired
by the great music played by the
Philippine Constabulary Band at
(Continued on page 26)


Page 18


KHAKI and RED


BOR BEURRBT


Miss Vicky Quirino, daughter of the
President, headed the group of distinguished guests at the PC benefit concert at the Rizal Coliseum on October
30. She is shown second from the right,
front row, seated beside Mrs. Eugenio
Perez, wife of the Speaker, also a patron. Others in the front row are Mrs.
M. N. Castaneda, Mrs. Jonathan Anderson, wife of the chief of JUSMAG, Mrs.
Alberto Ramos, wife of the PC chief,
and Mrs.’ Sotero Baluyut, wife of the
secretary of the interior. Generals Ramos and Castaneda may be seen in the
second row. At left photo, ComposerConductor Federico Elizalde congratulates Capt. Jose M. Campana for the
latter’s able direction of the concert
which was held under the auspices of
the PC Women’s Club. At extreme left
is Alberto T. Tirona, baritone, who was
a guest soloist that night. Other guest
artists were Mrs. Nela Legaspi Rubio,
soprano, who sang native and classical
numbers, and Miss Angelita Blanco
whose colorful Spanish dances were
warmly applauded.


MIMIRUM KUNG
TRU-ADE ALDU-A
NGTANG Aku!


NLNAISUSA


CAM AMINITITRU-ADg)
URAy DACAMIJ.


NOY CARBONATED
SUPER SMOOTA
REAL FRUIT JUICE
VACUUPA SEALED
RO PRESERVATIVES
T& PASTEURIRED


October, 1949


Page 19


GENERAL RAMOS TADDRESSLS
PRISON WARDENS


Text of Speech Delivered by Brig. Gen. Alberto Ramos, Chief of
Constabulary, at the Convention of Provincial and City Wardens
on October 6, 1949.


WISH to express my thanks to
Director Balagtas for the opportunity to meet you this afternoon. I
consider it an honor and a pleasure
to be with you and to contribute in
whatever way I can to the success of
your convention.
By the nature of your office, you
and I have a community of interests
in the subject of this conference,
namely, the improvement of the prison system in the Philippines. The
functions of the Philippine Constabulary and the Bureau of Prisons under
which you serve, have the same ultimate objective—the preservation of
law and order and the suppression of
crime and brigandage. While we in
the national police organization strive
to eradicate lawlessness by going after and apprehending criminals and
lawbreakers, the task of keeping
these men secure behind bars for just
retribution and reformation falls
upon your shoulders. In other words,
while it is our mission to weed out the
undesirable elements from the midst
of our society, it is your task in turn
to keep them in custody until such
time as they have become fit to live
again with free men and as the
courts of justice may determine.
This being the case, it follows that
the success with which you fulfill
your responsibilities has great bearing on the success of our own mission.
It is of immeasurable importance to
us that you succeed, so much so that
the Revised Administrative Code has
expressly provided for the transfer
of the custody of a provincial jail to
the Constabulary if and when such
jails are not safely guarded. This
transfer, however, is resorted to only
in case there is reason to believe that
you have failed to perform your task


with sufficient efficiency. The same
code provides for the periodical inspection of provincial and municipal
jails by the Constabulary, to see that
such jails are properly administered.
Hence, these inspections should never
be construed as being made for the
purpose of finding faults but should
be taken in the spirit of mutual cooperation between the PC and the
provincial government.
In my thirty-four years of service
in the Constabulary, I have always
followed with keen interest the improvements in our jail system. And
when Director Balagtas wrote me a
few days ago to make some suggestions regarding the subject of this
Convention, I thought it was an opportunity for me to impart to you
some of my observations on provincial, municipal and city jails. I am
making these observations or suggestions, not with any ulterior motive to
discredit your efforts, for I know
that you have always worked hard to
achieve success, but in a spirit of cooperation with a view to contributing
to a more effective and efficient administration of our prison system.
Foremost among my observations
on our jail system is the fact that
there is apparent laxity in the performance by some wardens of their
duties of guarding prisoners brought
under their custody, so much so that
time and again we hear of jailbreaks
here and there. We cannot afford to
let this situation continue if there is
to be uninterrupted peace and order
in this country. Every jailbreak is an
added menace to the peace and wellbeing of society. More often than not,
it involves great expense to our
treasury and sometimes results in the
loss of lives of peace officers who have


to go out to recapture desperate escapees. Every criminal behind bars
let loose by reason of the negligence
of some prison guards is a setback to
our efforts to establish and maintain
peace and order.
The solution to this problem, I believe, lies in part in the selection of
prison guards. The administration
of jails is a trust which must be reposed on the shoulders of responsible
men, men of unimpeachable honesty
and integrity, men who labor not so
much for the meager remuneration
the government can offer as to help
with a spirit of service and sacrifice
in the stability of that government
and in the security of our people. Inefficiency in the custody of prisoners
can sometimes be traced to the fact
that some provincial guards do not
devote their whole efforts to the
proper performance of their duties.
Some of them have other work aside
from their prison duties. Others are
just plain misfits who are in the service for no other purpose than to receive their pay. Thus, they find it
difficult to render the utmost efficiency. Some of you may complain
that the government does not give you
enough compensation to make your
families live, but I need not remind
you that sacrifice invariably goes
with service. Unless we are willing
and ready to make that sacrifice of
personal benefit and convenience, we
have no business remaining in the
service of the government.
Another observation of mine is the
inadequacy of some of our jails.
There have been frequent cases of
jailbreaks arising out of defective
and poorly-constructed jailhouses.
This may be due largely to the wide

Page 20


KHAKI and RED


spread destruction of government
buildings in the last war. This defect,
however, is being remedied as fast as
rehabilitation efforts can progress
and we hope that when sufficient
funds become available for this purpose the Administration, in line with
its vigorous program of reconstruction throughout the country, will have
built better and more secure prison
houses. In the meantime, it is incumbent upon you who are custodians of
such jails to exert efforts to make
them as secure as possible.
Another problem which needs the
personal attention of the warden is
the question of feeding the prisoners.
Before the war, this was the common
problem in nearly all the provinces
and municipalities—-not enough subsistence allowance for the prisoners.
In some cases, however, the daily allowance per man was enough, but,
in such cases some wardens did not
take the trouble of seeing that the


prisoners were properly fed. They
either let one of their subordinates
take charge of the mess or looked for
caterers who naturally had to make
some gains thus reducing the actual
cost per man per meal. I need not
remind you that a dissatisfied stomach means a dissatisfied mind, be it
that of a criminal or of a law abiding
citizen. Hence, proper and sufficient
subsistence allowance and a warden
who takes care of his wards and is
conscious of his duty to the government and to his fellowmen especially
the unfortunate, can always improve
the situation. The first can be
achieved by making representations
with the proper authorities or by having the inmates put up a truck garden, a piggery or poultry to help the
mess. I have seen this done in several places before the war and I see
no reason why it can not be done
everywhere now. The second is a challenge to your sense of duty.


Lastly, it is my sincere hope that
when this convention is ended tomorrow, you will return to your respective provinces and municipalities with
a broader perspective of your mission
and, fortified by the instructions and
recommendations which your superiors and fellow-wardens have propounded in this conference, more determined to carry out your responsibilities with the utmost efficiency. It
is my earnest and sincere hope that
this convention shall have contributed
to the successful administration of
our jail system, not only for your benefit but also for ours in the Philippine Constabulary upon whose shoulders rests the greater burden of apprehending the lawbreakers that
would be lodged in your custody. It
is my hope that while my men sacrifice their lives in bringing criminals
to justice, we can count on you to
keep them where they should be, lest
our efforts be turned to naught.


PRIMER FOR PATROLS'
Concluding Installment
By Lt. Col. NICOLAS GABUTINA


Section IV
MISCELLANEOUS
INSTRUCTIONS
12. When encountering an unidentified person carrying a firearm, the
patrol will politely, but with necessary
precautions, request said person to
exhibit his license for purpose of verification.
Persons holding firearm licenses
are required by law to exhibit them
when called upon to do so by the
Provincial Governor, a Constabulary
officer, or a peace officer, under penalty of having the license revoked.
13. When a patrol learns that a
crime has been committed in the area
of the patrol route, the patrol leader
will immediately abandon his itinerary and proceed at once to the scene of
the crime, and, if possible, before
other persons have arrived, to take
the necessary steps leading to the apprehension of the perpetrators thereof, to secure all evidences, and to
Reproduction of this article in whole
or in part will not be allowed without the
express permission of the author.


bring the case to the court of justice.
Constabulary personnel arriving at
the scene of a crime, such as robbery
or murder, will make a searching investigation of all surrounding things
that may be of use in detecting or apprehending the perpetrator, but also
for the purpose of noting any circumstances that may be of use as
evidence against him when brought
to trial. In important cases minute
notes will be taken down in writing
on the spot to assist the memory in
further investigations. Photographs,
freehand sketches, or maps of surroundings may sometimes be useful.
14. When a fire occurs in the locality through which the patrol is passing, the members thereof must give
assistance to the local authorities
and/or inhabitants thereof in putting
the fire out. The patrol must particularly guard against looting and
later, cooperating with the local police, conduct an investigation to find
out the cause and extent of damage.
15. In order to observe nocturnal
conditions in any locality, the patrol


must sometimes arrange its schedule
so as to arrive at night when people
are already resting. Some bad elements may bo caught redhanded with
this surprise arrival, especially when
the patrol has just left the same locality and has traced back its route for
the above purpose.
16. When the patrol finds it necessary to cross a sea or a deep and wide
river and there is danger of the craft
capsizing, the members thereof will
be fastening them on some undetachable portions of the boat or banca.
17. Except when actually engaged
in the pursuit of dangerous criminals
or when an encounter with armed
bands is imminent, pieces will generally be carried not loaded. Magazines must be filled, however, at least
while on march. The patrol leader
will, however, exercise discretion in
giving orders when to carry the pieces loaded or unloaded.
18. The patrol should constantly
take the necessary precautions for
their own protection against surprise
attacks while on a march or at a halt.


October, 1949


Page 21


In front of his mother’s house in a Marikina barrio in Rizal, Ruben Tiburcio, with
his mother, his wife and children, and his younger brothers and sisters, receives
news that the U.S. Veterans Administration is taking all possible action against a
racketeering ring that deprived him and many other payees of their rightful benefits in USVA checks stolen from the mails. Tiburcio, a former member of Hunter’s
Guerrillas, lost his legs in the explosion of an enemy hand-grenade as he went to
the aid of a surviving member of a stricken tank crew in operations during the liberation of Manila early in 1945. His father and two older brothers were killed by
the Japanese who were looking for him in connection with his underground activities. Tiburcio’s P9,000 disability compensation check was among those appropriated
by a gang of racketeers who make a career of swindling beneficiaries of the U.S.
government.


When resting in a locality known for
its radical tendencies, security measures will be taken against treachery
or surprise attacks. Sentinels must
be posted at night if necessary. Eating at the same time with their firearms out of their reach in a place
where there are persons of doubtful
character, constitutes a danger and
should be avoided. If the situation is
actually tense, half of the patrol will
act as guards while the rest take their
meals.
Precautionary measures against
surprise attack sometimes have telepathic effect. The fact that each
member of the patrol is momentarily
expecting an attack and is prepared
for it, will sometimes dissuade the
enemy from carrying out his purpose.
While marching in hostile territory,
places that afford concealment and
cover to the enemy, and are favorable for ambush must not be approached by the whole patrol but
must be first reconnoitered by
scouts.
19. Members of a patrol should be
careful not to give out information
concerning its mission and route. Impertinent questions made by careless
persons on these points will be evasively answered.
20. In districts where the hunt of
armed bands and criminals requires
the sending out of several patrols at
a time, extreme care must be taken
to avoid the tragic possibility of a
patrol firing upon another friendly
patrol. At the same time a patrol
must be wary of groups of persons
bivouacked in certain isolated places.
Thorough investigation must be made
before any drastic action is taken
against them. These groups might
turn out to be peaceful citizens engaged in lawful pursuits and should
get assistance and protection from the
Constabulary. If the patrol is fully
informed of the conditions of the localities to be traversed and is properly briefed before its departure, tragic
incidents of this character will be
greatly minimized.
21. Members of the patrol should
refrain from promiscuously firing at
birds and other objects as such action
may lead to accidental shooting. Such
act may also reveal the patrol’s presence or location to the enemy, besides the fact that it constitutes useless waste of ammunition.
22. Except when in the actual pursuit of criminals and undertaking
other cases of urgent necessity, patrols will not go beyond the jurisdiction of their district or province


without obtaining permission from
proper authority. When jurisdiction
has been trespassed, the presence of
the patrol must be reported at once
to the provincial or station commander of the area trespassed.
23. Where a patrol is not actively
engaged in the pursuit of lawless elements, it should stay several hours
in each barrio of importance and a
longer period in towns. The members of a patrol should endeavor to
meet and talk to as many persons as
possible. To this end, the patrol may
congregate in parties and other celebrations which are popular to, and
frequently observed by, our rural population. Information which cannot
be secured by the conventional methods are sometimes inadvertently
given in such parties or in tuba
stores when the effects of liquor
tend to loosen one’s inhibitions.
24. A patrol may be asked to escort
a civilian official to certain places.
Such requests must be referred to the
station commander for appropriate
action. It is not in the scope of a
general patrol to perform such du

ties. This is definitely a mission for
a special patrol.
25. In the procurement of food supplies, cargadores, and guides, the
patrol should conduct its transactions
with tact and diplomacy so as to give
no cause for the inhabitants to accuse the Constabulary of arbitrary
acts or abuses. The concejal, barrio
lieutenant, or any other influential
man in the locality can greatly facilitate matters for the patrol in this
and many other cases.
26. Members of a patrol must be
careful not to make any adverse or
ridiculous comments on the peculiar
customs and habits of the locality visited or on the idiosyncracies of its
people. Observation, however, should
be made of all such eccentricities and
incorporated in the patrol leader’s
report.
a. Wholesale criticism of the people and of the inhabitants of a particular town or locality and similar
harsh and undignified expressions
that hurt or injure the feelings of the
people, are both useless and harmful,
and will be avoided . Members of the


Page 22


KHAKI and RED


Constabulary should learn the art of
receiving information and impressions without criticizing others or
making unnecessary statements that
merely annoy people and give motives
for friction.
27. Members of a patrol must not
hesitate to render aid and assistance
to persons encountered in distress,
such as victims of fire, inundation,
earthquake, motor vehicle accidents,
shipwreck or any other calamity. Aid
may consist in securing transportation for the victims, helping them
look for temporary shelter and other
analogous actions.
a. If the calamity involves great
suffering and is widespread in character, the patrol may remain a few
days in the affected areas to help
local police authorities maintain
order and protect the victims against
further molestations from the bad
elements. If the patrol leader knows
his way about during such occasions,
his sympathetic attitude towards the
sufferers will greatly add to the
esteem and respect the public has for
the constabulary organization.
28. Stray animals encountered on
the route will be brought to the
nearest municipal treasurer for further disposition or turned over to
the barrio lieutenant for delivery to
the municipal treasurer for appropriate disposition. It should be de

Brig. Gen. Alberto Ramos
Chief of Staff, Philippine Constabulary
Camp Crame, Quezon City


termined whether subject animals
were stolen or merely lost.
29. The patrol may sometimes be
placed in an obligation to conduct
prisoners back to camp or to deliver
them to a magistrate or court of
justice. When confronted with this
responsibility, the patrol must take
the necessary precaution to prevent
escape and what is most important,
to prevent the prisoner from taking
possession of the arms of the patrol
and using them against the members
thereof. Unnecessary loss of lives
has been caused by carelessness in
this respect and the record of our
organization has been many times
tainted with the escape of prisoners
while in transit and under the custody
of our personnel. Dangerous and
notorious criminals will be handcuffed (rope may be used in the absence of manacles) and will be
marched three paces from their
guards.
30. A patrol may receive information that contrabands or other prohibited articles are found in a vessel
at anchor in the waters of the patrolling district. Many officers have
been deputized by the Collector of
Customs to arrest, search or seize any
vessel carrying contrabands. Without
this previous authorization, no
search, seizure, or arrest will be
(Continued on page 34)


The Iwo
Conflicting Ideologies
By SASgt B. S. LIGGAYU


FOMMUNISM is based on the be lief that man is so weak and inadequate, that he is unable to govern
himself, and therefore requires the
rule of strong masters.
Democracy is based on the conviction that man has the moral and intellectual capacity, as well as the inalienable right, to govern himself with
reason and justice.
Communism subjects the individual
to arrest without lawful cause, punishment without trial, and forced labor as a chattel of the state. It decrees what information he shall receive, what art he shall produce, what
leaders he shall follow and what
thoughts he shall think.
Democracy maintains that government is established for the benefit of
the individual, and is charged with
the responsibility of projecting the
rights of the individual and his freedom in the exercise of those abilities
of his.
Communism maintains that social
wrongs can be corrected only by violence.
Democracy has proved that social
justice can be achieved through peaceful change.
Communism holds that the world is
so widely divided into opposing classes; that war is inevitable.
Democracy holds that free nations
can settle differences justly and maintain a lasting peace.
These differences between communism and democracy do not concern
the Western Hemisphere alone. People everywhere are coming to realize
that what is involved is material wellbeing, human dignity, and the right
to believe in the worship God.
I state these differences, not to
draw issues of belief as such, but because the actions resulting from the
Communist philosophy are a threat to
the efforts of free nations to bring
about world recovery and lasting
peace.


   is en excellent
advertising medium.. it is read
from Batanes fo Sulu.


Bonquets from Gen. Lovett
U. S. VETERANS ADMINISTRATION BLDG.
Escolta and David Sts.
Manila
October 10, 1949


My dear Gen. Ramos:
On the night of October 5, 1949, a U. S. Government-owned jeep being
used by one of the members of our investigative staff was stolen from a hotel
parking lot at Batangas, Batangas.
The matter was reported to Capt. Kalalo, Executive Officer, 23r4 Po
Company, who, together with members of his command, gave extraordinarily
prompt service in the recovery of this vehicle, and the apprehension of those
who stole it.
Our Chief Attorney, Mr. Warren F. Brumfield, has advised me that his
attorneys and investigators, travelling throughout the Philippines, have always been accorded the highest type of courtesy and cooperation by the elements of the Philippine Constabulary with which they come into contact, both
personally and officially. The promptness of Capt. Kalalo and his men, in
this instance, is one of the typical examples of this courtesy and cooperation.
Accordingly, Mr. Brumfield and I feel that this expression of our appreciation is certainly due you and your splendid organization.
Very sincerely yours,
R. B. LOVETT
Manager


October, 1949


Page 23


RN
4
AI
22
E
AR
Ph
80
t
2
K
F
a
DE

M

*
E
RAN
a
*
DE
to
BE

M
5
ua


BESS


S OSDE


6a


aE
S

9


* Co

)
2






C?


$19


8io


6?


SEES


jef Compefifion
imp Downes
 bringing the ConA new featu
the people in Leystabulary close
n of target compete is the prom
tition where
ilian firearm holdare given full use
ers of Ormoc
e of Camp Downes,
of the target n
a military reservation. The 114th PC
Company commanded by Capt. Conrado S. Sabelino assists in the promotion of this competition.
Lately, a group of civilian firearm
holders led by Felipe Delgado, local
agent of the
Arms Corporation, sponsore
target competition
th the Ormoc Cinect
ty Festival. I
siasts from Tacloban and nears competed for
the championsl
tols Cal. 45, 38
and rifle Cal.
ophies and pennants were of
prizes in the
competition.
As an afte
this tournaet pa
t Camp Downes
nent
me
rang
Sunday feature u
the
vision of the PC
compa
tati
ilians in
range befo
ring are gilectures o
d use of
firearms, sigh
ing, and
other instructie
nich will aid them
to be proficien
n the use of firems
It is expecte
at eventually this
arget practice will become a hobby
mong respons
sional elements of Ormoc
Cpl. RODOLFO
C. ROBLES, I
mpany.


Epitap)
er
A bird, a man
n,
y
No bird, dead
be done.
Worke
it.
Spend
irn it,
Banke.
it,
Womel
d it,
Forgers fake it,
Taxes take it,
Dying leave it,
Heirs re
ve it,
Thrift se
t,
Misers crave it,
Robbers seize it,
Rich increase it,
Gamblers lose it .
I could use it.
-RICHARD ARMOUR


A "THRILLER"....


in every sense of the word!


Products of
LA TONDENA, INC.
Tel. No. 3.26-10
613 - 652 Echague, Manila
Listen to Pugo and Togo in "Edong Mapangarap,” a La Tondena, Inc, prese
tation every Tuesday from 8:00 to 8:30 p.m. DZFM


Band with a ...
(Continued from page 18)
the Exposition, told a large audience
in one of the last concerts: “I recognize the Filipino band as the
best and well organized one during
the Exposition.” At the following
Panama Pacific International Exposition at the Golden Gate in San
Francisco the band again reaped
great honors. Sergeant Navarro,
whom Sousa called "my friend, the
little brown sergeant,” won acclaim
as director. The late President Manuel L. Quezon, then resident commissioner in the United States
travelled all the way from Washington to San Francisco to congratulate
Sergeant Navarro.
Between trips abroad and playing
at official functions, the band
thrilled local music lovers with regular evening concerts on the beautiful Luneta. On January 16, 1915,
Col. Loving formally handed over
the baton to Navarro, who had been
promoted to third lieutenant, as the
new conductor of the band. Navarro
left the band one year after, and
Col. Loving had to be called back
from his retirement to reorganize
the band in 1919. Loving held his
last concert with the band on November 11, 1923 on the Luneta when
he once again relinquished the baton, this time in favor of Lt. Alfonso
Fresnido who had just arrived from
music study in the United States.
When the Pacific war exploded in
December 1941, the band was broken
up. Col. Loving fell victim to Jap
butchery near the spot on the Luneta where he and his band used to
give evening concerts. Captain Fresnido, as most members of the band,
did not live to see the light of liberation.
The Band Today
The Philippine Constabulary Band
was not reorganized until 1946, when
the PC was then known as the Military Police Command. Under the
supervision of young but able Captain (then lieutenant) Jose M. Campana, the band was put together
again and has since grown from the
handful of musicians in 1946 to the
75-piece band it is today. It has
none of the pre-war veterans of the
band, for the few survivors of the
pre-war organization were taken
over by the band of the Armed
Forces of the Philippines. Captain
Campana practically had to start
anew in building up the band which


WVZ Chapter of PCWo
Formed in Iloilo
The West Visayan Zone chapter of
the PC Women’s Club was formally
organized on September 3 last, with
Mrs. Lucina Apil as president.
Other officers elected were: Mrs.
Simplicia M. Offemaria, vice-president; Mrs. Jeanette M. Palencia, recording secretary; Mrs. Lilia S. Lozada, corresponding secretary; Mrs.
Amparo Carillo, treasurer; Mrs. Trinidad Gongon, auditor; and Mrs. Pla
cida Merano, press relations officer.
Mrs. Gabina Abia was unanimously elected honorary president and adviser while Mrs. Ramon Angeles was
chosen honorary vice-president.
The new officers were inducted into office by Mrs. Abia in a simple
ceremony on Septemher 10 during the
acquaintance party at the residence
of Lt. Col, and Mrs. Teodorico Apil
in Iloilo City.
The members present were: Mesdames Luz Jovellanos, Corazon Rojas,
Rebecca Cabasaan, Dulcinea Omana,
Anita Gatpayat, Lilia Dureza, Valentina Elizalde, Apolonia Lacsi, Rebecca
Ledesma, Leonora Mabasa, Andrea
Diaz, Josefina Flores, ana Bessie
Tronco.
—O—
NEW HOME NURSING
CLASS ORGANIZED
A home nursing class has been organized for PC enlisted men’s wives
under the auspices of the Military
Welfare Service Representative Miss
R. P. Ortiz of Camp Crame, Quezon
City. This is to enhance family life
in the enlisted men’s barrio and at the
same time disseminate the services of
the Philippine National Red Cross in
cooperation with the chapter administrator of Quezon City Chapter.
Several more classes are expected to
follow. The nursing instructor fer
the Quezon City chapter is Miss Liwayway Manio.


The Hands thaf Rock
the Cradle
By MARIA E. VILLAROSA
Much has been said about the accomplishments of our men and what
they did for mankind both in peace
and wartime. Now in lighter mood,
let’s speak our minds about the hands
that rock the cradle—the little sacrificing hearts behind the scenes of
men’s successes and failures.
Marriage is by far the most exalted
of all ties and at the same time the
most unique of all vocations for any
woman to take. To be the wife of a
soldier a woman has a dual role to
play—that of a heroine and a martyr
both to her family and to her country
when the need arises.
Spartan mothers of ancient times
have shown that spark of enthusiasm
over the death of a beloved son, or
that of a husband, as only brave and
strong-willed mother-hearts could portray in times of crisis. How many
sons could our Filipino mothers
spare? Could we let our husbands"
attention center on the tasks of warfare by freeing them of some unnecessary fireside obligations and home
life worries and sending them on their
mission with a wish and a prayer for
their safe return? Such gestures help
bolster any soldier’s morale and really
could make conquerors of the world
out of weaklings. Such wives, too,
are the ones who could rock the cradle.
A soldier-wife’s heart is not really
reinforced with stone. She, too, has
a tender heart to feel the gnawing
bitterness as any human could feel.
The uncertainty of a mission to an
unknown destination often brings
tears to the eyes. What if some misfortune should befall her husband?
Yet, she has to console herself that
it could not happen to him, and so,
the heart is appeased.
When the inevitable happens, she
bows her head in resignation. Perhaps it is her greatest pride, after
all, and that of her children, to contribute a hero for the motherland:


Col. Loving made internationally
famous. Under his baton, the band
plays at numerous official functions,
besides attending to the music needs
of the Constabulary. In 1947, it had
the honor of playing at social affairs
of the ECAFE in Baguio City.


The new Philippine Constabulary
Band may not be as famed as the
old, but it certainly is following in
the latter’s glorious traditions. Captain Campana is determined to bring
the band up to its pre-war music
power and prestige.


Page 26


KHAKI and RED


PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY
GENERAL HEADQUARTERS
31 October 1949
My dear Mrs. Martelino:
I hasten to congratulate and
thank you and through you the
other officers and members of the
Philippine Constabulary Women's
Club for your tireless efforts in
sponsoring the band concert last
night.
We rejoice with you, our womenfolk to whom rightfully belong
the praises, the bouquets for a job
well done.
My congratulations for past
achievements and to many more in
the future.
Sincerely yours,
ALBERTO RAMOS
Brigadier General
Chief of Constabulary
Mrs. Leopoldo L. Martelino
President, PC Women's Club
Camp Crame, Quezon City
Letters . .. (Continued from page 6)
Sirs:
As per Circular 19 GHO PC dated
14 July 1949 that amends Circular 3
GHO PC s-49 regarding the appointment of specialists in each company, I think it is an injustice that
the company clerk of each regular
company has not been included in
the authorized position of the above
cited circular.
The only authorized positions in a
regular company are as follows:
cook, radio operator and medical
aidman. How about the company
clerk who has greater responsibility
than the three with lesser responsibility in the company? At times
when this unit (106th PC Co) has
been the victim of ambush, it is the
company clerk who prepares all pertinent papers to support the claims
of the deceased. In performing
such task, he works to hasten the
preparation of all papers. GHO PC
has apparently forgotten that the
company clerk performs overtime
work and also a technical job in
the unit.
The company clerk of regular and
special companies will, I am sure,
agree with me especially when their
unit is assigned in SLZ PC and CLZ
PC which are the target of Huk suiciders.
Can not GHQ PC place the company clerk in the category of specialists?
Respectfully,
CDI BIENVENIDO URBIZTONDO
Company Clerk, 106th PS Co.
October, 1949


Message of Congratulations from the President
I am pleased to congratulate the Philippine Censtabulary Women’s
Club for their initiative in sponsoring the benefit concert of the Philippine Constabulary Band on October 30.
I understand that this concert will be held partly to raise funds to
benefit the families of the enlisted men of the Philippine Constabulary
in terms of schools, recreation centers, and such other facilities that will
contribute to their enjoyment of the good things of life.
But aside from these material results, the holding of this concert will
help foster the interest in the development of music in the Philippines which
suffered a setback during the war years. Our country needs not only material rehabilitation but also spiritual regeneration.
May this concert be a great success.
ELPIDIO QUIRINO
President of the Philippines


Compliments of


RURI
AMAEARMOM
MAU.


Opera


tors of
(oL
AVENUE"
“STATE"
"RIALTO"


Page 27


Want to make your car younger
overnight?


(THESE AMAZING
TIRES WILL DO IT!)
Wour First Ride on the new Super1 Cushions will make your car seem
younger!
First, you’ll notice amazing new comfort. You’ll float along on 24 lbs. of air!
You’ll get an incredibly smoother ride —
on all kinds of roads! s
Super-Cushions smooth away vibrations and steering shocks. 
Super-Cushions have greater traction
for faster starting and stopping.
Super-Cushions mean less wear and
tear on your car—fewer repairs!
They fit your present wheels. Drive
in to your Goodyear dealer today!


Here’s what Super-Cushions will do
te modernize your car!


Soffer, smoother ride — fewer rattles!
Super-Cushions give you an unbelievably smoother ride on any road! This means far less driving
fatigue!


¡Safer stopping—and safer, easier car
handling! Super-Cushions grip the road better
because of lower pressure and larger tread contact area. This means easier, faster stopping!


MORE PEOPLE, THE WORLD OVER, RIDE ON GOODYEAR TIRES THAN ON ANY OTHER MAKE


THE GOODVEAR TIRE & RUBBER GO. OF THE PHILIPPINES, LTD.
CEBU
BACOLOD
MANILA


“Secret Witness" Plan
Helps Combat Crime
In U. S. Cities
DEVICE which is not new in
A principle has been initiated in
U. S. cities in the war against crime,
according to an Associated Press report early this month.
It is the secret witness plan. It
gives men or women who know something about a crime a chance to turn
in their information and collect a reward without revealing their names.
The idea has spread rapidly in the
last three months. It has been put to
work against killers in Chicago and
Los Angeles, against murderers and
ballot burglars in Kansas City,
against gunmen in Detroit, against
hooded mobsters in Birmingham, Ala.
The chief result, so far, has been
information. Hundreds of letters
have been received. Many of them
offered information that looked helpful.
The Chicago Sun-Times conceived
the secret witness plan as a community service. It was sparked by an
FBI report that Chicago had 326
murders in 1948, highest number for
any city in the U. S. The starting
switch was pulled last May 9.
The newspapers ran a series of reviews of unsolved murders. It followed up with a full page list of 476
persons who had been slain since
1938 and whose slayers never had
been brought to book.
The Sun-Times offered to pay $5,-
000 for information resulting in the
conviction of the guilty in each of
the first 20 cases solved. Deadline
for the rewards is July 5, 1950. (The
total was increased to $110,000 by
$5,000 rewards posted in the slaying
of two Gary, Ind., women.)
The plan hinged on the hunch that
somebody knew something and would
tell if secrecy was assured. Somebody saw the killer at or near the scene,
overheard a snatch of conversation,
found a clue, caught a glimpse of a
license plate. Those who knew were
directed to do this:
Type or print the facts on plain
paper. Sign with any number with
six digits in it, once in the lower left
corner and once in the lower right
corner. Tear off one of the corners
and hide it. Mail the letter to P.O.
Box 3444, Chicago.
The Sun-Times keeps the original
letters. Those deemed worthy of investigation are copied, and the copies
are turned over to the police.


Real Estate Department
URHGURIO ARANTIA, P.
Jose Araneta Building
343 Echague, Manila
Tels. 3-25.25 & 3.28-26


in SANTA MESA HEIGHTS on an easy


TEN-YEAR INSTALLMENT PLAN!


No catch to this . .. no play en words . . . for with as little as
fifty-six pesos a month, you can really own your homesite in
SANTA MESA HEIGHTS . . . your pleasantest, fastest, growing
community in or arcund Manila .. remember, too, that as
month passes month, the value of your investment becomes
greater . . . so in SANTA MESA HEIGHTS, A LITTLE CAN
REALLY BUY A LOT!


You, too, can get your own homesite


October, 1949


Page 29


Pointers to
(Continued from page 11)
The propaganda for communism
is very effective to the common
class particularly those who have
not been successful in creating
stable and healthy families in our
rural districts. The people in our
rural places subjected to exploitation by landlords and still living under conditions of Feudalism are an
easy morsel of the communist propaganda.  These people subjected to
iniquities by landlords in their
agrarian relation become more embittered if they hear or come to
know through newspapers or other
means of abuses and injustices allegedly committed by government
officials. Such knowledge adds
flame to their already incensed
mind. It is, therefore, a challenge
to a Constabulary officer stationed
in a town or barrio to exert his influence in the community in enlightening the people as to what the
government is doing. The same officer should be vigorous in his denunciation to his superior officers
of any abuse that might come to his
knowledge committed by anyone,


particularly officials of the government.
It is also worthwhile mentioning
to you the sad plight in which some
officers find themselves in their
personal finances. This is especially so among those who happen to
be assigned in big stations where
the elite are distinguished by the
automobile they use. Due to his
position, it is but natural for the
officer to associate with the high
society in town. His pride for his
uniform and desire to be in the level of his new associates create in
him an urge to possess his own car.
Although the government is now
furnishing motor transportation to
officers in the form of jeeps, this
may not appear to the officer sufficiently decorous to use in society
so he decides to acquire an automobile. For that matter he invites
an automobile agent for demonstration with a brand new automobile
or possible good second hand car.
And after all kinds of arguments
adduced by the agent of how easy
he can pay the car on installment
plan, a contract is signed by the officer for the payment of the car
in monthly installments with so


much amount as first down payment. The first installment appears
to be easy but the officer overlooked to figure that a car cannot
be operated on air and water only
and as months go by he finds himself sinking deeper in his obligations and contracting more debts far
beyond his means to meet. In such
a situation the officer falls to the
temptation where his integrity and
honesty in the performance of his
officials duties may be prostituted
by money considerations illegally
obtained. Or the officer may be
tempted to indulge in gambling
with the frame of mind to risk government funds for the purpose of
covering his financial embarrassments. Such practice, sooner or
later, would be found out by his
superior and he will suffer a setback in his efficiency which might
eventually result in his summary
dismissal from the service.
Another matter that I might
bring to your attention is the relation of the officer and the enlisted
man, the relation of the superior officer to his subordinates, and vice
versa. By regulation, a subordinate
is supposed to respect and be loyal
to his superior. That there should


So Muela For So Little?
₱4.00 May Wim ₱9250,000
R EMEMBER—
CHRISTMAS SWEEPSTAKES
(DECEMBER 18, 1949)
(Prizes Based On A Sales Quota of P3,000,000)


FIRST PRIZE............ P250,000
SECOND PRIZE 100,000
THIRD PRIZE  50,000
6 FOURTH PRIZES at ......................... 12,000 each
15,607.55
1 CHRISTMAS PRIZE.
And Thousands of Other Prizes.
Cost per booklet of 10 tickets .......... P31.45
Profit per booklet ..................... ₱ 8.55
Prizes to agents ....... 6% of


the prizes from the first down to the
eighth and Christmas prize if full quota
is covered.
SAVE A LIFE AND WIN A PRIZE
PHILIPPINE CHARITY SWEEPSTAKES


Tels:
Manila
General Manager .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-73-95
1893 Rizal Avenue
Assistant General Manager .............. 2-73-91
Secretary, Board of Directors . ........... 2-78-72


TUNE IN: Station DZPI at 4:45 to 5:00 P. M. Every Sunday For Philippine Charity Swcepstakes
Program. AND: Statien DZAB at 7:45 to 11:55 A. M. Everyday.
Prize Claimants Are Required to Present Their Residence Certificates in Collecting Their Prizes.


Page 30


KHAKI and RED


be loyalty of the subordinate to his
superior is essential in all military
organizations but such loyalty must
be mutual and should spring from
the bottom of the heart and not by
compulsion.
Why do we hear of mutiny by
enlisted men against officers; enlisted men shooting an officer; enlisted men throwing a hand grenade
at an officer? If we look deeply
into the human relation between officer and enlisted men it should be
of a deep seated cohesion and comradeship as both partake the same
danger attendant to military life.
The enlisted men must observe certain rules and regulations which
should be devised for the promotion
of the command and their welfare.
If an officer, due to his position,
takes advantage of his enlisted men,
such as misusing the ration allowances belonging to the enlisted men
for his personal benefit, maltreating enlisted men with bodily harm
and other acts which are against regulations, no wonder that incidents
of mutinies in different provinces
had occurred. I urge you officers to
look after the welfare of your own
enlisted men. See that they get


what rightfully belongs to them;
that they receive the allowances
and provisions given by the government; that they are properly
quartered, clothed and fed. Strive
so that the enlisted man looks upon
the officer as his big brother, his
legal and spiritual adviser in times
of need. That these feelings spring
from the bottom of his heart; that
his loyalty towards the officer
exists because the officer had also
been loyal and true to the welfare
of his enlisted man including mem
bers of his family. When enlisted
men learn of misbehavior of their officer towards the people in the community where they are stationed, it
develops in their mind a contempt
against their own officer. When you
hear of officers borrowing money
from the enlisted men or from civilians in the community where they
live and purposely or otherwise fail
to pay such obligation, that the officer takes advantage of his position
in procuring rice, foodstuffs, etc.,
thru dubious means, that the officer
hardly stays in his station but mostly with his family in his house or
leaves the command to go to Manila if the family happens to live in
Manila;—knowledge by a subordi

nate of such matter will sooner or
later affect the efficiency of the
command resulting in demoralization of the service.
The leader and those led must reciprocate in fostering a loyalty that
knows no swerving from the dictates of the stern voice of duty. Let,
therefore, the true leader be loyal
to the cause of truth and justice
and the mandates of duty. He
should not exact obedience and loyalty from his subordinates which he
cannot himself give to the best of
his ability. For the sake of truth
and justice the soldier must practice a kind of loyalty to his superior. And yet this loyalty must
spring from the inspiring leadership
that characterizes a good leader.
Loyalty up as well as loyalty down
insures cooperation and harmony.
Another warning that I would
like to give the officers: Don’t allow your own family affairs to interfere with the command function
of your office. Don’t allow anyone
in your family to dictate you when
you should go out on patrol; what
food you should giye to the enlisted
(Continued on page 32)


Pleasure-Bound
the Year 'Round


Powered with a modern high-performance Vertical
Twin engine... amazingly comfortable, safe and
easy to handle. Use of special alloy metals has
reduced weight to only 280 pounds.


THE WORLD’S FINEST
MOTORCYCLE


Philippine Distributors
MACONDRAY & CO., INC.


China Bank Bldg., Manila


Tel. 2-95-27


A brilliant new lightweight model combining performance, safety and ease of control. An all new, extremely
lightweight single cylinder engine on a "man-sized'
motorcycle. Fully deluxe... total weight—only 240
pounds,  


October, 1949


Page 31


The Importance of Radio
in the Constabulary


derstand how it works. With a good
basis of technical knowledge the Signal boys are always on the go. These
soldiers do their duty as part of the
Constabulary.


By Sgt. JUAN M. EDUARTE


NT WOULD indeed be a different
story if we have today the conditions prevailing in 1901 when the
Philippine Constabulary first came
into being. The rapid progress in
science and modern inventions has
made a great change of living conditions from the beginning of American sovereignty in this country to
that of the present time.
Radio was the miracle of yesterday; it is a commonplace of today.
The facilities of communication have
improved a thousandfold. Radio occupies a vital role in the part played
by the Signal Personnel of the Philippine Constabulary in the national
scheme.
If you ever come to General Headquarters, Philippine Constabulary at
Camp Crame, Quezon City, you will
find the office of the Chief Signal Officer in Room 119. Lt. Col, Juan
Arroyo will welcome you. He is a
young and very responsible officer
of the Signal Corps being the chief
of this branch of the service.
The importance of radio communication in the campaign against lawlessness and dissident elements cannot be overestimated. The necessity
of rapid contact with General Head

quarters to those in the area of operations is very evident. Without the
aid of quick communication, as that
which the use of radio provides, the
campaign against the forces that oppose the established government
would be handicapped.
It is interesting to note, that as a
result of the last World War, there
has been an influx of signal supplies
into the Islands. That is why we have
the facilities of the PC Signal Corps
today. We have to be up-to-date in
our equipments in order to prevent
delay and save the lives of our men
in the field of combat.
The Signal boys are contributing
their part in the maintenance of
peace and order wherever they are.
Radio has done its part in saving time
and effort in having the 'message to
Garcia’ sent through with the least
possible delay.
The radio-man has his own lingo.
Those who do not have the know-how
of radio chatter will think that it is
a lot of nonsense. In the long run,
it is just another way of sending messages only to the right persons.
Radio is a complicated instrument.
It is difficult to make the layman un

Without the use of radio the present campaign against the dissidents
might have meant a total failure. But
as it is, the Philippine Constabulary
has done its part—thanks to the usefulness of radio and other signal
equipments.


Pointers to..
(Continued from page 31)
men; and last of all not to give direct orders to the enlisted men. Such
a procedure is conducive to a state
of affairs very undesirable to any
military organization and it might
result in tragedy.
You must pardon me for being
frank in telling these to you, but
in relating to you my experience of
more than 40 years in the Constabulary service I am only influenced by a desire of imparting to
you warnings of different pitfalls
that you may encounter in your career and which I earnestly desire
you should endeavor to avoid.
Remember, therefore, that upon
the maintenance of law and order
depends everything that make for
a successful national existence. The
increase of population, the expansion of commerce, promotion of education and other healthy signs of
development—these form part of
the responsibility in the hands of
the Constabulary.


How Mild Can a Cigarette Be? Try a Camel and Seel


INIDA NE... LICIEEA, SRIGHTER TACRAGE


Page 32


KHAKI and RED


BEFORE YOU BUY
LOOK UNDER THE HOOD
OFA
DIESEL POWERED


Diesel Powered International Trucks and
buses incorporate all the latest engineering advancement in design. They are
built stronger from high quality materials
to insure long life.


AINTERNATIONAL)


W


International Diesels give maximum
power from every drop of fuel ... the
ideal unit for heavy hauls where power
and economy are vital. Before you
buy ... see the Diesel Powered Infernational ... your best buy.


INTERNATIONAL HARYESTER COMPANY
E
OF PHILIPPINES,
MCCORMICK International


154 Marques de Comillas, Manila
Magallanes Street, Cebu
Sasa, Davao — Lacson St., Bacolod


Tractors and Farm Equipment
International Trucks
International Refrigeration
Interna tion a l Industrial Power


TELLAAIE COMJIADULARI


eace to preserve in this country of freedom,
ower to seek the despoilers of law,
artial to none in dispensing of justice,
eerless integrity invests it with awe.
alled at all times across mountains and valleys,
ares without and where trouble is bred,
ourage instilled in the face of all dangers—
rowned be the men in the khaki and red!
Lient. OSCAR T. JUCO


(Continued from page 23)
Primer For...
made unless a search warrant has been issued by a competent court of justice.
In conducting a search of any vessel, precautions
must be taken against resistance on the part of the vessel’s crews and subsequent maltreatment of our soldiers.
31. Members of the patrol, and all Constabulary personnel for that matter will avoid engaging in altercations and heated arguments with outsiders concerning
public questions. These arguments, however persuasive
or logical, rarely convince anyone and may damage the
reputation of the Constabulary for neutrality and impartiality.


Republic of the Philippines
Department of Public Works and Communications
Bureau of Posts
Manila
SWORN STATEMENT
(Required by Act No. 2580)
The undersigned, ALFONSO A. CALDERON, managing editor
of   , published monthly in English at Camp
Crame, Quezon City, after having been duly sworn in accordance
with law, hereby submits the following statement of ownership,
management, circuation etc., which is required by Act No. 2580,
as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 201:
Name
Post-Office Address
Managing Editor: Alfonso A. CalCamp Crame, Quezon City
deron,
Owner: General Headquarters. Camp Crame, Quezon City
Philippine Constabulary
Publisher: General Headquarters, Camp Crame, Quezon City
Philippine Constabulary
Printer: National Printing Co.. Inc. 728 Lepanto, Manila
Office of Publication: GHO, PC
Camp Crame, Quezon City
If publication is owned by a corporation, stockholders, owning
NONE.
one per cent or more of the total amount of stocks:
Bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders owning one
NONE.
per cent or more of total amount of security.
In case of publication other than daily, total number of copies
printed and circulated of the last issue dated September, 1948
1. Sent to paid subscribers
.......... 5,450
2. Sent to others than paid subscribers .......... 1,550
Total ...................... 7,000
(SGD) ALFONSO A. CALDERON,
Managing Editor
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 1st day of October,
1949 at Camp Crame, Quezon City the affiant exhibiting his Residence Certificate No. A-61673 issued at the City of Manila on
January 12, 1949.
(SGD) FELICISIMO M. MANDAC
Notary Public
My Commission Expires 31 Dec. 1949
NOTE: This form is exempt from the payment of documentary
stamp tax.


* **
LUCKY UY ALWAYS TOPS
He Sold the Following
FIRST PRIZE ticket No. 557977
won P150,000.00 — Horse Time Bomb
SECOND PRlAL ticket No. T.0.00
won P75,000.00 — Horse Ipil
FOURTH PRIZE ficket No. 419503
won P12,000.00 — Horse Bright Moment
Appreximation Prizes at P4,000.00
each ticket Nos. 557976 — 557978

Approximation Prizes at 12,000.00
each ticket Nos. 718237 — 718239
Approximation Prizes at P500.00
each ticket Nos. 419502 — 419504
FIFTH PRIZES—at P5,000.00
772672 364152 611596 336301, 668797
586076 114739 226285 095475
SIXTH PRIZES—at P3,000.00
286550 767414 401764 052051 060125
249448 430521 514135 224689. 305390
109346 737282 040253 670936 545275


762790 187826
SEVENTH PRIZES—at ₱1,000.00


270053


082161


151185


633662


128878


193043


422936


430495


185809


301988


765887


299857


211544


114762


665862


550940


102177


224733


009554


116615


661089


688448


681676


140547


298808


173590


299912


672546


325872


154156


7P
SEIGHTH PRIAL


-at P500.00


114872


185546


052048


386378


497818


261591


102221


570184


377624


104589


106337


063958


622168


439982


186801


067113


294413


071474


134291


206322


426167


125310


439756


675078


446924


574686


604686


581281


140696


797844


798181


106351


307569


278352


236298


179372


190234


223226


645453


654650


131306


781231


422016


217294


650294


261858


545214


131018


554057


701286


224803


754716


119857


753379


575690


250627


164250


606104


137624


248457


409420


511325


402712


90 Centena Prizes also sold by Lucky Uy.
WE BUY WINNING TICKETS
All tickets beginning ...... 1459 won P200.00
All tickets ending ........ 977 won
40.00


All tickets ending ...
All tickets ending ...
Wanted Sub-Agents
P33.00 per booklet
50450 agent’s price
Note: The cost perbooklet
may change without
notice.


a
MANULL UY
The Star and Lucky Agent No. 1
The only agent who sold 24 FIRST PRIZES
In the History of the Philippine Charity Sweepstake
The only agent who


sold three (3) consecutive
FIRST PRIZES.
A WINNER NEVER QUITS A QUITTER NEVER WINS


... 38 won 20.00
4.00
....O won
All provincial orders
Add P0.28 for registered
mail
Address
13 P. O. Box, Manila
13 Plaza Sta. Cruz, Manila


NEAN AN a nauaau
Adi A
Pleasant news for you!
THE NEW DODGE
WItn UrRGiAIIG IIdIISMIISSTUll


Yes, for you the new Dodge is really
pleasant news. It is so much better than
ever ... in so many ways.
For example, you can drive all day without
touching the gearshift lever ... or using the
clutch! That is because of the sensational
new GYROMATIC* Transmission. It does
all the shifting for you . . . automatically.
Besides that, the GYROMATIC Transmission lets you seleci the time you want
to change to another gear. And it combines
with All-Fluid Drive to give you smoother
acceleration, too.


Here is additional pleasant news! The
beautiful streamlined styling of the new
Dodge does not sacrifice your comfort,
convenience or safety in any way.
You will also be pleased with the smooth
performance of the improved L-head
engine. And the new "sea-leg” shock
absorbers give you a softer, safer ride over
rough roads and around curves.
These are but a few reasons why the new
Dodge is pleasant news for you. Come in
and see it today!


extra comfort. Seats are
and
chair-height .
wider than ever. You
have plenty of comfort...
and plenty of room


NEW BEAUTY ... with
extra vision. Larger windshield, lower hood, lower
front fenders give you
better view of the road
ahead


* Extra equipment on Dodge “Coronet” models only
ON DISPLAY AT
UNITED MOTORS (P.I.), INC.
ECHAGUE-AYALA, MANILA, PHILIPPINES, TEL. 3-26-24


Here it is.. the new


ELTO
FDURWHEEL DRIVE
Meapons Cavrier
Model shown above
furnished with detachable can vas
body cover.


Here is Willys-Overland’s answer to the tough and
rugged demands of modern combat — a four-wheeldrive weapons carrier capable of doing the myriad
chores of the civilian 'jeep,’ yet able to carry a oneton payload of ammunition, supplies and sundry battle paraphernalia for the use of troops at the fighting
front.
Designed for both off and on the road use, this
versatile Willys weapons carrier can be driven either
with the 2-wheel drive for easy and light on-the-road
driving or with the 4-wheel drive for heavy and rugged off-the-road operations.
The new Willys 4-WD is the lightest vehicle of its
type in the market today. Hence, its ability to maneuver in tight-curves and corners, in steep and narrow grades where a heavier and more cumbersome
vehicle is sure to flounder. Engineered with typical
'jesp’ stamina and rugged pulling power, the new
Willys 4-WD can climb a 48% grade at its rated gross
vehicle weight of 5,300 lbs.!


LIBERTY MOTORS, INC.
WILLYS-OVERLAND FACTORY DISTRIBUTOR FOR THE PHILIPPINES


306-13th St., Port Area, Manila


Tel. 2-68-06




N
COVER
PAGE


The New Dodge Six—it is beautiful to see, thrilling to drive
and marvelous to ride in. "Graceful lines create the mode


that sets the Dodge Six apart as a distinguished motor car.
ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE
LEVY HERMANOS INC.


MAMIA


H
A
A.


S


R. G. Hawkins
Editor and Manager


Esteban Erispe
Advertising Manager


Lo
KHAl and I
OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE CONSTABULARY
AND POLICE
Published Monthly
Philippine Constabulary Headquarters.
Tels. 5-64-10—4-98-52
P. O..Box 618
Entered As Second Class Mail At Post Offico,
Manila on Nov. 6, 1926


SUBSCRIPTION RATES"
In the Philippines, Unitd
Sitates, and Possessions:
One Year ............P5.00
Six Months ............P3.0
Three Months ..........₱1.5
In All Other Countries in tle
Postal Union:
One Year..............P7.0)


E


Wol. XIII


MANILA, JULY, 1933


No.7


—113
GESESESESABESESESASESESESESESESESESESESIESESESESESESESESESESESESESASESPJAS
ASESENESESESESESESESESESESESP


E OF CONTENTS


THE FRONTISPI.
FO.


F GOVERNOR GENERAL FRANK MURPHY IN THE UNIEGION OF WHICH HE IS A MEMBER.


E
7



—1—
—
ESaseSeSaseSESaSeSESeSeSESeSeSESESASESESESESESESESESESLSESESPSESESESESESESESESESESESRSESESESESRSASESESESESESESESES


Greetings from Governor-Gen
Message from the Chief ....
The New Chief and His Staff
The Insular Police Observes Its .
Service, by Robt. G. Woods, e
P. C...........................
Administrative Staff ................... 13
Inspectors Division Etaff ..................... 14
Quartermasters Division Staff ............... 15
Intelligence Division Staff ................... 16
Medical Division Staff ...................... 18
The Evolution of the Philippine Constabulary
Academy, by Lieut.-Col. O. M. Johnson .... 21
Review of Activities of the District of
Northern Luzon ................. 29
Review of Activities of the District of Southern
Luzon, by Colonel Eustaquio Bactat ......... 31
Resume of Activities in the District of Visayas 33


A “Quiet and Peaceful” Year in the District
of Mindango and Culu .................... 35
Editorials:
38
Another Milestone ......................
The Constabulary Officers' Club........ 38
Constabulary Officers Club Holds Election, by
Major J. V. Agdamag ..................... 39
Veterans Fund Drive Swings Underway .... 41
The Fateful End of P. C. Officers Who Have
Been Malacanan Aides, by Major Lucas
Baviera, P. C., Retired ..................... 45
Constabulary Reminiscencies, by Colomel Francisco, Onate, P. C., Retired ................ 47
Grand Encampment Elects Officers for 1933 .. 49
VIII. Defensive Combat As Taught at the
U. S. Army School (Continued from June
issue) .................. 52
XVII. The New Penal Code (Cont ued lrom


June issue) ................ 56 
—--


66


FILIPINAS COMPANIA DE SEGUROS
"FILIPINAS BUILDING"
21 Plaza Moraga, Manila
FIRE ARMS
LIFE


WE INSURE


HOUSE
FURNITURE
SHIPMENTS
AUTOMOBILES


BONDS


TRUST
FIDELITY & SURETY


MORTGAGE LOANS


ROOMS FOR RENT


FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CALL AT
Central Office, Room No. 205
Filipinas Building


Telephones 2-17-63 &. 2-17-64


MANILA


Fost Office Box No. 745


July, 1933


PAGE 5


KHAKI and RED


The






Brigadier-General CLARENCE H. BOWERS
CHIEF OF CONSTABULARY


HEADQUARTERS STAFF
Front row, from left to right: Major Telesforo Martinez, Adjutant; Lt.-Col. Benito D. Valeriano, Inspector-General; Col. Charles E. Livingston, Acting Chief of Staff; Brig.-Gen. Clarence H. Bowers, Chief;
Lt.-Col. Basilio J. Valdes, Chief Surgeon; Lt.-Col Juan C. Quimbo, Superintendent, Intelligence Division;
Major Miguel Aguilar, Acting Quartermaster.
Back row, from left to right: Lt. Jose C. Villanueva, Medical Inspector: Capt, Rafael Ramos, Assistant Adjutant; Major Manuel G. Olympia, Assistant Chief Surgeon; Major Alejo Valdes, Inspector; Major
Luciano Feraren, Dental Surgeon; Lt. Vicente L. Torres, Disbursing Officer; Lt. Rosalio B. Figuroa, Cha
mist.


PAGE 6


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


AA



8


N


gt the Philitgn,


THE OLDEST BANRING INSTITUTION IN THE PHILIPPINES
Established 1851






.......... ₱10,000,000.00
Authorized Capital .......
Capital Fully Paid ................................. ₱ 6,750,000.00





BRANCHES:
Cebu, Iloilo and Zamboanga, P. I.
GENERAL BANKING OPERATIONS
Telegraphic Transfers, Commercial and Travellers’ Letters of Credit, Traveller’s Checks,
Drafts, Collections, and every description of exchange and banking business. Exceptional facilities
for handling transactions in the Far East.
All kinds of administration, fiduciary and trustee business. Safe Deposit Boxes for rent,
suitable for keeping jewelry, documents, valuables, etc.
SAVINGS ACCOUNTS
at 4% interest per annum
Current Accounts and Fixed Deposits allowed advantageous rates of interest to be ascertained on application.
HEAD-OFFICE: No. 10 Plaza Cervantes, Manila, P. I.
CABLE ADDRESS: “BANCO”—Post Office Box No. 777


CORRESPONDENTS:
In all parts of the World





Uith Compliments
of
calampa bugar Estate
Pampanga Sugar Mills








PAGE 8


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


February 1, 1933, is young in years and much water may pass under the bridge before age suggests
to him the advisability of relinquishing the control of the organization to his successor.
The Army officers who commanded the force
as chiefs and those who served as assistant chiefs
brought much to the Constabulary and gave it a
standing and prestige militarily that it could not
have attained otherwise. The influence, discipline
and esprit de corp left by these great soldiers, most
of whom served later as Majors-General over seas
and in the continental United States, will endure beyond the life of any man in the force today. Notwithstanding the foregoing, they, as all army officers, had been stung by the superiority complex
bee. There was lacking that comradeship which
usually exist to a superlative degree among all
military men, and there was evidence of a social
chasm so deep and so wide between the Army officer and the Constabulary officer that no constable dared attempt to cross it.
Among the chiefs from the list of Constabulary
officers who attained the highest rank the Corps
has to offer, General Rafael Crame was first to receive recognition. He looked as though he was made
for the job, but he too was of a retiring nature,
not inclined to appeal for popularity and made no
attempt to be sociable. Comradeship was foreign
to him. He was a good man and a good soldier,
but during his regime the social chasms was still
deep and wide. Then to the "Old Tiger' Chief Charles E. Nathorst, a foreigner by birth, a naturalized
good citizen of the United States, was left the task
of bridging the chasm. Although the oldest in


Brigadier-General RAFAEL CRAME
1917-1926


Brigadier-General HERMAN HALL
1914-1917


years of fany of the eight chiefs, none of them
came anywhere near his record for service. He
visited the different districts, provinces, companies
and stations throughout the Archipelago including
the far flung Siasi and South Ubian stations in
the Sulu Sea near Borneo, using airplanes, boats,
and over-land facilities. He got close to the
officers and men, many whom had at no time seen
a chief of the organization in their vicinity. He
ate, and drank, made comnades and friends of them.
His regime was the greatest of all. It can be stated
without fear of contradiction that upon his retirement he was the most popular chief of any who
had preceded him.
General Lucien R. Sweet, officer, gentleman,
soldier and disciplinarian did not have an opportunity after his appointment as chief to show his
wares. Ill health caused his retirement a few
months after his appointment to the position in the
United States on accrued leave and later his death.
Had he lived to command the organization, which
he loved so well, we are positive that his regime
would have been just as efficient and honorable as
his 31 years of service had been.

The present Chief—General C. H. Bowers,
came to the position after a preparatory course of
28 years. He had served as junior company officer, detachment commlander, company commander
Provincial and District Commander, Superintend

July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


Page 9


Brigadier-General CHARLES E. NATHORST
1927-1932
ent of the Constabulary Academy, Quartermaster,
Intelligence Officer and Acting Chief. If the signs
of the Zodiac hold true, he will equal the "Old Tiger’s” record for service and comradeship.
Looking back over its thirty-second year, the
bureau finds that it has lost much during the past
twelve months. To begin with, General Nathorst,
the retiring Chief, properly accounted for his stewardship and relinquished command of the bureau,
April 14, 1932. He found that "Lady Luck” had favored him. He turned over to the present chief the
balance of P5,700,000 appropriated to run the bureau for the year and which had not been spent
-up to that time. From that balance forced savings
of P500,00 were required of his successor. For
the year 1933, the Legislature reduced the amount
appropriated for 1932 by P1,000,000 and placed
upon the chief the responsibility of an additional
forced savings of P500,000. This economical measure, so far, has necessitated the reduction of nearly 25%% of the force.
With a reduced appropriation and a reduced
foree, the malcontents in the Christian provinces
began a rally on the ragged edges of the law and
the Moros of Lanao and Sulu became ugly and even
transgressed the law, although they knew that the
way of a transgressor is hard. It was necessary
to further reduce the force by disbanding nine companies in the peaceful provinces that vacanices in
companies in Lanao and Sulu might be filled. To
opearate at all within the limited amount of funds


alloted, allowances were eliminated, salaries reduced, traveling expenses cut to the minimum and
per diems split in half. Just about this time news
of the probable success of the Hawes-Cutting Independence Bill was broadcast throughout the Archipelago. The Moros became jublant and expressed
a desire for an early indpendence that they might
kill escape the electric chair and horrors of prison
lif. The communist organization composed of peasants federated laborers and tenants were not so
jubilant at the prospects of an early independenc
bue were just discontented with overlords—such as
landlords and land owners generally and desired
an early change of conditions. If that change meant
independence, then they wanted it, and at once.
Through the suggestion of the Constabulary
several meetings were held by local officials in the
different barrios to hear complaints and ascertain
the actual conditions and needs of the people and
to enlighten them on the evils and ultimate dangers
of Communism. The results obtained by these
meetings were beyond all expectations and many
members of the National Confederation of Peasants
relinquished their membership in the organization.
The prosecution of the leaders of "Kapisanang
Pangbansa ng mga Magbubukid" in San Antonio
and Cabiao, Nueva Ecija, and the confirmation by
the Supreme Court of the sentence imposed on communist leaders, oaused many members of the organization to lose faith and drop out.
The tenants’ strike in the province of Nueva


Brigadier-General LuciEN R, Sweet
1932


PAGE 10


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


Ecija, marked by a display of red flags in the rice
fields; the activities of the communists in enlisting
in their organization many ignorant laborers and
tenants; the several unsuccessful attempts by communists and tenants to hold public demonstrations
without permits in the provinces of Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, Pampanga and Laguna; and the engagement at Moro Manangulo’s cotta at Taraka, Lanao,
resulting in the death of Manangulo and one Constabulary soldier and the wounding of four other
soldiers, were some of the outstanding features of
the general discontent.
On account of the delicate situation brought
about by the agrarian trouble in the province of
Nueva Ecija due to the large territory thlit required Constabulary attention in order to properly.
maintain law and order, it became necessary to
transfer a company of soldiers from Imus, Province
of Cavite, to San Isidro, Province of Nueva Ecija,
the affected district. Just at this time, the Supreme Court upheld the order of the Mayor of Manila prohibiting the holding of seditious meetings
by communists. This decision had a salutary and
sobering effect on the Communist and other secret
societies.
The "Kapisanang Magsasaka”, headed by Jacinto Manahan, organized for the purpose of disseminating communistic principles under the guise
of fighting for the welfare of the tenants has a
strong hold in San Antonio, Jaen, Sta. Rosa, Cabanatuan, Gapan, Cabiao and San Isidro, municipalities of Nueva Ecija. A conservative estimate of
their number including sympathizers is placed
laround 8,000 members.
During 32 years residence in the Islands, the
writer has often pondered on the subject of replacing the casique or the overlord landowners and
-as arrived at the conclusion that neither the tenant nor agrarian troubles can come to an end until
the Casique is gotten rid of and when the tenants
are rid of him they will have a much larger problem with which to contend and that problem will
be old man hunger. As bad as the Casique is paint

ed, it has been discovered by one and all tenants,
communists and the National Confederation of
Peasants as well as by the Kapisanang Magsasaka
that the man called “Casique” has from time immeial proven to all concerned, especially here in the
Philippine Islands, "a Shelter in a Weary Land and
a Harbor in a Mighty Storm.” Without him, lands
would no doubt grow fallow and hunger would
know no cessation.


Excluding the worries of the Communists,
Tangulans, the National Confederation of Peasants,
the Kapisanan Magsasaka and other secret societies, the thirty-second year of the existence of the
Philippine Constabulary has been featured by discontent, disappointments and disillusionment.
On October 9, 1932, the organization lost an
officer, eleven men, 15 rifles and 6 shotguns in a
Moro ambuscade. In an attempt to recover the
arms which were finally recovered, seven more enlisted men were lost and two officers were wounded. This should not have happened—and if Captain
Leon Angeles, Colonel Luther Stevens and the Chief








Complimenis of
LUIS PEREZ SAMANILLO BUIIDING


The Most Up-To-Date, Well Lighted & Coolest Office
Bldg, in the City
MANILA



4-90-16
TELEPHONES
4-90-17
Ildefonso Tionloc, Incorporated
Customs Brokers and Forwarding Agents


123 Dasmarinas


Manila, P. I.


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 11


had been allowed to work out their own salvation,
it would not have happened, but it is the same old
story, too many cooks spoil the pudding.
The Constabulary is a semi-military organization trained for 32 years in guerilla war-fare. It
has a collegiate Academy in which the young officers are taught the art by men who have been tried.
‘The Chief of Constabulary is a past-master of the
art of fighting in the bushes. This statement is
born out by his record and his contribution to the
guerilla war-fare in 1924 in the Colorum Campaign
in Surrigao. This alone should convince the public
that if the Constabulary is left to enforce the law
and preserve peace and order as it has been trained
to do, there can arise no emergency in the Archipelago which cannot be handled safely by it.
Since last July there have been 12 officers seperated from the service either by resignation, retirement, death or dismissal. There were also 29
officers promoted and nine appointed during the
year. Among those who resigned were Third Lt.
Durban G. Duckworth Ford, on July 31, 1932; 3rd
Lt. Luis B. Estrera, on September 7, 1932; and
2nd Lt. Fortunato Mondrgaon, on October 17, 1932.
Those who retired were 1st Lt. Luis M. Alviado,
on December 31, 1932; Ist Lt. Primitimo Espiritu, on December 31, 1932; 1st Lt. Victorino Fortus, on December 31, 1932; Col. R. A. Duckworth
Ford, on December 28, 1932; Col. Ramon Ochoa,
on December 31, 1932; and 1st Lt. Bernardo Saberola, on April 1, 1933. 2nd Lt. Francisco Gimeno, died on January 1, 1933.
Following is the list of officers promoted during the past 12 months in the chronological order
of their promotions:
Soliven, Fidel, promoted to Major, December
22, 1932; Bowers, Clarence H., promoted to BrigGen., February 1, 1933; Baja, Emanuel A., promoted to Major, February 1, 1933; Buenconsejo,
Irineo, promoted to Major, February 1, 1933; Page,
Herbert C., promoted to Major; February 1, 1933;
Sison, Bonifacio, R., promoted to Captain, February 1, 1933; Guido, Jose P., promoted to Captain,
February 1, 1933; Mejia, Jacinto E., promoted to
Captain, February 1, 1933; Livingston, C. E., promoted to Colonel, February 1, 1933; Stevens, L. R.,
promoted to Colonel, February 1, 1933; Bactat, Eustaquio, promoted to Colonel, February 1, 1933; Valeriano B. D., promoted to Lt-Col., February 1,
1933; Johnson, O. M., promoted to Lt. Col., February 1, 1933; Quimbo, J. C., promoted to Lt-Col.,
February 1, 1933; Cerquella, Cristobal, promoted
to Lt-Col., March 16, 1933; Natividad, Antonic,
promoted to Major, March 17, 1933; Arambulo,
Jose A., promoted to 1st Lt., March 27, 1933; Maramba, Guillermo, promoted to 1st Lt., March 27,
1933; Leon, Eleuterio L. de, promoted to 1st Lt.,
March 27, 1933; Laurente. Sergio, promoted to 1st
Lt., March 27, 1933; Mabesa, Julio S., promoted


to 1st Lt., March 27, 1933; Santiago, Doluinador,
promoted to 2nd Lt., March 27, 1932: Castre, Manuel G., promoted to 2nd Lt. March 27, 1933: Cruz,
Fidel N., promoted to 2nd ILt., March 27, 1933;
Dionisio, Pedro, promoted to 2nd Lt., March 27,
1933; Pastrana, Jesus F., promoted to 2nd Lt.,
March 27, 1933; Fajardo, Apolinar G., promoted to
2nd Lt., March 27, 1933; Crame, Juan, pronioted to
2nd Lt., March 27, 1933; and Mascardo, Dominador
T., promoted to 2nd Lt., March 27, 1933.
The list of new appointments during the same
period follows:
Poggi, Richard H., reinstated October 26, 1932:
Deang, Pedro, appointed April 24, 1933; Campo,
Isagani V., appointed April 27, 1933; Nakar, Guillermo, appointed April 26, 1933; Pintoy, Climaco,
appointed May 1, 1933; Mondragon, Fortuanto, reinstated May 9, 1933; Celis, Joaquin Jr., appointed May 22, 1933; Cabrera, Tranquilino, appointed
May 27, 1933; and Reyes, Fidel V., appointed May
27, 1933.
Since September, one officer and 24 soldiers
were killed in action. Of this number 23 were
killed by Moro outlaws or amucks while two were
killed in Tayabas.
One officer and 21 enlisted men died during
the period from July, 1932, to date. The deaths
were caused by various diseases, suicides, drowning and accidents.


amas iaimiag
RCA—VICTOR
RADIOS—VICTROLAS


The smallest 4 Tube Radio to the
largest 12 Tube Combination units,
gives you that RCA-VCTOR quality
that comes in all RCA VICTOR products. It is outstanding whether in
Radios or the straight Orthophonic
Victrola.
ASK ABOUT OUR SPECIAL DISCOUNT TO PHIL. CONST. UNITS.
RCA - VICTOR Co., Inc., Int. Div. Camden, N. J., U. S. A.
ERLANGER & GALINGER, INC.
Escolta—Manila
BACOLOD
ILOILO
CEBU


PAGE 12


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


Only selected Philippine
tobacco could make this
one GOOD Philppine
cigarette


Made by
TABACALERA
ORIGINATORS OF HIGH GRADE PHILIPPINE TOBACCO PRODUCTS





COMPANIA MARITIMA
S.S. PANAY arrives every Friday morning from Manila and sails every Sunday at
8:00 a.m. for Manila.
S.S. BOHOL and S.S. MACTAN one of these vessels will sail every Wednesday fof
Maribojoc, Zamboanga, Davao, Daliao and Talomo and the other will sail
for Manila every Thursday.
S.S. CEBU and ISLAS FILIPINAS one of these vessels will sail every Saturday for
Dumaguete, Dipolog, Zamboanga, Cotabato and Jolo and the other will sail
every Monday for Manila.
For further information call INT. HARV. CO. OF PHIL, CEBU
Telephone No. 41
S.S. LUZON arrives every Monday morning from Manila and sails same day at 5:00
p.m. for Cagayan and returns from Cagayan Wednesday morning and sails
same day at 5:00 p.m. for Manila.
For information call PASTRANO UNCHUAN, Telephone No. 48.
Compania Maritima also operate the following steamers to almost all southern,
ports and Mindanao.
S.S. NEGROS
S.S. LEYTE
S.S. FERNANDEZ HERMANOS
S.S. ALBAY
S.S. SAMAL
S.S. ARGUS
S.S. JOLO
S.S. REGULUS


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED
PAGE 12
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF


Colonel CHARLES E. LIVINGSTON
Acting Chief of Staff


Major TELESFORO MARTINEZ
Adjutant and Inspector-at-Large


Captain RAFAEL RAMOS
Inspector and Assistant Adjutant


PAGE 14


KHAKI and RED


July 1933


INSPECTORS DIVISION STAFF


Lieut.-Colonel BENITO D. VALERIANO
Inspector General


Major ALEJO VALDEZ
Major MIGUEL NICDAO
Inspector
Inspector


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 15


QUARTERMASTER DIVISION STAFF


Major MIGUEL AGUILAR
Acting Quartermaster


Major PORFIRIO ZABLAN
Acting Asst. Quartermaster


First Lieut. VICENTE L. TORRES
 spector of Constabulary Buildings
(Engineer Officer) and Asst. to Q.
M. (Paymaster)


PAGE 16


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


INTELLIGENCE DIVISION STAFF


Lieut.-Colonel JUAN C. QUIMBO
Superintendent and Inspector


Captain Jose P. Guido
Asst. Superintendent


First Lieut. LICERIO P. LAPUS
On duty (Inspector of Constubatary Agents)


KHAKI and RED
PAGE 17
July, 1933


First Lieut. ALfred E, FAwceTT
On Temporary Duty


-oo-)0(-o0


Orders placed with advertisers in
  are assured of prompt
service and square deal, if submitted
thru the Chief, Advertising Department
of  , Oriente Building,
Manila.


Second Lieut. EDWIN D. ANDREWS
On duty


Patronize Our
Advertisers



Men PdG BtACnera AFOn: OMB ASGn BADea PAiTgMFIR
Aicohol 35 7. Uol.; Opium 0.135Gm7.


NEAT and TRIM
APPEARANCE
includes
A

Perfect Shave.
Use a
B. C. K.
Quality Razor
AT ALL DEALERS


SOLE IMPORIERS
C.AELLING,
INC.
171 J. Luna
Manila


PAGE 18


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


MEDICAL DIVISION STAFE


Lieut.-Colonel BASILIO J. VALDES
Chief Surgeon and Inspector


Major LUCIANO FERAREN
Dental Surgeon


Major MANUEL G. OLYMPIA
Inspector and Asst, to Chief Surgeon.
In charge, Office of Chief Surgeon


PAGE 19


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


First Lieut, JOsE C. VILLANUEVA
On duty, Office of Chief Surgeon


Sec. Lieut. ROSALIO B. FIGUEROA
Pharmacist and Recorder, Opium Committee


“Dr. LORENZO C. REYES
Manila, P. I.


(Sgd.) Arturo Verceles”


223 M. Earnshaw, Sampaloc


Deai Doctor:
The two pictures of my son, Pedro Verceles, one of which was taken while he
was sick and the other ifter being cured
by KATIALIS, are proofs of the effective
cure of your discovered medicine.
I consider the use of your KATIALIS
oy my son as a good luck for it took only
two jars of KATIALIS to cure the IRRITATIONS (SKIN ERUPTIONS) on
his leg which he has suffered for more
than a year.
Besides, 1 have saved much for the cost
of two jars oj KATIALIS is very little
compared to what 1 have spent within a
year for other medicines to cure his skin
disease.


Truly yours,


This letter is one of the many testimonials we have received which speaks of
the result of using KATIALIS. KATIALIS
has cured many persons of skin diseases
such as PRICKLY HEAT DHOBIE ITCH,
SARNA, ECZEMA, BLISTER, GRAINS
OfF THE FACE including those which appear after shaying, PIMPLES, WHITESPOTS, FRECKLES, BOILS, ABSCESSES, ANTHRAX, DANDRUFF, CHAFE,
all kinds of WOUNDS, ULCERS, etc., and
it will completely relieve you from suffering if you give it a chance.
KATIALIS also cleans and beautifies
the face, and it is a quick remedy for
“SOBAQUINA” (bad smell emanating from
the arm pits) and bites of mosquitoes,
bedbugs, fleas, chicken lice and small insects.


Before using KATIALIS
After using KATIALIS
Ask for KATIALIS at your drugstore or use the coupon below.
DR. LORENZO C. REYES
405 San Lazaro, Manila
Sir:
Enclosed please find P1.20 for which send me one jar of KATIALIS.
Name......
AGGBS


Page 20


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


HILE we are young our
V
V
parents plan and save
for our future. With manhood, the same problems are
thrust upon us.
Now you are planning for
your children—for your own
old age.
Many people find Protection for their family, and Security of their own future in
ownership of an Insular Life
Blue Seal Policy.


ILECTUI


EQUALITY—JUSTICE


LETLILIS


SECURITY—PEACE OF MIND


JHEN you were a litlle
boy did you want to
be a teacher, a lawyer, a
politician, a doctor!


Or did you stand erect
and tell your father, "I
want to be a soldier!"


HLAS


ENRICHED—PROTECTED


ECELCDNE


INSULAR LIFE BLDG., MANILA


MISSing
)
Ee
Page / Pages
9
21-22


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 23


THE SECOND CLASS CADETS (JUNIORS)


on the trail, they kept going until they had outhiked and out-fought every band of law-breakers
in the Islands.
After the fighting was over, and order more
or less restored, the important thing was to keep
in touch with all elements of the community so as
to forestall future trouble and to see that the laws
were enforced. This was done by establishing
Constabulary stations at trategic points and using
them as bases from which patrols could cover the
adjacent country. In this way the authorities were
able to keep themselves informed about what was
going on in all parts of the Islands, and to place
themselves in a position to stop trouble at its source.
For this work, a somewhat different type of
Constabulary man was desirable. While rough
and ready methods were still necessary to some degree there was more of a need for a combination
of the fighting-man and the diplomat. It was seen
that officers and men, in order to accomplish their
mission, needed to be trained in the special work!
required of them. This need gave rise to the officers' school which was first established in Manila in 1906. New officers entering the service, and
a number of the older officers were put through a
course of instruction in this school and sent out
better equipped than formerly for their work. Some
of the officers who attended those first sessions of
the school are still in the service and have a splendid record of achievement behind them.


SCHOOL MOVED TO BAGUIO
In 1908 the officers’ school was moved to Baguio and established on a newly acquired property called Constabulary Hill, now known as Camp
Henry T. Allen, named after the first Chief, the
late General Henry T. Allen, organizer of the Constabulary. By 1908 the original roster had been
greatly modified, owing to the adjustments inevitable to a new organization getting established,
Some of the original appointees were not suited to
the service, some of the service did not suit. Some
had died in battle, others by reason of disease, and
some had gone to seek wealth or adventure in other
walks of life.
As time went on the standards of the service
were steadily raised, and ipso facto entrance requirements were higher than formerly. One had
to prepare himself for the job and watch his step
in order to keep it. It was realized that the Constabulary offered an interesting and very useful
career, and the high command set about choosing
material for officers that was likely to reflect credit on the organization. This attitude resulted in
the building up of a remarkable esprit de corps,
and made the name of Constabulary known and respected throughout the length and breath of the land.
It was still a pretty early day in the history of American occupation and most of the important positions in the Constabulary as well as in other departments of the government were held by Amer

PAGE 2


Ju


THE THIRD CLASS CADETS (PLEBES)


icans. Although occasional appointments were
still made here it was the procedure at this time to
bring young men over from the United States to
fill vacancies in the lower grades. The men
brought over were graduates of colleges or military academies and consequently had excellent educational groundwork so that a few months of intensive training in special subjects were sufficienti
to convert hem into efficent junior officers. During the time this plan was followed an average of


two classes a year was brought over and sent to
the school in Baguio, the number in each class depending of course, on the number of vacancies existing in the grade of third lieutenant.
EARLY CURRICULUM
At this time the curriculum of the school consisted of The Compiled Acts, Penal Code, Military
Map Reading, The Constabulary Manual, Guard
Regulations, Infantry Drill, Fencing, Dancing the


MANILA
NEW
THE ARISTOCRATIC SUBURB
Where all modein conveniences are now available:
MEAg AAg A AN CNDE LONS IN METEIAIIAL IOCAMAN EIA LAME TAENG IME RAN
16-METER WIDE FIRST CLASS AVENUES


The next time you are out for a ride instruct the driver
to take you out to NEW MANILA and see for yourself how wonderful, how magnificent and how glorious
and impressive is the topographical grandeur of this
greatest of all sub-divisions in and around Manila.


Better still: let’s take you out there to show you
around and point out spots of interest and beauty!
Call up telephone 2-23-4C, or on Sundays and holidays
6-87-25. Our representative will be delighted to
escort you around. We’ll send you one of the company’s cars.


JUAN YSMAEL & CO.. INC.
GENERAL AGENTS
348 ECHAGUE
MANILA
On Sundays call at 20 Broadway, New Manila—Tel. 6-87-25


TEL. 2-23-40


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 25


Rigodon, and a smattering of Spanish. Students
had to stand reveille, guard-mounting, retreat, and
Saturday inspection and were expected to pass satisfactory examinations in all the subjects enumerated above, at the end of three months. They
were then assigned to Districts and sent out to
stations where vacancies existed.
The school as described above was conducted
up to the first part of 1916, after which time no
new appointments were made in the United States.
Members of the classes of 1915 and 1916 were
known as special students, due to the fact that the
Academy had been founded in 1914, and the name
of the school changed to The Constabulary Academy. Special students have been appointed from
time to time since 1916, but their numbers have
been few and no regular classes are provided for
them. At the present time appointments as special students are rarely made, and can be justified
only when the applicant has exceptional qualifications that make his appointment desirable.
The year 1914 marked a new era in the history of the Philippine Islands for at that time the
Filipinos were given a very large participation it
had been the avowed policy of the Amercan Government to turn authority over to the Filipinos just
as soon as they were prepared to handle it properly. The times now seemed propitious and the policy was put into effect. A great war was being
waged in Europe and the United States, along with
other neutral countries had her hands full in looking after affairs close to home. Business opportunities were good and large numbers of Americans
were continually leaving the service to engage in
more lucrative employments. The schools of the
Islands had been turning products, and there was
a large amount of material that could be used in
the government service.
GIVEN COLLEGIATE STATUS
Having in view the present and future needs
of the Constabulary service, the Philippine Legislature, in the Appropriation Act of 1914 set aside
funds for the creation and maintenance of a cadet
class in"Baguio, under the name “Constabulary
Academy. A six months’ course was prescribed,
but before receiving their commissions graduates
of the Academy were required to take the three
months  course in the officers’ school. The Academy was run in this fashion for two years, until the
passage in 1916 of Act No. 2605 which expanded
the institution somewhat and provided for a nine
months' course under the name "Academy for Officers of the Philippine Constabulary” Beginning
with the school year of 1919 a two-year course was
prescribed. The Adademy functioned under Act
2605 until December 1928 when Act 3496 was passed. This Act expanded the course to three years,
renamed the institution “The Philippine Constabulary Academy," and gave it a collegiate status.


WARNER, BARNES & CO., LTD.
LONDON, MANILA, ILOILO, CEBU &
BACOLOD
MEN TORK AGENTS —LEWARO, BIBBY & CO., 106 Wall Stroel
Importers and Exporters
SHIPPING AGENTS:
Nippon Yusen Kaisha
Cunard Line
White Star Line
Bibby Line
INSURANCE—Fire, Marine, Workmen’s
Compensation, Automobile and
Miscellaneous
Sugar Machinery, Diesel Engines, Condensing Plants, Shipbuilders and
Engineers.
All Classes of Fertilizer.
Sperry Flour Co.
Sugar Bags
Telegraphic Address: “Warner”
Manila office:Perez-Samanillo Bldg., Escolta


PLEASE PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS)


Atlantic, Culf & Pacifie Company
Manila


Engineers
Manufacturers
Contractors


71-77 Muelle de la Industria
MANILAA


PAGE 26


AHAKI and RED


July, 1933


The class of 1928 was the last class to graduate
under the two-year basis.
Since 1928 the school ht.s lived up to its new
status as best it could, but it has labored under
the handicap of very limited library facilities and
the lack of instructors trained in certain subjects.
In spite of these handicaps the school has made
improvements along scholastic lines and eventually
no doubt will rate in tHat respect with the best colleges in the country. At the present time the curriculum lacks a number of hours in specified subjecis in order to give the school a definite standing with the Commissioner of Education. If a plan
can be worked out whereby we can secure better
trained instructors in the languages and in history
it will add greatly to the standing of the instituA
tion.
NEED TRAINED INSTRUCTORS
The Academy Act provides for the employment
of civilian instructors under certain conditions,
but so far our annual appropriation has not been
sufficient to allow for such action. That may be
done eventually, or if Headquarters see fit, selected
officers might be detailed to the University of the
Philippines for special work to qualify them as instructors here. I have nothing but praise for the
regular line officers who are sent to the Academy
as instructors. They have all done their duty to
the best of their ability but Constabulary officers


as a rule have not been trained in the art of teaching, or in the higher branches of all the subjects
required at the Academy. The fact that they are
not so qualified is no reflection on them since their
ambitions did not tend in that direction. After
all not everybody can be a teacher. Successful
teachers have usually had years of special preparatory training. That fact, however, does not remove our need for trained intsructors, or relieve us
from the responsibility of securing them. To be.
n competent instructor one must not only understand considerably more than the rudiments of the
subject he proposes to teach, but he must have had
some training in the art and manner of presenting it. If one does not understand how to present
a subject effectively much of his knowledge is of
no help to his classes. The answer to our problem
then seems clear. We must either employ trained
civilian instructors, or we must train a group of
officers for that work. Perhaps a combination of
the twe methods is the best solution.
1932 33 A SUCCESSFUL YEAR
With the improvement of the school the service will improve, and conversely the school must
improve to keep up with the requirements of the
service. In this day of rapid change and development, the service as well as the service school has
to keep on the jump in order to stay abreast of the
times. It is with this object in view that we are


Forbes, Munn & Co., Ltd.


113 Muelle de Binondo


Phone 4-97-44


GENERAL MERCHANTS AND INSURANCE AGENTS
BEST KHAKI DRILLS & SHIRTINGS


Manila Steam Laundra
DRY CLEANING AND DYEING


—):000: (-


651-653 Magdalena, Trozo


Telephone 4.96-89


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 27


July, 1933


endeavoring to build up the school so that its graduates can face the conditions of life with the same
assurance as the graduates of any other good college. We want our graduates to feel that the years
spent here have been years well spent. We do not
want them to feel that, had they gone to some other
institution, they would have secured a better break
in the struggle of life.
In conclusion I wish to state that the school
year of 1932-33 has been as successful as could be
expected under the circumstances. We have added
a little to some of the courses and made such improvement in others as we were able. The library
has been built up to some extent, but due to a scarcity of funds it is still far from what it should be.
At the present time the greatest need of the library is a wider selection of books of reference most
of which are expensive. We expect to get these
books a few at a time until we have a good collection for the purposes intended. Shortly before this
article appears we shall have graduated another
class some of whom will doubtless be commissioned before a great while. They have been with us
for what doubtless seems to them, three long and
weary years, and they are now about to don the
red shoulder-straps and take their places in the
khaki-clad ranks. After their preliminary training they are entering the real school which is called experience. We hope they will all prove faithful to their trust and to the traditions of the service.


Beware of imitations!
If there is no "PETROMAX"
name do not accept. All “PETROMAX" nickelplate lamps are engraved with the name “PETROMAX" and
they are packed in cartoon boxes
with the name "PETROMAX" printed as well as the picture of the
lamp.
m
“PETROMAX"
GERMAN KEROSENE LAMPS
With a complete stock of spare parts
Made of brass of the highest quality
Economy—No Danger
Won't Explode—Brightest Light
Efficiency—Rain and
Windproof Satisfaction


DIFFERENT MODELS
From 100 to 3,500 Candle Power
For fishing, haciendas, streets, ships,
houses, stores, warehouses, schools,
churches, cuartels, restaurants, fiestas, etc., etc.
AFTER WE SELL WE SERVE
Ask for catalog and prices from
BOUFFARD HNOS.
648 Rizal Ave., Manila
Sole Agents for the Philippine Islands
Cebu Office: 91-93 Magallanes St.,
Iloilo Office: 72 Iznart St.


that is being
carried to its
OWN HOME


By
The


E
SINGALONG SUBDIVISION
D

“The NEN MALATE Of MANILA"
P
EI

ETU
OF INTEREST
2
A


TO YOU!
FOR THE LAST TWO DECADES WE HAVE
HELPED HUNDREDS OF TEACHERS, EMPLOYEES AND INVESTORS OWN THEIR
HOMES.
We Can Help You, Too!
We know how. See us before Buying
your HOMESITES.
Phone MR. ARABEJO now 4-98-75 or 5-48-86 or
2-82-31 and make an appointment with him or one
of our representatives who will help you select a
homesite to fit your means.
MONTHLY PAYMENTS AS LOW AS P18.00
This beautiful subdivision which is within the
limits of Manila and within the reach of all means of
transportations,—street cars, buses, etc.—is located
near the Sta. Scholastica and La Salle Colleges and
the homes of Dr. E. Licauco, Dr. Bienvenido A. Tan
and Prof. I. Elayda.
SELLING AT PRICES YOU CAN AFFORD
TO PAY
—USE THE COUPON BELOW -
SINGALONG SUBDIVISION
C/o MACONDRAY & CO., INC.—3rd FLOOR, CHINA BANK BLDG.
Without the least obligation on my part kindly advise me how to
obtain a home lot in the New Malate of Manila.
I spend P.......... . . . . . .. . monthly in house rent.
Aame.
Office Address .............................................................
Residence Address.........................................................


PIMPL


 


aa
GONAL
aa 
NAT
a
ACUROL
VI

 
a
aa
a 
a 
aa 
a 
mama aa
SOLD
BY ALL


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 29


Review Of Activities Of The District Of Northern Luzon


a
At the end of the thirty-second year of the
existence of the organization, the District of Northern Luzon owing to the financial condition of the
government had its forces reduced to 607 enlisted
men and 44 officers. Notwithstanding the reduction of personnel, law and order during the year
were considered good in the Distirct. There were
a few violent crimes committed against persons
and property but not of such propotion as to disrupt public order nor were there any organized
bands which could be attributed to the acute depression.
A series of thefts in and around Aparri wias
the extent of that industry. The men responsible
for these thefts are now awaiting trial before the
courts of justice. One case of murder in the province of Cagayan because of the prominence and
social standing of the principal, Felix Villaflor,
commanded much attention throughtout the valley
and because of its similarity to the notorious Viola
case in Bulacan, it was given more publicity than
is usually due such cases. The murderer was sentenced to serve 14 years, 8 months and 1 day imprisonment and indemnify the heirs of the deceased
in a sum of P1000.00.
Owing to the activity of Lieut. F. B. Villaluz
in gathering evidence which convicted Felix Villaflor of murder, this officer and two enlisted men
of the organization are now under bond of P20,000
each—they having been accusel at the instance of
the Villaflor family of the murder of the late Rufino Samson in 1926. This case has several times


COLONEL WILLIAM E. DOSSER
Commander, District of Northern Luzon
been investigated and dropped for the lack of evidence.
Another murder case which disturbed the even
tenor of existence in the peaceful Cagayan valley
was that of Manuel Manzano of Isabela, a pig ven

DISTRICT STAFF OFFICERS, NORTHERN LUZON
Cape. A. N. VILLALOBOS
Maj. VICTORIANO LUNA
Maj. EULALIO TANEDO
District Adjutant
District Surgeon
Asst. to D. C. and Inspector


PAGE 30


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


dor who awhile in company with other Christian
peddlers en route to Natonin, Bontoc, was murdered by outlaw Gaddangs under the leadership of
Saguibu. The motive of the crime was robbery.
In Vigan, Ilocos Sur, Chinese factions caused
the Constabulary some sleepless nights owing to
a kind of tong war brought sabout apparently
through the purchase of a consignment of Japanese
goods during or prior to the boycott of Japanese
products by a member of the Chinese Protective
Association. The purchaser felt obligated to accept the goods but it appears that the members of
the Association felt otherwise. To settle the trouble
for all time an investigation into the cause and the
Chinese responsible for it is being conducted with
a view of deporting the responsible person or persons.
In countires where the inhabitants are still in
a very low stage of civilization, the predominant
offense is against person. The Mountain Provinco
proves no exception to the rule, although her record is very much lower than that of Sulu which
probably tops all the provinces in the Philippines in
criminality record. On account of the topographic conditions of the “Mountain", the people who
are a few miles apart but divided by a mountain
or range, were until recently antagonistic to each
other and carried on tribal wars.
These feuds have since the American regime
been partly patched up by peace-pacts entered into between the differene tribes or groups in which
they agree to forget their past differences. These
pacts also provide punishment for a tribe, community, or family violating them. The dying embers
of these feuds and the old-age tradition of the people that an assault, injury or murder must be avenged, are mainly responsible for the great majority of crimes against person.
From statistics we see that during the past
six years 66 homicides, 92 murders and 145 physical injuries were committed, Ifugao, with 20, 32
and 42, respectively leading the other subprovinces,
and Kalinga, with 11, 24 and 38, respectively, a
close second. Ifugao, however, has the biggest population which is close to 74,060 while Kalinga
has only 29,000. Proportionately, therefore, Kalinga had a higher crimirlality record than all other
subprovinces. This is attrihuted to the fact that
tradition of avenging death of a relative has received a less blow here than in other subprovinces


Orders placed with advertisers in
  are assured of prompt
service and square deal, if submitted
thru the Chief, Advertising Department
of  , Oriente Building,
Manila.


Honesty It’s Own Virtue?

To the Personnel
Philippine Constabulary,
Greetings:
We wish to quote herebelow extracts of a report made to the Superintendent, Intelligence Division, P. C. by two P. C. investigators upon the
request of the Public Service Commission as well
as Section 825 of the Administrative Code:
“Santiago Sambrano” "Florencio Lara,
“Gonzalo Advincula” “Marcelo Farinas”
“Emilio Acuna", "Rufino Ravago”, “Carlos
Aguila”, “Nolasco".
“The reduction of fares by the above
operators is already a common knowledge to
the public. Not one passenger voluntarily
rides on the truck before he makes a bargain."
“Northern Luzon Transportation Co.
(Norlutran).”
“This is the only operator that does not
lower its rates and bedause of this most of
its trucks going back and forth from San
Fernando (U) to Laoag are empty.”
“This company is the only one that observes its time and rate schedules.
“If this company is to continue operating as it is now, it will surely fall some day."
“Section 825, Administrative Code:—
“The Philippine Constabulary is the
armed force of the Government of the Philippine Islands, established and maintained
for the preservation of peace, law and order within the Islands.
Trusting that you will be able to read between
the lines, we beg to remain,
Yours sincerely,
NORTHERN LUZON TRANSPORTATION, INC.
(Norlutran)
(Adv)
owing to its isolation until recently from civilizing
factors particularly the provincial government
center, Bontoc. Nevertheless ethnologically the
people of Kalinga subprovince do not all belong to
the tribe called Kalinga but a great portion of them
pertains to the stock called Bontocs and these have
no mean part in elevating the criminal record of
the subprovince. These data can not therefore
served as a yard stick to determine which tribe in
the “Mountan" has the “revenge custom" most
deeply rooted. It is certain, however, that government authority and other civilizing factors such as
easy means of communication, schools nad religious
missions are effective in disintegrating it.


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 31


Activities Of The District Of Southern Luzon
By Col. E. BACTAT
District Commander


The District of Southern Luzon with headquarters at Manila comprises at present the following twenty (20) provinces: Albay, Bataan,
Batangas, Bulacan, Camarines Norte, Camarines Sur, Cavite, Laguna, Marinduque, Masbate, Rizal, Sorsogon,
Tarlac, Tayabas and
Zambales.
It covers an area of
about 330C8 square
miles with about 4,600,-
000 population.
Former it had 46
Companies and detachments with 116 officers
And 1,589 enlisted men
as authorized strength.
Under section 7 of act
No. 4032, better known
as the appropriation act
for 1933, the Philippine
Constabulary was required to make forced
savings. In order to effect this forced leconomy, this district had to
have its share in the reduction of the enlisted
strength of the entire
organization. It was alloted a quota of 339 vacancies so that at present there remains only a
strength of 1,250 enlisted men, or one enlisted
man to police every 3,-
680 population of the
district.
The following stations, companies and detachment of the district
were abolished to further effect the required
economy and the officers and men composing
them were assigned to the
the same provinces affected:
Third Company, Virac,


DISTRICT COMMANDER AND STAFF,
DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN LUZON
Seated: Col. Eustaquio Bactat, District Commander.
Standing, left to right: Lieut. Col. C. Cerquella, Asst. D. C. and Inspector; Major J. V. Agdamag, Assistant to the D. C. and Inspector; Capt.
F. I. Torres, District Adjutant.
nearest companies in ny, Laguna; 57th Company, Sual, Pangasinan;
72nd Company, Casiguan, Tayabas; Detachment
Albay; 29th Compaof Brook’s Point, Palawan.


PAGE 32


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


Officers composing the District Staff are as
follows:
Colonel Eustaquio Bactat, District Commander; Lieut. Colonel Cristobal Cerquella, Assistant
District Commander; Major Jose V. Agdamag, Assistant to District Commander and Inspector, District Southern Luzon; Captain Felicisimo I. Torres, District Adjutant.
Enlisted men composing the district personnel are as follows:
Sergeant Major Rafael Santos, General Service; Staff Sergeant Apolinario Cargo, General
Service; Sergeant Raymundo Cruz, 9th Company,
Paligo, Batangas; Sergeant Henry Dickson, 7Ist
Complany, Gumaca, Tayabas; Lance Corporal Gabriel Mariano, 50th Company, Pasig, Rizal.
Reviewing the happenings in the district of
Southern Luzon one year back from August 8, 1933,


the date the Constabulary will have attained the
age of 32 years and the next Anniversary Number of the Khaki and Red will be published, the
most outstanding event is the growing unrest of
the tenants in Central Luzon principally affecting
the provinces of Bulacan, Nueva Ecija and Pampanga.
This unrest has been found to be largely due
to the Red activities, preachings of unscrupulous agitators whose principal aim is to exploit the
ignorant, the natural desire of the tenants to better themselves and partly because of their ignorance.
The unrest has grown to such magnitude that
during the later part of the second quarter of
this year, 1933, about 1,000 tenants declared
a strike. They would not work unless their de(Continued on page 57)


cDeyond the hill
is a valley


YUR progress in life is like a journey through
 a mountainous country — a series of hills
and valleys. Today we may stand on the hilltop
of success, but just ahead lies a valley of uncertainty. Life insurance is a safeguard during
business depressions as well as in boom periods
—both of which are equally hazardous. Carry
life insurance in order that ample funds may be
provided to guarantee an independent old age
plus protection for your dependents.
Establizhed 1887
THE
E
MANUFACTURERS LIFE
INSURANCE COMPANY
Head Office
Toronto, Canada
E. E. ELSER, Manager for P.I.
EDW. L. HALL, Asst. Manager
1th Floor Kneedler Bldg., Tel. 2-15-04, Manila
Men of Character and Ability are desired as Agents,
particularly in the Provinces.


UOrIA LIIMIS
of the
bududiopo
191D
QuedIVIOlon
₱10.00 per Month
No Down Payment
No Interest
For particulars see
BUEN. M. VELMO
Telephone 66
Box 92
Cebu, Cebu


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 33


Resume Of Activities In The District Of Visayas


DISTRICT STAFF


Left to right: Major Eliseo Bringas, District Surgeon, Visayas; Col.
minals. Garramino N. Q G. B. Francisco, District Commander, Visayas; Major F. G. Oboza, AsGramino N., one of the sistant District Commander and Inspector, 2nd. Inspection Division, Visayas; Ist Lieutenant Basilio Fernando, District Adjutant.


Despite the depression,
which had been raging
throughout the district,
the locust infestation
which in some localities
had caused damages to
crops and the iumusual
big army of unemployed, peace and order conditions in the Visayas
during the last twelve
months had been very
satisfactory. Crimes of
the usual kind, not the
result of organized or
combined lawlessness but
of personal differences,
land troubles, jealousies
and immoderate indulgence in an alcoholic beverage, locally called tuba, were committed and
in almost all cases, the
rerpetrators t hereof
were readily apprehended and dealt with according to law.
Through continuous,
unrelenting and systematic efforts, the Constabulary in this district
succeeded in accounting
for three dangerous criMontescos who murdered Sergeant Ramon Gayanilo, 2rd Company,
and Sgt. Fernandez Cebua, 44th Co., lat Mount Baloy, Calinog, Iloilo en January 7, 1929, was shot
to death for resisting arrest by a patrol from the
25th Co., Calinog on July 22, 1932 in the mountains
of Calinog. Valentin Malindog wanted for murder since 1914, was surprised by plain clothes men
from the 65th Co., Borongan under Lieut. D. U.
TTenazas in the mountains of Salcedo, Samar on
Aug. 24, 1932. He did not have a chance to use a
12-gauge home-made shotgun, one 32-caliber revolver and one 25-caliber Colt pistol—all with ammunition found in his possession. Jose Salamorin wanted
for double murder by the Justice of the Peace of
Tolong, Negros Oriental, was shot by Lieut. Pedro
Sumulong while evading arrest at Sitio Pangi, Tolong, on September 21, 1932. He died on October
3, 1932, of the wound he received.
The labor situation in the district was a sore


spot to peace and order. Sporadic strikes or attempt to declare walk-outs were registered.
Among the most important strikes duuring the last
twelve months were: On December 20th,
1932, about 500 seamstress working in different
dealers of ready-made trousers in Iloilo, Iloilo declared a strike due to reduction in their wages.
There was no disorder reported. On May 15, 1933
about 3,000 men and women, members of Federacion Obrera, working in different Chinese corn
mills, soap and shirt factories in Cebu, Cebu declared a strike on account of the dismissal of two
girls working in a corn mill. The strike was settled on May 18 through the intervention of the
Provincial Commander.
In spite of the activities of its leaders, the Federacion Obrera in Iloilo which caused most of the
strikes in Iloilo and Negros Occidental in 1930-


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


1931 is losing, its prestige and is now headlong
boung for disbandment. The insular treasurer decided that it is a communistic organization and cancelled its license on November 4, 1932.
There had been an attempt to extend to the
district the tentacles of communism. On October
12, 1932, a communist agent, arrived at Pulupandan, Negros Occidental and tried to organize a
branch of the "Katipunan ng mga Anak Pawis sa
Pilipinas” (Society of the Sons of Labor of the
Philippine Islands). The laborers, however, did
not pay much attention to him, so that he left the
province without accomplishing his purpose. Some
labor leaders in Negros Occidental and Negros
Oriental received during the month of March 1933,
printed propaganda from the Communist Party of
the Philippine Islands, Manila, but these did not,
in the least arouse their interest.
In spite of its depleted strength, the Constabulary shouldered and performed its multifarious duties with as much zeal and devotion as in the past.
The people still respect it as a dependable organization for the protection of individual rights, life
and property. Its relation with the other officials
has been excellent. Greater good-will and mutual
confidence existed between them.


PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS.


VEIOE TIGnem
oin the Visayan Islands and Mindanao, remember that we are owners of FAST,
COMFORTABLE AND NEW MOTORSHIPS with weekly sailings from Cebu to
the principal ports of Visayas and Mindanao.
Rates and dates of sailing gladly furnished on request.
LA NAVIERA FILIPINA INC.
Tel. 673 Cebu, Cebu 41 Martires St.
Agents in Manila: L. EVERETT INC.
801 Muelle de la Industria


Safe Food
for Babies

CARNATION
EVAPORATED MILK
Babies of all ages thrive and grow
strong on Carnation Evaporated Milk.
Sterilized in the tin, it is absolutely
safe—free from all disease germs.
Guaranteed pure cow’s milk.


For Sale at
All Dealers


Large or Small
Tins


OSI ARRIVEL
New Shipments of American, Belgian & German
Arms and Ammunition


SHOTGUNS
Browning
Ithaca
Remington
Remo-Popular
Winchester
RIZAL
BONIFACIO, etc.


REVOLVERS
Browning
Colt’s
Luger
Mauser
and RIFLES
Smith & Wilson


FRESH AND COMPLETE LINE OF SPORTING GOODS
such as Equipment for BASEBALL, BASKETBALL, FOOTBALL, INDOOR BASEBALL, TENNIS, VOLLEYBALL, BOXING and other HEALTH
BUILDERS.
We also stock FUN-FULL PLAYGROUND
APPARATUS and MAGNAN RACKETS for
which we are the exclusive representative in the
Philippines.
Reduce Prices and Reasonable Discounts
to meet depression.
IDHING AQuEl ee.
508 Rizal Avenue, Manila, P. I.
Box 1948
Tel. 2-77-23
REQUEST FOR FREE CATALOG


July, 1933


KHAKI ana RED


PAGE 35


A “Quiet And Peaceful” Year In The District Of
Mindanao And Sulu


The thirty second year of service of the Constabulary in the Moro provinces in Mindanao and
Sulu began with the activities of a new Alancat sect
in Cotabato near the happy hunting grounds of the
late Datu Mampurok. Unlike Mampurok however, the leaders, Moros Maguilila ( Ombad (
Amani Salibo, Kabal () Kasug, Linandog, Oman,
Sancho, Macacana and Marecy Mana were soon arrested and their cases remanded to the Court of
First Instance of Cotabato.
Moro Manangulo of Taraka for some unknown
reason raised the red flag over his cotta at Thraka
on September 20, 1932, and turned outlaw. Lieut.
Fred Belling, Station Commander at Tamparan,
sent Datu Dianka O Sultan Sa Budiadingan and
other prominent headmen to make an attempt to
induce Manangulo to lower his flag, abandon the
cotta and surrender. This he refused to do. Lieut.
Belling, commanfling officer of tthe 90th Company at Tamparan, with twenty-four enlisted men
and the Justice of the Peace, went to the cotta for
a peaceful interview with the outlaws. The detachment was fired upon at it approached the cotta
and an engagement followed in which Manangulo
and one soldier were killed and four soldiers were
wounded. His cotta was destroyed.
On September 25, 1932, at Lugus, Siasi, Moros Misuary and Majid, sons of Panglima Ruga

MAJOR CELESTINO NAVARRO
Asst, to D. C. and Inspector


COLONEL LUTHER R. STEVENS
District Commander, Mindanao and Sulu
san and fourteen others assaulted the market and
killed Moros Mohamad Asadu, Arasain and Madiza. The murderers later surrendered to Captain
Leon Angeles.
The criminal element on the island of Jolo
during the year was unusually active. Many robberies, some by armed bands, were committed and
some were connected with murders. On the morning of October 9, 1932, a detachment of 22 enlisted men of the IIIth Company stationed at Seit
Lake, under the command of Lieut. Vicente G. Alagar while on patrol were treacherously ambushed
at Bud Kan Asali, Panamao, by Imam Ibbah, Sakkam and more than 70 followers armed with spears
and blade weapons. Lieut. Alagar and 13 enlisted men were speared, slashed, stabbed and brutally
massacred. Nine men of the detachment were able
to escape in the jungle and cogonal grasses, leaving
their arms, 15 rifles, 6 shotguns, 1674 rounds of
ammunition and other equipment in the hands of
the outlaws.
This dastardly act of the moros necessitated
the assembling of nearly the whole Sulu force of
ten companies to recapture the lost arms which in
time was done. Capt. Leon Angeles, provincial


PAGE 36


KHAKi and RED


July, 1933


commander of Sulu, with available troops at hand
attacked the outlaws the same day, October 9, 1932,
and continued the engagement the 10th, 13th and
20th of October and up to November 4. In this
engagement three more constables were killed and
eleven were wounded. Thirty-five outlaws were killed, including Imam Ibban, and many more were
wwounded. On November 13 Sakkam’s band fired
upon an auto truck on the Luuk, Camp Andres
Road, and killed chaffeur Timbresa (0 Consing.
On April 3, Moros Juma, son of Sakkam, the
ring leader of the outlaws who massacred Lieut.
Alagar and thirteen men on October 9, together
with Imam Tantali, Asanuddin and Anuddin surrendered with two rifles to Capt. Leon Angeles.
The records show that of the more than 70
outlaw followers of Imam Ibbah’s band that attacked and massacred Lieut. Alagar and 13 enlisted men on October 9, thirty-five have been killed,
seventeen are now in jail and eleven are still at
large. The seven outlaws unaccounted for were
probably killed or have left the Sulu Archipelago.
On June 27 at Bakud Tangkao, Patian Island,
Sulu, a band of outlaws led by Moro Butu Daud
treacherously massacred Moros Amil, Apas, Hadjail, Abdurasid, Tapsi, Ampilani Akmad and Sadad who were repairing the fish trap of Moro Ba

MAJ. HERBERT C. PAGE
District Adjutant and Inspector,
Mindanao and Sulu


Hollywood's MAKe-UP Secrel...


k For THE STArs of the screen...
and for you... Max Factor, filmland’s make-up genius, created
make-upin colorharmony to individublize thenaturalbeautyof
each complexion. A make-upensemble... powder, rouge, lipstick,
eyeshadow and other requisites.
max FACTOR'S
SOcIerY make-UP
HAvEyour complexion analyzed
and your color harmony in Max
Factor's sOciETY MAKE-UP
suggested for you by a personal
representative of Max Factor’s
Make-Up Studio, Hollywood.
X


Y FRANCES DEB X
featured in Paramount's "nignt os
JUNE 13TH" X Max Factor's
Make-Up nsed exclusively.


MAX FACTORS
SOCIETU MAKE-UP
Available at leading Cosmetic dealers


BO BOX
CASARSI
MAKATI, RIZAL


BY AUTOMOBILE
GO VIA TEJERON


15
MINUTES
FROM PLAZA GOITI


BY STREET CAR
TAKE PASIG CARS


Cool, Spacious, Ventilated Dance
Floor, First Class Bar at Economy Prices, Courteous Service
to all Party Reservations
Made.
Free Admission
C. Durr
Tel. 5-61-40
Prop.


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 37


ladji. A small boy among those working on the
fish trap made his escape by swimming out to sea.
This same band appeared in the village of Tangkao and killed Moro Saril. The supposed motive
for the massacre was attributed to Butu Daud’s
ill-feeling toward Moro Baladji whose fish trap was
near his. On July 1, 1933 a patrol under Lieuts.
Ramon Angeles, Juan Crame and Macario Asistio
investigated the trouble and attempted to arrest
the criminals who resisted. An engagement followed in which Butu Daud and 12 followers were
killed.
Between July 5th and 10th, 1933, twelve hundred laborers in the vicinity of Davao, Davao went
on a strike. The strike began with the Henson
Orth Stevenson Co., when the employees of this
company demanded the dismissal of the Capataz,
Manuel Medina, followed by sympathy strikers.
To cope with the situation it became necessary for
Capt. Elias Dioquino to assemble the majority of
the five compaanies stationed in the province of
Davao to protect life and property.
The foregoing, combined with other happenings not mentioned for the lack of time in the District of Mindanao and Sulu contributed greatly to
the "Peace and quiet on our Southern Front".
Following are the enlisted men who gave up
their lives in the maintenance of peace and order
in the District of Mindanao and Sulu during the
year:


CAPT. RAMON ZAGALA
Dental Surgeon, Mindanao and Sulu


NAME
Escalona, Demetrio, Pvt.
Roca, Teofilo, Pvt. .....
Patente, Patricio, Pvt. ..
Eugenio, Elias, Pvt. ....
Garcia, Pedro, Pvt. ....
Oraye, Primo, Pvt. ......
Aguirre, Marcelino, Pvt.
Doctolero, Julio, Pvt. ...
Dasmarinas, Felipe, Sgt..
Lagarde, Jose, Pvt. .....
Hijastro, Aurelio, Pvt....
Cardinas, Domingo, L-Cpl.
Habalo, Felix, Sgt. .....
Lawagan, Jose, Pvt. ....
Yecyecan, Estanislao, Cpl.
Lopez, Cerena, Cpl. .....
Estorninos, Sotero, L-Cpl.
Camania, Sofronio, Pvt..
Mambering, Mbro, Pvt..
Mata, Nicolas, Pvt. .....
Falguera, Severo, Pvt. ..
Bruno, Timoteo, Cpl. ....


Co.


Date


BY WHOM


90th


9-20-32


Killed in an encounter with Moro outlaws in
Tamparan, Lanao.


113th


10-13-32 Killed in an encounter with Moro outlaws
under Sakkam in Tayungan, Sulu


112th


10-9-32


IIIth


10-9-32


Killed in action by Moro outlaws under Imam
Ibbah in Tayungan, Sulu.


Ilith


10-9-32


1


1lith


10-9-32


11


ilith


10-9-32


2


11ith


10-9-32


11


11ith


10-9-32


3


11ith


10-9-32





I11th


10-9-32


"


IlIth


10-9-32


12


IlIth


10-9-32





Ilith


10-9-32


1)


I11th


10-9-32


11


I1Ith


10-9-32


12


.1626881


10-9-32


11


106th


2-18-33


Killed in an encounter with Moro outlaws
under Sakkam in Tayungan, Sulu.


90th


2-18-33


Gunshot wound received in action with Moro outlaws in Tampawan, Lanao.


1115th


2-26-33


Killed by Moro amuck Mamon in South
Ubian, Tawi-Tawi.


112th


4-30-33


Killed by Moro Amuck Anta in Romandier,
Sulu.


106th


5-3-33


Killed in an encounter with Moro outlaws un

der Sakkam in Tayungan, Sulu.


PAGE 38


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


KHAKIAND RED
OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE CONSTABULRY AND POLICE
Tels.: 5-64-10
Philippine Constabulary Headquarters
4-98-52
P. O. Box 618
TUBLISHED MONTHIN — SUDL GAD IOUENTAVOS
PULO N. G. RAWEINS MAMOO
R
ESTEBAN D. ERISPE
Advertising Manager


SUBSCRIPTION RATES
In the Phlippines, United States, and Possessons:


One Year...*... P5.00
Six Months ....... P3.00
Three Months..... ₱1.50
In All Other Countries in the Postal Union:
....₱7.00
One Year
 



Entered As Second Class Mail At Post Office,
Manila On Nov. 6, 1926


Vol XIII


No. 7
Menila, July, 1933


EDITORIALS


ANOTHER MILESTONE
On August 8, the Philippine Constabulary will
have attained its thirty-second anniversary as the
insular police lorce of the Philippine Archipelago.
On the eve of a new Constabulary year the organization is faced by far more varied duties than it
did thirty-two years ago when its chief function
was to supress banditry and chase outlaws who
preyed on their fellow citizens. The work of the
Constabulary today is far more complicated and
far more ardous than in the early days when the
offficers and men merely had physical barriers and
obstacles to surmount and overcome.
The air of discontent permeates the air
throughout the country today and there is seething
excitement relative to the political problems of the
country. Yet no alarm is felt among the citizentry, because of the explicit confidence of the people in the Philippine Constabulary to maintain
peace and order. This speaks well for the efficiency of the organization.
Never has the services of the Philippine Constabulary been more needed than it is today and in
the immediate future. In the early days the
United States army was on hand to enforce peace
and order if necessary. The United States Army is
still in the Philippines but Army officials have long
leit the maintenance of the internal peace and order
of the Islands exclusively the job of the Constabulary. Independence will make greater demands on
the services of the Constabulary, which will in time
form the nucleus of the Philippine Army. Because


of this the insular officials should endeavor to augment and build up a stronger force instead of cutting it down to the least possible minimum and overburdening it with duties which will eventually
hamper its efficient functioning.
On the thirty-second anniversary of its establishment the Constabulary can rightly look back
to a life span of efficient and commendable service
to the country. It can proudly point to its record
of achievements in keeping the peace of the country
and safeguarding the welfare of her citizens. Its
service can stand with equal excellence to any similar body in the world and is, indeed, to be envied.
On the occassion of the Constabulary birthday,
however, the officers and men in the service should
realize that the organization cannot forever depend
on is past laurels and achievements. It must continue to carry on. It must ever push forward and
gather unto itself more power and greater glory,
making its traditions serve as an inspiration and
an impetus toward a higher and bigger goal.
-) (—
PEN
THE CONSTABULARY
OFFICERS' CLUB
The officers of the Philippine Constabulary
have organized a club, the purpose of which is to
provide a medium of contact for the officers in
the service. Elavorate plans are being made to
establish club quarters which will afford a place
where officers from the provinces may board and
lodge while in Manila and vrill serve as a meeting
place where officers may come into social contact
with one another.
Such an undertakingl is commendable and
should receive the wholehearted support of every
officer in the service. The need for just such an
organization has long been felt, in the constabulary.
Khaki and Red wishes to extend the best of luck to
the organizers of the club and to offer any assistance necessary to make it a success. At the same
time we wish to warn them not “to bite off more
than they can chew” and to proceed slowly, contenting themselves with starting on a small scale and
expanding gradually as the needs of the club warrants.


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 39


Constabulary Officers
CiuD 11010s Liection


Major Martinez is chosen president of new organization.


By MAJOr J. V. AGDAMAG, Vice-President
OThe second meeting of the CONSTABULARY
OFFICERS' CLUB was held in Manila Garrison
on June 17, 1933. There were approximately 60
Constabulary officers of Manila and neighboring
provinces who attended this second reunion of the
“Khaki and Red” men and a few from the District
of Mindanao, Visayas and Northern Luzon. Among
the ranking officers who graced the occasion were
General C. H. Bowers, Lieut. Colonel Benito D. Valeriano and Lieut. Colonel Juan C. Quimbo.
The most important business transacted during this Officers’ get-together was the adoption of
the Constitution and By-Laws of the Club. The
Constitution and By-Laws was finally approved
and adopted after several amendments were introduced. One of those who sponsored an amendment increasing the initial and monthly fees of
the members hails from the Bicol region. He is no
less than the fiery and eloquent speaker, Captain
Zacarias Imperial, who, like “Castelar” delivered a
forceful and appealing oration in Spanish which
finally won the heart and soul of everybody present. His amendment was most logically approved
with overwhelming votes when submitted to votation. The next business of importance was the
election of the officers of the club. The result
was as follows:
President, Major Telesforo Martinez, Adjutant, P. C.
Vice-President, Major J. V. Agdamag, Assist

ajor


TELESTORO MARTINEZ
PRESIDENT


Major JOSE V. AGDAMAG
Vice-President


ant to District Commander and Inspector, Southern Luzon.
Secretary-Treasurer, Captain F.
I. Torres, District Adjutant, Southern Luzon.
For the information of the members, the following receipts and expenses are submitted:
Balance from last get-together,P28.20
From Headquarters, P. C. ... 30.00
Gen. C. H. Bowers, Lt. Col. J. C.
Quimbo, Lt. Col. B. D. Valeriano, Major M. Aguilar, Major T. Martinez,
Major P. E. Zablan, Major M. G.
Olimpia, Capt. R. Ramos, Capt. J. P.
Guido, Ist Lt. A.E. Fawcett, 1st Lt.
L.P. Lapuz, Lt. J.V. Villanueva, M.
D., 2nd Lt. R. Figueroa, Pharmacist,
P.C., and 2nd Lt. E.D. Andrews.
(Please turn to next page)


Captain FELICISIMO I. TORRES
Secretary -Treasurer


PAGE 40


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


From Manila Garrison ............ P26.00
Mejor E.M. Panis, M.D., Capt. M. N.
Castaneda, Capt. G. Alona, D.S., 1st Lt.
D.A. Alvarado, Ist Lt. R.S. Banez, Ist
Lt. I.. Florentin, 1st Lt. A.J. Fresnido,
1st Lt. B. Galinato, 1st Lt. A.B. Panopio,
Ist Lt. F. Selga, 2nd Lt. T.T. Asuncion,
2nd Lt. A.V. Sayson, and 3rd Lt. A.C.
Cruz.
From District of Mindanao........ ₱ 4.00
2nd Lt. R.T. Altura, M.D., and 2nd Lt.
V. Orais.
From District of Northerrn Luzon.. ₱ 2.00
Captain M. S. Torralba
From District of Visayas..........₱ 2.00
Ist Lt. B. Fernando
F.om District of Southern Luzon .. P83.00
Col: E. Bactat, Lt. Col. C. Cerquella, Major J.V. Agdamag, Major I. Buenconsejo,
Major A. Natividad, Capt. V.S. Bilbao,
Capt. F. Borbon, Capt. S. F. Cacdac,
Capt. S. C. Cruz, Capt. 2.R. Imperial,
Capt. R. Jalandoni, Capt. E. Lasam,
Capt. J.E. Mejia, Captain E. Mendoza,
Capt. M. Oppus, Capt. A. Ramirez, Capt.
E. Rello-a, Capt. B. R. Sison, Capt. P. F.
Tabuena, Capt. F. I. Torres, Ist Lt. A. R.
Barrios, 1st Lt. A. V. Bartolome, 1st Lt.
G. Castaneda, 1st Lt. L. D. Dizon, First
Lieutenant G. F. Ferreol, First Lieut.
L. T. Javalera, First Lieut. P. Magsino, Ist Lt. J.R. Mendoza, 1st Lt. R.F.
Perez, 1st Lt. J.G. Polotan, 1st Lt. A.B.
Pineda, 1st Lt. F. Sandico, 1st Lt. G.P.
Tomas, 2nd Lt. E.A. Abay, 2nd Lt. G.N.
Calicdan, 2nd Lt. A. Dabu, 2nd Lt. B.
Devera, 2nd Lt. S. Juban, 2nd Lt. Z.P.
Palacios, 2nd Lt. O. Sales, 3rd Lt. J. Celis Jr., 3rd Lt. L.S. Tan, and 3rd Lt. N.
S. Velarde.


Total receipts .. ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .P178. 20
EXPENSES
65 plates (9 ₱1.60 ..................... P104.00
4.30
43 cigars Old Presidentes .............
17 cigars, Good Presidentes ........... 1.02
7.30
2 bottles, Fundador .................
1 bottle Johuny Walker .............. 4.70
73 bottles beer, black ................. 13.14
50 bottles Soda, Royal .... 4.00


50 kilos ice.......................... 1.13
Talaba ........... 4.60
Shrimps .......................... 4.30
Transportation .................. 0.50


Total..................... .. P148.99
BALANCE ...... . .. . . . . . . . . . .. ₱ 29.21
Ten Gays before the party was held, a circular
letter was sent to all officers in Manila and neighboring provinces informing them that they should
be ready to offer their pet suggestions, motions and
remarks and crack their best jokes, fire their witticism and explode their humorous selves for our
wholesome entertainment. The officers who attended proved themselves not only equal to the expectation but we noted that our Capt. Z. Imperial
gave everybody a surprise. He made a lengthy
and eloquent appeal in English and Spanish for
the support of the Club. During his speech everyone sat down quietly and seriously took notice
of him. Someone remarked that it is but righi
that he is the Constabulary “Castela”.
The spirit of cordiality, liarmony and good
feeling prevailed among the members during the
luncheon and during the meeting.
We should not close this chronicle without acknowledging the excellent “esprit de corps" shown
by the following brother-officers who, though they
were not able to attend the party, paid their
shares so the party might be a success:
Col. E. Bactat, Lt. Col. C. Cerquella, Major
M. Aguilar, Major I. Buenconsejo, Major L. Ferraren, Major M. Nicdao, Major M. Olympia, Captain S.F. Cacdac, Capt. E. Lasam, Capt. J.E.
Mejia, Capt. A. Ramirez, Capt. E. Rellosa, 1st Lt.
A. V. Bartolome, 1st Lt. J. V."Villanueva, M. D.,
2nd Lt. M. Andrews, and 2nd Lt. R. Figueroa,
Pharmacist, P.C.
For your information, the manager of the next
gathering of the Constabulary Officers' Club is
Capt. M. N. Castaneda to be assisted by Capt. R.
Jalandoni.
It is also deserving of mention the up-to-dateness of the following officers in paying their ini

tial fees.
Captain M. Torralba ...............P2.00
1st Lieutenant J. G. Polotan....... 2.00
2nd Lieutenant R. T. Altura . 2.00

Total ...................... P6.00


DIIRO
ARADCONB
4

EGR CRA




Distributors:—Botica de Sta. Cruz


Patronize Our
Advertisers


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 41


Veterans Fund Drive Suings Underway


The fund raising caimpaign of the Veterans
of the Constabulary is off to a flying start, and
from all indications it is going to be just about the
biggest thing that ever happaned.
About June 20 the first delivery of books of
tickets was received from the printer and the mailing of them was started on the same day. Within
ten days the entire first order of books of tickets
were mailed out, yet before the mailing was completed some of the books from those first delivered
were already sold and the proceeds turned into the
Campaign Headquarters. According to officials
in charge of the campaign who have had previous
experience along this line, this had never happened before and it is remarkable to see the books of
tickets being turned in at such an early date.
There are several reasons for this outburst of
enthusiasm which should not be overlooked, the
first as well as the most important of which is the


fact that the Veterans of the Constabulary is one
of the outstanding organizations in the Philippines;
and when it comes to producing results it is second
to none.
Another good reason is the fact that the Gift
Distribution Committee has worked night and day
for months to secure the right merchandise at the
right prices, with the result that the gifts in this
campaign are the greatest ever offered. In fact it
can be said that prizes offered during this campaign are almost double any that were ever offered
before in a similar undertaking.
Col. Juan Dominguez, Major Telesforo Martinez, Capt. Rafael Ramos and other officials are
proud of this wonderful offering and are extending their sincere thanks to the many friends who
are assisting so nobly in this affair.
As to the prizes the greatest interest centers
on the two automobiles that are to be given away.


A MEN ROID VE GNVINIRIS SIBAN
is to be given away by the Veterans of the Philippine Constabulary in connection with the Fund
Raising Campaign.


Buy Tomorrow's Car Today!
The Newest
Model 40
V.3
e


"After We Sell We Serve”
TRADING & SUPPLY COMPANY
Main Office and Display Room:
Port Area (Malecon)
MANILA


Combining
the many advanced features that you
have always wanted in a motor car.
YOU GET—
New Speed
New Bequiy
New Comfori
New Economy
New Smoothness
New Reliability
AT UNUSUALLY LOW PRICES


PAGE 42


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


The committee selected two cars: a Ford DeLux
V-8 Convertible Sedan and an Essex Terraplane.
These two automobiles are only two of the 100-big
gifts that are to be given away on the last night
of the celebration. In a previous undertaking of
this kind there was only one automobile and about
50 last night gifts offered.
In previous campaigns of this kind there were
about six or eight prizes be given to the individual
ticket buyers. But the officials of this campaign
demanded bigger and better inducements be made
to offset the much-talked-of depression, therefore
there are thirteen (13) prizes given out with each
book sold not counting an extra special prize which
brings the total up to 14 prizes. Those of a superstitious nature should note that the committee has
adopted that famous lucky number thirteen.
Over P50.00 worth of merchandise is being
given out with every book of tickets, therefore, any
one who desires to purchase the entire book of tickets may do so and they will receive more than
their money’s worth in actual merchandise besides
contributing to a worthy cause and also having the
opportunity to participate in the distribution of
those 100 big last-night gifts. The books also contain hundreds of admission tickets to the fair
grounds in December which promises to be one of
the greatest events of its kind ever held in the
Orient. Several persons have already taken advantage of this most liberal offer.
Another set of prizes that is dausing quite a
stir among ticket sellers are the three big prizes
offered to the person who sells the greatest numa
ber of books. But it is not generally known that
to compete for these prizes all you have to do is to
have your friends who are selling tickets to mention your name when paying for their books. In
this way the seller as well as the ticket buyers re

ceive their premiums just the same and the party
who encourages such sales and is mentioned as such,
receives the credit and has an opportunity to participate in three prizes that are valued at over
P200.00.
It seems as though there is no end to the prizes that are offered during this campaign. Last
week the Gift Distribution Committee got ttheir
heads together and purchased 13 additional musical instruments and tennis rackets and are going to
give them away as additional prizes to the Constabulary Company who sells the greatest number
of books of tickets. And again it might be well
worth mentioning that these prizes are separate
from all other prizes and all that a company has
to do is to have their friends mention their company when the book is paid for and credit will be
given to that company. This is not only sounds
easy but is easy.
The Queen Contest Committee has been having numerous meetings to formulate the plans for
that most important feature of the campaign. There
are 1,000 votes that go with each fully sold book
of tickets. This Queen contest should create a
great deal of interest as the lady selected as Queen
will not only be wined, dined and feted and will
reign supreme during the nine gala nights of fun,
laughter and joy, but will also be offered an opportunity to appear in one of the forthcoming Philippine Talking Motion Pictures along with the biggest motion picture stars in the Islands.
Taking the campaign as a whole the officers
in charge such as Col. Dominguez, Major Martinez, Capt. Ramos and their many assistants are to
be congratulated on working out and formulating
the plans for such a gigantic undertaking and af

It Tastes Good!
Just like sweet cream!!!
Easiy digestible.
Powerful reconstructive for
CHILDREN and ADULTS,
who suffer from general
debility, malnutrition, anemia,
rickets, BERI-BERI, scrofulosis, neurasthenia, and other
ailments caused by lack of
vitamins.
Formula: Codliveroil 40%, Yolk
egg 10% Calc. lact. 0,3% Calc.
hypophesph. 0,305, Trag canth
4,200 Ad. dest. 45,26%0.
Examined by Bureau of Science
Laboratory No. 172,372
Approved by Board of Pharmacy
 Permit No. 321.


N



EHNTEN


The GERMAN
Codliver-Oil-Emulsion
combined with Yolk of Egg.
The only codliver-oil-emulsion
containing the four vitamins
A., B., D. and E.
Sold at all Drug Stores
or by C. O. D. from Agents:
Inhelder, Walch Co., Ltd.
China Bank Building
P. O. Box 1182 Manila
C. O. D.—P2.50 postage paid
per original bottle of 300
grams.


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 43


ter December 31 they should be entitled to an unanimous vote of thanks from the Constabulary Veterans and the Constabulary organization as a whole.


Following is what Secretary Teofilo Sison,
Secretary Quirico Abeto and Chief Columbus
Piatt have to say about the fund drive:


THE COVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
BBeparintent ni Justice
Manilu


Che Goterinent of the Ehilippine Salanbs
JBeparfment of the Interior and Labor
AHanila


In view of the growing body of the Veterans, Philippine
Constabulary, it has become necessary that a Charity Festival Benefit for the widows' and orphans: Welfare Fund be
undertaken in order to give aid ta all needy members and
families.
The Veterans are appealing to you for cooperation and
support, which in turn will also help you. The management
is offering you a wonderful opportunity in connection with a
novel scheme whereby you may use your spar e time to profitable advantage.
The Veterans organization is undertaking a BIG CHARITY FESTIVAL in December, 1933. The proceeds from this affair will
be used to help every ex-constabulary soldier, widow and orphan. The little help you ar e asked to render them will be
fully compensated.
oraatos
Secretary of Justice


I heartily indorse the efforts of the vetenans,
Philippine Constabulary in connection with the Festival
Benefit which is to be held this coming December, 1933.
This occasion will constitute an outstanding event in
the history of the Association because it will be the
first of its kind to be undertaken by it. The Association needs the full support of all public spirited citizens in order to make the affair a successful one. It
has also devised a way by which all those who assist
the organization in its undertaking will be rewarded
for their interest and work. The Constabulary Veterans
need money to carry on. A little help from the many
will work no hardship upon the individual, yet it will
enable the veterans to promote their work effectively.
I hope that every goyernment employee as well as
the public in general will give this cause his very best
efforts and support.


POLICE DEPARTMENT
CENTRAL OFFICE


THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
CITY OF MANILA


TEOPiLO SISON
Secretar/ of the Interior
and Labor


May 17, 1933.


I desire to subsoribe wholeheartedly to the movement of the veterans, Philippine Constabulary, in opening a charity-festival benefit for the welfare fund of
the widows and orphans of members of the Philippine
Constabulary. It is sincerely hoped that other organizations and the publio in general will unite and make
this festival an unqualified suecess.
I understand that the funds of this veteran organization are not sufficient to help all needy members
and their families and the publio owes its assistance
to this effort to raise funds for this worthy purpose.
The lives of the members of the Constabulary are
always in danger, and when a member of this organization gives his life in the line of duty his widows and
orphans need and are entitled to the aid of their comrades and the general publio.
I sincerely hope that this festival will be a huge
suecess as I know the veterans of the Philippine Constabulary merit our moral and material support.
Yours most sincerely,


ECOA


P-h


(Chief of Police)


PAGE 44


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933












BO
SO
Customs
Firearm
Internal Revenue
Ammunition
Fidelity
Judicial
Various
.Contract
INSURANCE


Fire


Marine
Earthquake
Typhoon
Rent


Compensation
Accident
Automobile
Plate Glass
Flood


Our bonds are acceptable to the Government of the Philippine Islands and the United States Government. We are the
Agents of the Union Insurance Society of Canton, Ltd, and the
Great American Insurance Company of New York.
CALL OR WRITE FOR PARTICULARS
Fidelity And Surety CompanyOf
The Philippme Islands
INCORPORATED MAY 8, 1912
AGENCIES—Cebu, Iloilo, Davao and Zamboanga
GEO. C. DANKWERTH
President


Monte de Piedad Bldg.,
Plaza Goiti, Manila.


P. O. Box 150
Tel. 2-12-55














July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 45


The Fateful End Of P.C.
Officers Who Have
Been Malacanan Aides


Major Baviera, retired, here
gives an interesting account
of the incidents in the lives of
aides-de-camps to former Gov.
ernors-General.


By MAJOR LUCAS BAVIERA, Retired


The readers of Khaki and Red who are mostly
Constabulary officers should be interested to know
the curious and ironical luck of their brother officers who have been assigned as Aides-de-Camp to
former Governors General of the Philippines. Fate
hais, apparently, worked against all-of them for many were untimely and forcedly separated from the
service. Untimely because they were able to reach
the twenty or more years period required for the
retirement with life pension. Some of them died
relatively young of protracted and painful diseases.
The chronological order and brief story of each
one of the Constabulary aides at Malacanang follows:
Major George S. Holmes, a handsome and tall
man, was the first P. C. Officer who was assigned as aide-de-camp to former Governor General
Cameron Forbes and afterward Governor General
Francis B. Hariison. He conducted and accompanied Mrs: F.B. Harrison on the s.s. Manchuria
bound for the States which was stranded near the
coast of Japan. He was afterward appointed Superintendent of the Constabulary Academy. Later
on he was confined in a hospital, suffering from a
sort of mental derangement, which was the cause
of his separation from the service.
Cap ain Michael J.. Byrne was aide-de-camp to
former Vice-Governor Gilbert. Shortly after this
assignment he resigned.
Captain Jeff D. Gallman was Senior Inspector of the Ifugao sub-province. Due to his exceptionally good services rendered among the Ifugaos,
Governor Forbes, offered him the position of aidede-camp. Unfortunately, on their return trip to
Manila, the Captain behaved in a manner that displeased the Governor, for he was under the
influence of some irritating substance. Upon their
arrival in Manila, he was ordered back to Quiangan, his station. Shortly after he resigned. Captain Gallman was one of the finest officers in the
service. All his promotions were due to meritorious service rendered in the field among the primitive people of the mountains.
Colonel R. W. Jones was the aide-de-camp to
former Governor General Francis B. Harrison.
While the Colonel was performing this duty, he was
given another assignment as Brigadier General of
the National Guard. In spite of an unknown disease—a sort of general spasm of the muscles—
which required him to go to the States several


MAJOR LUCAS BAVIERA, .C., RETIRED


times and consult the best known specialists, he was
able to reach the retirement perriod with a life pension. Shortly after his separation from the serv:
ice, he died comparatively young, from the same disease, after a long period of suffering.
Lieutenant Colonel Francisco Onate, former
Chief Surgeon of the organization was the first Filipino officer to achieve the distinction of becoming
the aide-de-camp to a Governor General of the
Islands. This officer accompanied former Governor General Harrison and his brother, Archibald,
on their trip to the States in 1918-1919, as the Governor’s private physician.
His separation from the service was untimely
for he was unable to retire with a life pension.
Back in the year 1914, Colonel Onate was appointed a political officer to work jointly with General
Charles E. Nathorst, then still a Major, for the
passage of the Constabulary Pension Retirement
Act. It is the irony of Fate that an officer who
worked hard for our actual Pension and Retire

PAGE 46


KHAKI and RED


ment Act, left the service without enjoying the benefits of the same.
Colonel Lucien R. Sweet was first aide-decamp to former Vice-Governor Yeater, who was at
the time Acting Governor General. Subsequently
he become aide to Governor General Leonard Wood.
Against his will he had to go on leave due to his
dreadful disease—Cancer. While he was confined in a hospital, he w as unexpectedly promoted
General and Chief of Constabulary. Shortly afterward, he died of a malignant tumor. Before
his death he had a long period of terrible pain.
His desire to come back to the Islands and work in
the capacity of Chief was not fulfilled. Fate was
against him. He was well-known for his upright
ness, squareness and fairness.
The last of the series of Constabulary aides at
Malacanang was Colonel R. A. Duckworth-Ford.
This officer was an English subject. He was ordered by Governor General Wood to go to Hawaii to
investigate labor conditions among the Filipinos in
the Territory. While he was doing this work, he
took advantage of this opportunity to secure American citizenship in one of the Federal Courts. After about ten years separation from the service, he
was one of those five American officers who were
appointed Majors during General Wood’s regime.
It was reported that his well-written and complimentary articles concerning Governor General
Wood’s administration which were published in the
London Times were rewarded with his assignment
as Malacanang aide. He had hardly had his twenty years service when he retired. As in Colonel
Onate’s case, the real cause of his separation is a
mystery, for immediately after his long vacation
abroad in 1932, when he was supposed to be in the
height of fitness, he retired or was forced to re

July, 1933
tire. He had the reputation of being a good writer. Khaki and Red has published some of his articles and stories. Destiny was against him for his
desire to stay longer in the service was not achieved.
Fortunately for the Contabulary, all the officers above cited have been promoted by sheer merit, from one rank to the next higher one, demonstrated in field service in the different provinces
to which they had been formerly assigned.
If the rapid promotion of an officer is due to
social graces, intimate connection with the publishers of newspapers of wide circulation, who indirectly publish his name and picture and to the management of banquets for the powerful ones, etc.
and not to sheer merit the organization will become demoralized.
This story may serve as a warning to the officers of the service who aspire to be an aide-decamp to the Chief Executive of the Islands, that
the position may carry with it a tragic and sad end.


Per bottle
₱0.80


BARTONS
DYE
INE
VSP
DOUBLS SERVKE SNOE POUSO
Wondor Shog Polish
RESTORES COLOR
PRESERVES LEATTER

CONCEALS SCUFFS
Makes Old Shoes Look New


Per dozen
P6.80


Per gross
P60.00


Colors:
Colors:
Coa aN. HAMILTON-BROWN codena Bra a
black
black
white kid Shoe Store and Haberdashery
white kid
light tan
light tan
109—111 Escolta, Manila
nut brown
nut brown
Sole Agents
oxblood
oxblood


SMCIXS.
JOrOnay
S10n
LA TLDALA


IA
27
H
L


For effective results
against skin diseases such
es: Prickly-heat, Dhoble
itch, Ringworm, boils,
 Chefing, Pimples, Mange,
A
Hongkong-foot, Eczema,
forunculosis, Dandruff
Herpes, etc.


Formula approved No. 214492: Comphora 6 Gm.¡Menthol 15 Gm.;
Resorcino, 50Gm.; Acid salicylic 506m.; Line oxide 240 6m.;
Sulphur 1206m.; Excipiens q s.1000 6m.


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 47


Constabulary Reminiscencies


By COL. FRANCISCO ONATE
Former Chief Surgeon and Lieut. Col., P. C.


On the occasion of
the anniversary of the
Philippine Constabulary, I send my greetings to all former
comrades and to the
young officers as well.
It is very gratifying for all the members of the Constabulary in and out of the
service, that this organization after thirty-two years has survived and rendered
valuable service to the
country.
If I am not mistaken, Colonel Eustaquio
Bactat, who enlisted
as a private, is the old

Col. FRANCISCO ONATE, Retired


est officer and member, in point of service, of this
grdat institution.
One day while I was at the Headquarters, P.
C., I happened to see an official who is in some
way connected with the publication of the Khaki
and Red. Being one of the stockholders of the
corporation, I inquired of the progress of the business.


The official referred to above, in his hnswer,
made me understand that as a business, Khaki and
Red was a losing proposition. He said that the majority of the officers, stockholders and non-stockholders, are indifferent to the Khaki and Red. He
invited them to send articles for their publication
in the monthly issues specially for the Anniversary
Nuumber, and that, with the exception of two or
three officers, all of them have not answered the
call.
Then, the official asked me why I did not
write some articles for the magazine.
I was glad to accept the invitation. I have,
however, a certain doubt, that this publication
might again have the tragic end that it had during
my incumbency ias president of the board of directors of the magazine.
Without apparent good reasons the publication
was immediately suspended by verbal order of the
then Chief of Staff. Until now I am at a loss regarding that unexpected and peremptory ukase.
Let us turn back to some historical facts. The
pronoun “I” shall often and necessarily be used
in f ese writings.


Not knowing that some day I was to be the
president of the board of directors of the Khaki
and Red Co., I accepted with reluctance the position of vice-president, when this post became vacant due to the changes of stations of the ranking
officers of the organization, at that time. The
president had to resign for he was assigned outside of Manila, the vice-president succeeded him
and all members of the board present elected me to
take the latter’s place. I served as a director, vicepresident and president of the corporation for a
period of of not less than four years. I am only
writing from memory for I have not the official
data right now. So, I am speaking, rather writing with certain authority of my experience with
the Khaki and Red Co.
It was a very thankless and unprofitable
task. There was no salary nor pecuniary compensation whatever for the position of president or
vice-president. The work was full of responsisibilities of different kinds.
The usual philosophy of: "Let the others cook
the food, as soon as it is prepared and cooked, you
and I and all of us will eat it” was the prevailing
mental attitude, and it seems that it is still now.
I may have been mistaken in attributing the
cause of the indifference of the majority of officers to the welfare and success of the Khaki and
Red Co., to that common mental attitude already
mentioned in the preceding paragraph. So I soon
substituted it for this.
Other causes may be found in the following
thought: “A magazine that can not publish any
constructive criticism against the Chief, or other
higher-ups in the Government without endangering the future of the sender or writer, does not
deserve the support of the entire organization."
Their support will mean a conscious, intentional
and willful conset of the injustice or unfairness
committed.
I submit to the readers of the Khaki and Red
what I believe are the apparent causes of that indifference complained of and they themselves can
appreciate and judge as to whether the first one,
or the second, is, or both of them are, true statements of facts.
The actual publishers are in a critical and embarrassing position, they are fighting against
great odds, they do not receive any moral nor material support from the high ranking officers. The
junior officers, are somewhat resentful. But all
of them, seniors and juniors, receive the benefits


PAGE 48


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


that Khaki and Red magazine has been, and is still,
fighting for in their behalf. The situation is pathetic, exactly the same as that of the "National Unity” preached and not practiced by our leaders.
Each and all of the members of our Legislature and other high officials in our government receive a copy of the Khaki and Red, it is inmaterial
as to whether or not they pay ther subscription.
The pertinent point is that they read regularly and
systematically editorials and articles of the magazine containing petitions for the improvement of the
organization, informing them of the efficient and
constant services performed by this and that constabulary unit scattered all over the Islands. All
this publicity serve as a propaganda for the whole
institution. That they have favorably acted on
them, no body can deny.
The Khaki and Red Magazine has done and is
still doing a great deal of good for the organization
in general.
If some one else is doing this work, "why
should I worry in wasting time, money and energy.” This idea was already expressed above and
is the one maintained by many.
A long article tires the reader. Let us be
satisfied at present with this short story. We will
continue in following articles to unriddle severa!
enigma or tell anecdotes or stories of the past.


Telephone 2-20-42
P. O. Box 1495


SUGAR MANUFACTURERS
GENERAL MERCHANTS
Sub-Agents For
Fire & Marine Insurance Companies
Manila, P. I.
719 Echague





ITs more Fun
TO KnOW


Camels are made from
finer, MORE EXPENSIVE
tobaccos than any other
popular brand. Try Camess and give your taste
a chance to appreciate
those costlier tobaccos.


PLAZA DUNCH
FRED M. HARDEN
Prop.
SOLE AGENTS IN THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS


MATCHLESS
BLEND


NO TRICKS IN CAMELS—JUST COSTLIER TOBACCOS





July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 49


General Orders
No. 72, s. 1933.
1. The minutes of the
Fifth Reunion of the
Guand Encampment are
hereby published for the
information of all concerned.
2. Opening of the
Grand Encampment. -
The Fifth Reunion was
formally opened at 9:30
a. m., on February 19,
1933, in the Social Hall
of the Manila Garrison,
presided over by the
ICommander - in - Chief,
Comrade C. E. Nathorst.
The Commander-in-chief
designated Comrade Felix Llorente as 1st Vice
Commander - in - Chief
and Comrade M. N. CasCastaneda as 2nd Vice
Commander-in-Chief.
3. Delegates and Alternates present were:
For Gen. Bandholtz
Post No. 1—Manila:
Comrades F. de Guzman, R. Lorenzana, L.
Arellano, D. Valmores,
and J. Y. Bato.
For Capt. Rickards
Post No. 2—Dagupan:
No delegate.
For Capt. Juan Post
No. 3—Laoag: Comrade
Bernabe Nicolas.
For Col. Mair Post
No. 4—Iloilo: Comrade
Nazario Soto.
For Lieut. Maynes Post No. 5—Dansalan.
No delegate.
For Capt. Rosado Post No. 6—Bacolod.
Comrade Filomeno B. Cabrera.
For Lieut. Magno Post No. 7—Zamboanga.
No delegate.
For Lieut. Ward Post No. 8—Jolo.
No delegate,
For Lieut. Walker Post No. 9—Cebu.
No delegate.
For Gen. Crame Post No. 10—Davao.
No delegate.



Comrade JUAN DOMINGUEZ
Commander-in-Chief
For Major Logan Post No. 11—Bayombong.
Comrade Ricardo L. Madamba, and Comrade
A. F. Abellana.
For Capt. Vandam Post No. 12—Tuguegarao.
Comrade Florentino Pagulayan and Comrade
Juan Ifurung.
For Sgt. Agsilo Post No. 13—Cabanatuan.
Comrade Amando B. Pineda and Comrade
Antonio V .Sayson.
4. Morning Session.—The Adjjutant General
read the annual report of the Commander-in-Chief
for 1932.


PAGE 50


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


Comrade MARIANO N. CASTANEDA Comrade ALEJANDRO YANCE
Comrade FELIX LLORENTE
Quartermaster General
Second Vice Commander-in-Chief
First Vice Commander-in-Chief


5. The Adjutant General also read the letter
of the Commander-in-Chief, Comrade Gen. C. E.
Nathorst, tendering his resignation as Commanderin-Chief due to the fact that he is to leave with his
family for a trip abroad.
6. Election of General Officers.—Comrade
Felix Llorente moved that the election of the Commander-in-Chief be made by acclamation. The motion, duly seconded by Comrade M. N. Castaneda,
was unanimously approved. Comrade Juan Dominguez was nominated and unanimously acclaimed Commander-in-Chief. The election then proceeded with the flollowing results:


First Vice Commander-in-Chief
Comrade Felix Llorente .......... 23 votes
Second Vice Commander-in-Chief
Comrade M. N. Castaneda ....... 21 votes
Quartermaster General


26 votes
Comrade Alejandro Yance .......
Judge Advocate General
Comrade Francisco de Guzman .... 15 votes
Grand Chaplain
Comrade Juan C. Quimbo ........ 16 votes
Surgeon General
Comrade Basilio J. Valdes ........ 24 votes
Members of the Council of Administration:
For Northern Luzon
Comrade Bernabe Nicolas ......... 28 votes
For Central Luzon
Comrade Antonio V. Sayson ...... 21 votes
For Southern Luzon
Comrade Domingo Valmores . ..... 21 votes
For Visayas
Comrade Nazario Soto ..... ....... 21 votes
For Mindanao and Sulu
Comrade Elias Dioquino .......... 17 votes


July, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAEE 51


The following Staff Officers were appointed:
Deputy Commander-in-Chief—Comrade T. Martinez
Leputy Commander-in-Chief in the U.S.A.—
Comrade O. A. Hansen
Chief of Staff . . . . . . . . Comrade J .A. Hernandez
Adjutant General . .. ..... Comrade Rafael Ramos
Inspector General & General
Installing Officer . ... Comrade M. G. Olympia
Asst. Adjutant General . Comrade Alejandro Yance
Asst. Qvartermaster General—
Comrade Justo Y. Bato
Aide to the Commander-in-Chief


Comrade Rosendo Lorenzana
Grand Historian . . . . .... Comrade Jose Velasquez
Grand Patriotic Instructor—
Comrade Lucas G. Baviera
Grand Trumpeter . ..... Comrade A. J. Fresnido
Sergeant-at-Arms . ... Comrade Francisco Polotan
Color Sergeant . . . . . . . . Comrade Gregorio de Leon
Color Bearers ...... 1. Comrade Leon Abando
2. Comrade M. del Rosario
3. Comrade Zacarias Matreo
4. Comrade Eugenio Alano
Color Guards ...... 1. Comrade C. Hermocilla
2. Comrade P. Caballero
Guard . . . . . ....... . . . . Comrade Benito Espejo


OF REGIMENTAL FAME
There are certain things everyone in
the regiment comes to know like their
squads right and squads left. Such is
West Point Khaki, a Khaki manufactured expressly for the tropics. You'll
save money by wearing West Point
Khaki!
Sold exclusivelp bp
LRAGUINALDO
514-520 Juan Luna, Manila
Cebu—Bacolod—Iloilo


PLEASE PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS)


77
UAUTHULA
Combustible For Internal
Combustion Engines


“Gastarla”, used for automobiles, autobuses, tractors, launches, etc., with
a slight adjustment of
the carburetor, will give
first class service, great
economy, and absolute
safety.
CENTRAL AZUCARERA
DE TARLAC
P. O. Box 143
Manila


EXCELLENT
Autobus Service
For Excursionists
We
offer the
safest and most
comfortable means of
transportation at a comparatively low cost and take
you anywhere in
the Provinces
of
RIZAL, CAVITE, BULACAN, LAGUNA,
TAYABAS AND BATANGAS.
PASAY TRANSPORTATION CO. ING.


Manila Office:
55 Alejandro VI
Tel. 2-26-28
Manila


Main Office:
Tambo, Paranag
Tel. 5-76-64
Rizal





PAGE 52


KHAKI and RED


July, 1933


VIII. Defensive Combat As Taught At
The U. S. Army School


(Continued from June issue)


(The following installment is a part of the series which
is a follow-up of the series on Offensive Warfare which was
concluded in the November issue of Khaki and Red. This
series will prove instructive and beneficial for everyone who
plans to take the promotional examinations which are based
largely on the Infantry Manual of which Defensive Combat
is a part. The glossary for this series may be found in the
December, 1932, issue of Khaki and Red.—Editor's Note.)
i. The organization and plan of defense of a strongpoint by a front-line company should include the following:
(1) Main line of resistance.
(a) The deployment of one or two platoons as a holding force.
(b) Location of combat posts to secure the development
of the maximum fire effect on the front, covering all approaches, and on the flanks covering the fronts of adjacent
units and the unoccupied intervals.
(c) Provisions for mutual fire support and cooperation
with adjacent units.
(d) Coordination of supportng weapons, ncludng provivion for the protection of machine guns and the covering of
dead spaces in their hands of fire by the fire of automatic
rifies.
(e) Observation and concealment
(f) Coordination with the support.


(g) Effective use of obstacles.
(2) Support.
(a) Deployment of one or two as a supporting force to
be used primarily for counterattack and to provide the
maximum fire support to the front line.
(b) Cooperation with the combat posts on the main
line of resistance within the strongpoint, and with adjacent
units.
(c) Concealment of dispositions.
(3) Local security. The detail of a local-security
detachment (when not provided by higher authuority) with
instructions as to location, mission, andl coordination with
djacent units.
(4) Command post and observation post. The establishment of a command post and observation post in accordance with the considerations discuussed herein (paragraph 34).
(5) Trenches and obstacles
(a) Construction in accordance with the instruction
contained in the battalion order and the principles contained
in paragraph 39.
(b) Location of tactical wire in coordination with the
final protective lines of machine guns.
(c) Determination of the number and location of approach trenches.
(d) Establishment of the trace of trenches along the
intervals between combat posts.


Jury, 1933


KHAKI and RED


PAGE 53


(e) Construction of wire around combat posts and
ftrongpoints.
(6) Coordination of fire and shock action.
(a) Coordination of the fire of the combat posts on the
main line of resistance with:
(i) Each other.
(ii) Adjacent units.
(iii) Supporting weapons.
(iv) Supports.
(b) Coordination of shock action to include:
(i) Support to be given a counterattack within either
platoon sector by the adjacent combat post.
(ii) Support to be given adjacent combat post.
(iii) Support to be given by supporting weapons
(iv) Assistance to be given to the battalion reserve in
case it counterattacks.
(7) Plans for counterattacks by the support.
(a) Best use to be made of the terrain features.
(b) Support to be given by adjacent units and supporting weapons.
(c) Part to be played by each and individual of the
tupport.
33. COMBAT POSTS.—a. A combat posts (see
glossary) is the smallest organized tactical locality in the
defense, its garrison varying from a few men to a rifle
platoon. It is so disposed as to cover by a fire definite
portion of the terrain, and its garrison is always prepared
to resist attack from the front, the flanks, and, when practicable, from the rear, it is the organic cell of ground
organization; and the desirability of unity of command and
control indicates the platoon as its usual garrison. In
broken terrain, however, or when the platoon has been given
a wide sector, the necessity for covering by fire the sector
assigned may require the platoon to garrison more than
one combat post.
b. The usual deployment of the platoon in defense is
in one line, but two lines may be advisable in situations
such as the following:
(1) When the platoon is located on a flank of a defensive position.
(2) When the sector assigned the platoon is so narrow as to prohibit deployment in one line.
(3) When the field of fire is short and broken, enabling
the attacker to reach assaulting distance under cover.
(4) When the platoon is acting alone.
c. Regardless of how the platoon is deployed (one or
two lines), it is a fundamental precept of the defensive
tactics of the units within the combat post that each shall
be able to cover with fire its own front and flanks and the
fronts of adjacent units. When it is deployed in two lines,
those units in rear must also be able to cover the flanks of


Complimenis
to the
LERAS
of
PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY
—):000: (—
.BECK, PNC.
MANILA
EEESS


(PLEASE PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS)


Maximum Returns....
Absolute Security
In investing your money you naturally expect
good returns coupled with the assurance that
the investment is safe. Then... invest your
money in our
SAVING SHARES
which are available at as low as P1.00 per
month, and pay a Fixed Dividend of 4%,
5%, and 6% depending upon time.
MORTGAGE LOANS
in Manila
under the most favorable terms
ANTONIO MELIAN
MANUEL M. RINCON
President
Manager
EL HOGAR FILIPINO
El Hogar Bldg., P.O. Box 105 Manila, P.I.
Iloilo-Cebu-Zamboanga-Baguio-Legaspi


PAGE 54


KHAKI and RED


July. 1933


the elements to their front. In general the rifle units of a
combat post are located in such a manner as to favor the
deployment of frontal and flariking fire. In order that they
may be able to deliver a maximum amount of effective fire
to the front and flanks, and, if necessary, to the rear of the
combat post, it may be advisable to locate them on a line
either parallel, oblique, or perpendicular to the general
front.


d. In the early stages of a hastily assumed defensive
(as when an attack has broken down when the machine
guns not occupied their defensive positions, the plan of
defense must be temporarily developed upon the dispositions
of the rifle units. Changes in these original dispositions
will often have to be made in order to coordinate them
with the dispositions of the machine guns (see Figure 5).
When the time and means are available for deliberate organization of the ground, the plan of defense must be arrived at by such mutual adjustment between dispositions of
the rifle units and those of the machine guns as to permit
the full use of their combined defensive powers. In accomplishing this adjustment, great weight must be given to the
utilization of the defensive firepower of the machine guns.
e. (1) The rifle units within a combat post are distributed in groups of from four men to a squad, the squad
leader retaining command and control even though
there be two groups. He stations himself where he can
conduct the fight of his squad, and at the same time keep
in communication with the next higher leader. He is responsible for and charge with the following:
(a) The proper fire distributions, fire control, and fire
discipline of his unit.
(b) Proper distribution of ammunition within the unit.
(To be Continued)


KHAKI DRILL
“WIGAN"


A
E
'kasr 
PAT
KHAKI ORI!"
ESPINNE
Agan nasadanatamal 
OlA

gritb, 5


)


Suppliers


WISE & COMPANY
MANILA


COMPLIMENTS


of



O








MANILA


EIUES


PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS.


 


KHAKI


and RED


 practiced by a physician or
Matawge and dispensing of abortives.—The penalties provided in article 256 shall be imposed in its
maximum period, respectively, upon any physician
or midwife who, taking advantage of their scientific knowledge or skill, shall cause an abortion or
assist in causing the same.
Any pharmacist who, without the proper press
cription from a physician, shall dispense any abortive shall suffer arresto mayor and a fine not ex1,000 pesos.
SECTION THREE—Duel.
ART. 260. Responsibility of participants in a duel.
—The penalty of reclusion temporal shall be imposed upon any person who shall kill his adversary in a duel.
If he shall inflict upon the latter physical injures only, he shall suffer the penalty provided
therefore, according to their nature.
In case any other case, the combatants shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor although no physical injuries have been inflicted.
The seconds shall in all events be punished as
accomplices.
Art. 261. Challenging to a duel.—The penalty of
prision correccional in its minimum period shall
be imposed upon any person who shall challenge
another, or incite another to give or accept a challenge to a duel, or shall scoff at or decry another
publicly for having refused to accept a challenge
to fight a duel.
(To Be Continued)



Iwous....
GOLDENBERG'S
offers
THE LOWEST PRICE
THAN EVER!
Here is the proof:
“Gabardine” for men’s Suits ...... P 0.70 meter
Raincoats “Goodyear” for Women
5.00 each
and Men, from—............
Elegant Raincoats for Women ....
3.50 ,,
Fancy Shoes for Women ..........
2.50 ,
3.50 pair
 Shoes for Children .......
Silk Stockings ....................
0.75
Silk Crepes with designs, from—
1.20 meter
Percales and Fantastic, from—
0.20 ,
Chifon Voiles with designs, from—
0.30 ,,
Poplins Estanpados, from—......
0.25 ,
Plain Colored Cloths, from0,208
Beautiful Silk Scarfs of 1 pheter
1.20 each
square, from—.....!...?....
Etc., Etc., Etc.
We cater to wholesale Buyers
You are welcome at
GOLDENBERG'
194 JUAN LUNA
Near China Bank Bldg.


Read Khaki and Red


HE PHILIP
NECUARANTY CO, ING


ESTAALISHED IN 197
SURETY BONDS—We execute Bonds of various lainds specialy
FIREARMS BONDS.
FIRE INSURANCE—in thePhilippine Islands
ANS—Secured by first mortgage on improved properties in the City of


A.M. The iVew
Penal


(Continued from June issue)


(For the benefit of the officers and men of
the Constabulary and Police services KHAKI AND
Red is reprinting the New Penal Code. Following
is the seventeenth installment.—ED. NOTE)


SECTION TWO.—Infanticide and abortion


ART. 255. Infanticide.—The penalty provided for piarricide in article 246 and for murder in
article 248 shall be imposed upon any person who
shall kill any child less than three days of age.
If the crime penalized in this article be committed by the mother of the child for the purpose
of concealing her dishonor, she shall suffer the penalty of prision correccional in its medium and
maximum periods, and if said crime be committed
for the same purpose by the maternal grandparents
or either of them, the penalty shall be prision mayor.
Art. 256. Intentional abortion.—Any person who
shall intentionally cause an abortion shall suffer:
1. The penalty of reclusion temporal, if he shall
use any violence upon the person of the pregnant
woman.
2. The penalty of prision mayor if, without


using violence, he shall act without the consent of
the woman.
3. The penalty of prision correccional in its me!
dium and maximum periods, if the woman shall
have consented.
Art. 257. Unintentional abortion.—The penalty
of prision correccional in its minimum and medium
periods shall be imposed upon any person who shall
cause an abortion by violence, but unintentionally
Art. 258. Abortion practiced by the woman her.
self or by her parents.—The penalty of prision cor
reccional in its medium and maximum periods shal
be imposed upon a woman who shall practice an
abortion upon herself or shall consent that any
other person should do so.
Any woman who shall commit this offense to
conceal her dishonor, shall suffer the penalty of
prision correccional in its minimum iand mediun
periods.
If this crime be committed by the parents of the
pregnant woman or either of them, and they aci
with the consent of the offenders shall suffer the
penalty of prision correccional in its medium and
maximum periods.


USESESESESEBESRSESASESESESESESESRSESESESESESESESESESESESESESISRSESESESESESUSESESESESESESBEAFAFAFASABASASANAEAS28292S
Ure


UD IIES IvO



9918 AGEAPRS


TORS


1 EQUIPMENT
-TIFFANY AND
DIO
OTHER INDEPENDENT PRODUCTIONS.


OPERATING THE
RADIO and PALACE THEATRES


gA


CINE TONDENO — CINE MAGALLANES
CINE PACO


AND CINE ZORRILLA


- - —    EDEnE

Office of the Fresident


nf fhe hilippines


essade


I take pleasure in extending my greetings to the officers and enlisted
men of the Philippine Constabulary on the occasion of its 6?nd anniversary.
As it reaches its olnd year of existence, the PC can look back with
pride at its accomplishments. During the last six decades, it has proven


itself a reliable factor in promoting the peace and security of our nation.
As Commander-in-Chief, I take personal pride in the brillant record of
service of its fighting men.


 On this occasion, I call upon the officers and enlisted men to uphold
the noble traditions of the Philippine Constabulary in order that they will
be able to bequeath to those who are to come after them the, same untarnished record of soldiery left behind by their predecessors. I also commend them for their achievements and look to the future with heightened
confidence in their ability to preserve peace in our land and to promote
the progress of our people.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT
of the Philippines
Malacanang
MESSAGE


August 8, 1963
Congratulations to the officers and men of the Philippine Constabulary
as they mark the olnd anniversary of the organization on August 8, 1963.
Since its creation as a national police force, the rank and file of the
Philippine Constabulary have racked up an enviable record of valor and
heroism in the field and contributed substantially to the effective maintenance of law and order throughout the country. I am confident that the present members of the force will prove equal to the challenges that await them
in the future and will live up to the high standards and lofty traditions
establishment by their predecessors.
“Mabuhay' and more power to the Philippine Constabulary!


EMMANUEL PELAEZ


 


Page 6


Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE
Office of the Secretary
Camp Murphy, Quezon City
MESSAGE
To the officers, enlisted men and civilian personnel of the Philippine
Constabulary, I whole-heartedly convey my greetings on this the sixty-second
anniversary of your organization.
The man in “Khaki and Red” is presently entrusted with a more responsible role in the national effort for socio-economic advancement of our
people. He personifies the courage of the people to eradicate the malignant
forces that deter the creation of an atmosphere conducive, to the pursuit of
private and public productive enterprises. He exemplifies the constitutional
and governmental prerogative to grant justice to anybody; the use of force
against those who would place themselves above the law and our national
virtues; and against those who seek the decay of our democratic way of
life. His vast powers, must therefore, be used discreetly and judiciously
in the accomplishment of his avowed mission. This, he must do to add
more lustre to the constabulary's history of service.
My congratulations again and best wishes to non ali.


MA GaAta,
MACARIO PERALTA, URJ


Secretary


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Republic of the Philippines
Department of National Defense
Office of the Secretary
Camp Murphy, Quezon City
MESSAGE
In its sixty-two years of continued and meritorious service, the Philippine Constabulary has indeed created an image of a worthy arm of the government that constantly endeavors to stimulate national progress through
vigilance, and courage in the preservation of peace and, order.
From a skeleton force, sixty-two years ago, the Constabulary today has
transformed itself into a mobile, flexible and systematically-trained crimebusting organization. Its tradition marked with heroism in various times
and places in our history, is complimented today by the growing awareness
among its members that theirs is the great responsibility of guarding the
countrysides from all forms of criminalities and at the same time guarantee
justice for everybody.
I call, therefore, on the military and civilian personnel to uphold this'
responsibility well because only by doing such can the people pursue their
productive endeavors, unmolested and free. Such is the guarantee for
progress.
Best wishes to you all.


Undersecretary


age 8


 


On the 6lnd anniversary of the Philippine Constabulary, I salute the
officers and men for another fruitful year of loyal and dedicated service to
our country and people.
At this stage of our political and economic development, the reign of
peace and order plays a crucial role as it makes possible a setting for the
free interplay of factors conducive to progress. This is fundamental, and
of which the Philippine Constabulary, as the national law-enforcing arm oj
the government, is primarily responsible. In this particular task, the officers and men of this famed outfit, together with the civilian component
elements, have acquitted themselves creditably and well.
The recent events, which now form part of our contemporary history,
attest to the indispensability of the Constabulary. In the face, of the present-day not too dependable local police forces, the Constabulary has assumed the over-all responsibility in the maintenance, of peace and the rule
of law. Thus, oftentimes than not, it has been called upon to the rescue of
citizens in distress and the succor of victims of criminality. It has used its
manpower and resources in the performance of a thousand and one important missions all directed towards the stability of our nationhood. For all
these worthy achievements, a grateful Filipino people, certainly, take pride
in congratulating the Constabulary on another year of its existence.
As the khaki and red marks another year of public service, I wish to
renew my faith and confidence in the unswerving loyalty and selfless devotion to duty of the. Officers and Men who made possible the colorful histery of the Constabulary. I ask them, once again, to rededicate themselves
to the public duty they have sworn to discharge always keeping in mind that
there is no greater glory than to be of service to one's God, Country and
People.
Keep up the good work


General, AFP
Chief of Staff


JULY-AUGUST, 1963


Page 10


Major General, AFP
Vice Chief of Staff


 


8 August 1963
It is with great pleasure that I extend sincerest felicitations to the Officers, Enlisted Men, and Civilian Employees of the Philippine Constabulary
as they celebrate the o?nd anniversary of the founding of their organization.
Another milestone of dedicated and loyal service to our country and
people has been added to the colorful history of the. Khaki and Red. In its
sixty-two years of service, the Constabulary has set an enviable record of
valor and heroism. As the national law-enforcing agency, it has constantly
endeavored to promote national progress by providing the correct climate
conducive to the productive growth and development in the social, political
and economic fields. The Constabulary mirrors the courage and aspirations
of our people in their struggle for a better way of life in peace and abundance.
May our people continue to give it their support so that the Constabulary can continue to perform its manifold duties as protector of our rights
and guardian of the peace.


I congratulate the Officers, Men and Civilian Employees of the Philippine Constabulary on the occasion of the o?nd anniversary of the founding of their organization.
The Constabulary, as the national law-enforcing agency of the government, assumes a crucial role in securing the stability of our nationhood. In
the pursuance of its duties, this outfit does not only maintain peace and
order, but it also provides an atmosphere conducive to productive undertakings, thus promoting the economic growth of our country.
Like any other member of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, I share
the pride with all constabularymen in the observance of another fruitful year
of meritorious accomplishments.
May our good people continue to give the necessary support and cooperation to all constables so that they shall be able to junction more
effectively and well. No assigned task can be difficult to accomplish with
the people sharing in the toil.
Congratulations, again, and carry on the good work.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 11


“DEDICATION TO DUTY IMBUED WITH
MORAL REGENERATION IS OUR YARDSTICK OF SERVICE.”
Gen GARCIA


MESSAGE


To the officers, enlisted men and civilian employees of the Philippine Constabulary:
Through the pages of the “Khaki and Red” I greet the members
of the Command on the occasion of the 6lnd anniversary of its
jounding. From an insular police force organized to meet the
threats to peace and order, it has grown in stature into what it
is now — a major service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.
It is writing a noble chapter that could be well entitled the
Constabulary Profession of Arms, in the social, economic and
military history of our country. I am pleased to note that we
have not faltered in the face of the varied tasks we are now
asked to perform.
I ask every member of the Command to look back for guidance
and inspiration to the traditions that bind the red to the khaki
into a uniform that is not wanting in sagas of courage. We can
not all write chapters in that record, but we can all see to it that
the record is kept clean.
Good luck, and may God bless us all!
DOMINADOR F GARCIA
Brigadier General, AFP
Chief of Constabulary


Page 12


 


The Early Philippine Constabulary
These researches were made possible through the courtesy of Mr. Ramon Estrada of Quezon City, based on his
collections, one of which is THE STORY OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY written by Lt Col Harold Hane


Elarth, a retired PC Major.


The evolution of the PC uniform is said to be closely
associated with the history of the force. In the early
decade, the uniform of the Constables was patterned after
that of the U.S. Army. The non-Christian soldiers were,
however, allowed to retain their typical uniforms, like
the “fez” of the Muslim Constabulary men. The symbolic
"red" was added to the khaki when the Corps was
"Filipinized.”


Mission and Accomplishments — General
The mission of the Constabulary, briefly
stated, was to establish and maintain stable
government in the three thousand islands
known as the Philippine Archipelago. In his
book, The Philippines, Past and Present, former
Commissioner Dean C. Worcester states, "It
(The Constabulary) has established and is maintaining a condition of law and order never before equalled or approached in the history of
the islands. Although the mission and its successful accomplishment may thus be stated in a
few words, the records disclose that it was a
long, hard and bloody task.
How this mission was carried out — the
detailed account of some of the thousands of
stirring events in which this famous Corps
participated between 1901 and 1936 — is “THE
STORY OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY."
In the telling of this story which former
Governor-General W. Cameron Forbes in his
book, The Philippine Islands, characterized as
“one of heroism, endurance, and loyalty to
ideals under great difficulties,” the names of
the officers participating in these events will
be mentioned; for it was the privilege of the
writers to have a part in some of the incidents
described and, more important, to be personally acquainted with many of those names
appear in this account.
Few of the military operations described
herein may correctly be called “battles, but
where the odds invariably were with the enemy,
even brief engagements often were very sanguinary. Casualties among the American of

ficers by the time the World War I called most
of them to the Army of the United States in
1917 totalled 19 killed and 30 wounded in
action; and 37 died from other causes largely
due to the hazardous nature of this service.
But great as were these casualties, loss
from other causes was far greater. Attrition
by reason of loss of health or morale was tremendous; infact, while the rosters show an
average strength of 225 American officers, in
the first sixteen years a total of 997 Americans
held commissions in the Corps — a 400% turnover.
The story of the fighting phase of the
Constabulary activities is a veritable chronicle
of death — death from rifle, bolo, spear; from
cholera, dvsentery and drowning. Human life
seemed of small accounts in those days of
jungle warfare. But it is noteworthy that there
is no record of any slaughter of the enemy by
an overwhelming force of Constabulary. Always the ratio was in reverse, and the tradition: "TO BE OUTNUMBERED, ALWAYS; TO
BE OUTFOUGHT, NEVER" was born in the
earliest days of its existence. Moreover, it is
highly significant that in its entire history, during which it fought hundreds of engagements,
no unit of the Philippine Constabulary ever
surrendered to the enemy.
Tulisanes on Luzon, Pulajans in the Visayas, and Moros in Mindanao matched their
fanatical bravery against the gallantry of the
khaki-clad soldiers, and at the end of the first
decade of such fighting the score stood: Constabulary dead — 50 officers and 1160 men;
Enemy dead — 4862, captured 11,979.
In this jungle-wrapped country, habitat of
the Malay, military maneuver in combat rarely
was feasible.


The constabulary “gave birth” literally to the aborning
Philippine Army when Commonwealth President Quezon
(seated in photo) signed in 1936 the National Defense
Act. The PA today still looks up to the PC as its progenitor.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 13


Brief Sketches Of Some PC Old Hands


Brig Gen HENRY T. ALLEN, First Chief of Constabulary


Major General Henry T. Allen was born in
Kentucky in 1859. He was a graduate of the
United States Military Academy (class 1882).
When the Philippines passed the Organic
Act or the Jones Law on July 18, 1901 (the law
which created the Philippine Constabulary) he
organized and was appointed on July 31, 1901
as first chief of the PC with the temporary
rank of Brigadier General. He was then a Captain assigned in the U.S. 6th Cavalry.
On January 31, 1903, after serving as Chief
PC for one year, his promotion was confirmed
by Governor General William H. Taft, with the
approval of the Secretary of War. General
Allen was relieved from active duty with the
Philippine Constabulary in 1907. He was then
promoted to Major General in 1917, United
States Regular Army.
He served as Commander of the American
Forces in Germany from 1919 to 1920.
General Allen holds the rank of Major General when he retired from active military duty
(USA) in 1923.
He was decorated by the United States
government the Distinguished Service Medal;
Indian Wars Medal; Philippine Insurrection
Campaigns Medal; Mexican Border Medals and
Army of Occupation Medal; Spanish-American
Campaign Medal; Philippine Congresional Medal (World War I).
From the Philippine government, he re

ceived the Luzon Campaigns Medal and the
Visayan Campaigns Medal.
Major General Henry T. Allen died on August 30, 1930 at Charmain, Philadelphia.
MAJOR GENERAL HARRY H. BANDHOLTZ
General Bandholtz was born in Michigan,
USA, in 1864. He was a graduate of the United
States Military Academy in 1890. He was first
appointed colonel in the Philippine Constabulary
on 9 April 1903, and became the Chief of the
Constabulary with the rank of major general in
1907. On 1 September 1913 he was relieved as
chief of the PC.
The American general was appointed major
general of the United States Army in 1923 and
retired from the US military service in the
same year.
He was in charge of the campaigns in
Albay and Sorsogon in 1903 against Ola and
Toledo, and obtamed the surrender of leading
outlaw chiefs in 1906.
General Bandholtz died on 7 May 1925. He
was a holder of the Spanish-American campaign medal, US Congressional medal for military services in the Philippines, (Philippine Insurrection) campaigns medal, Mexican Border
Medals, Victory medal for World War I, and
the Distinguished Service Medal.
LIEUTENANT GENERAL JAMES G. HARBORD
General Harbord was born in Illinois in
1866. He was a graduate of Kansas State
Agricultural College in 1886. He was first appointed colonel in the PC in 1903 until his relief in 1913. General Harbord was the first
chief of Mindanao and Sulu, acting chief of the
PC in 1913, first chief of staff of the American
Expeditionary Forces in Europe in 1917, later
became commanding general of the Second Division of the United States Army. He took
part in all major offensives in the European
campaigns. He was deputy Chief of Staff of
the US Army from 1921-1922 and retired from
active military service later in 1922.
He held the rank of Lieutenant General when
he retired.
General Harbord became president and
later Chairman of the Board of Radio Corporation of America. He was a candidate for
vice president at the 1920 Republican Party
Convention, but he stepped aside in favor of
candidate Dawes.
General Harbord is a medal holder for services in the Indian Wars, Spanish-American
campaigns, Cuban occupation, Congressional
Medal for Philippine campaigns, Philippine (Insurrection) campaigns, Mexican border medals,
World War I Victory Medal, Distinguished Ser

Page 14


 


vice Medal, Distinguished Service Medal (Navy)
and Luzon, Mindanao and Sulu campaigns
medals. He died on 20 August 1947.
BRIGADIER GENERAL RAFAEL CRAME
Brigadier General Crame was born in Rizal
province in 1863. He was a graduate of the
Special Infantry School in 1881, became third
lieutenant in 1902. In 1903, he was promoted
to second lieutenant and first lieutenant Captain 1905, Major in 1906, Lieutenant Colonel in
1907, full-fledged Colonel in 1914 and Brigadier
General on December 17 1917. In the same
year he was appointed Chief of the Constabulary, the first Filipino to hold the stewardship
of the PC.
General Crame was awarded the Medal for
Valor in 1921.
During the Spanish times he served in the
Spanish Army as a volunteer private, then to
first lieutenant in 1881 until 1898.
General Crame was awarded two Spanish
medals.
He died on 1 January 1921.


E
A



E

I








E
I

O

P

AE
A
S
S
I
E

O


E


Copy of a letter from the collections of Japanese-executed, pre-war fabulous Tenyente Francisco Canuto ng
Konstabularia, showing that the PC was once under the
Department of the Interior and Labor.


Major General Paulino B. Santos is a graduate of the PC Academy (class 1914); third
lieutenant in the constabulary in the same year,
second lieutenant in 1915 and two years later
was promoted to first lieutenant. He became


a captain in 1918, major in 1923; lieutenant colonel, 1930, and retired from active military service in the same year. He returned to active
military service as chief of staff of the newly
organized Philippine Army in 1936, with the rank
of a major general. Two years after, he retired
again from active service.
General Santos saw military actions in Bulacan in 1914, in Lanao from 1915 to 1919, Sulu
in 1919-1924. From 1924 to 1930, he was adjutant general of the Philippine Constabulary
and Philippine Army Chief of Staff from 1936
to 1938.
The general participated actively in the
many military campaigns in morolandia; and
was awarded the medal for valor and the
wounded soldier’s medal for gallantry in action
in the battle of Bayang Cotta, Lanao, in 1923.
In 1920, he became the provincial governor of
Lanao and served the term until 1924.
General Santos first joined the PC in 1909
and was a Constabulary officer until 1912. He
was the director of the Bureau of Prisons from
1930-1936, manager-director of the Government’s
settlement project in Koronadal, Cotabato, from
1938-1942.
The Japanese army held him as a prisoner
of war from 1942 to 1945. Death claimed his
life while in Japanese hands on 29 August 1945
near Tumanang, Mountain Province, a few days
before Japanese General Masuoka’s forces
collapsed.
He was born in Tarlac province in 1890.
MAJOR GENERAL BASILIO J. VALDEZ
General Valdez was born in Manila in 1892.
He was a graduate of the University of Santo
Tomas, Manila, with a degree of Doctor of Medicine in 1916. He entered the military service as a military doctor in 1921, rising to Captain the following year, Major in 1925, lieutenant Colonel and chief surgeon of the constabulary in 1926. He became Chief of the Constabulary in 1934 with the rank of Brigadier
General. In 1936 General Valdez was promoted
to major general assigned as deputy chief of
staff for the newly organized Philippine Army
in 1936. He became chief of staff of the PA
in 1939. He was the chief of staff of the Philippine Army under the exile Philippine Commonwealth Government in the United States
throughout the war. He was relieved from the
position in 1945 when the American forces returned the Commonwealth Government in Manila. He retired from active military service
in 1946.
General Valdez is the holder of the following awards: Silver Star for gallantry in action
on Bataan, and seven French Medals including
Legion of Honor. He is an awardee of World
War I and World War II Victory Medals, Defense Medal, Asiatic-Pacific Campaigns Medal
(World War II), Philippine Liberation medal,
Long Service Medal and Luzon Campaign
awards.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 15


Threadbare suits and personal effects of the indomitable
Tenyente Canuto retrieved from his "Kingdom domain"
in Mainit, Surigao del Norte, by the Troop Information
& Education Office, HPC the prized possession of his
followers who believe in him up to the present as the
symbol of unwavering conviction and bravery even as the
Nipponese bladed “Katana” lopped off his head one July
day in 1942.


MAJOR GENERAL GUILLERMO B. FRANCISCO
Maj. Gen. Guillermo B. Francisco was born
in Manila in 1885. He was a graduate of Liceo
de Manila in 1907 and Constabuary Academy
(class 1914).
He was commissioned third lieutenant in
the same year; second lieutenant in 1911; first
lieutenant in 1913; Captain in 1917: Major in
1922; Lt. Colonel in 1924; full-fledged Colonel
in 1927. In 1936, he was promoted to Brigadier
General and in 1941 was promoted to MajorGeneral. He held the same rank when he retired from active military service in 1949.
His assignments include: Luzon from 1908
to 1927; District Commander of Visayas from
1927 to 1936. Chief of Constabulary from 1938
to 1941. Commanding General 2nd Division on
Bataan; until he was captured by the Japanese
and became a prisoner of war in 1942. He
served as technical adviser to President Quirino
from 1946 to 1949.


BRIGADIER GENERAL SIMEON DE JESUS
Brigadier General Simeon de Jesus was
born in Pampanga in 1894. He graduated from
the Constabulary Academy in 1916.
He was commissioned third lieutenant
when he enlisted in the Philipine Constabulary
in 1916. After a year of service, he was pro

moted to second lieutenant; first lieutenant in
1918; Captain in 1922; Major in 1935; Lt. Colonel in 1937; full-fledged colonel in 1941; Brigadier General in 1941.
He served in Luzon, Cebu and Negros. He
was instructor in the Philippine Constabulary
Academy in 1924. In 1942, he was captured
by the Japanese and became a prisoner of war.
He was incharge of the Military Intelligence
Guerrilla forces in 1944.
In 1945, he was arrested by the Japanese
and was executed on 7 January of that year.
He was posthumously retired from the
Philippine Army as of date of death.


SOME PC OLD HANDS
The foregoing biographical sketches were picked at random from an old collection. We shall endeavor to run more of these as a regular section in
succeeding issues.
The Editor


His boots and other paraphernalia of the “Brias Roxas
Escolta” trade mark associate in like terms the nostalgias of the HPC Oriente Building at the Binondo park,
the Sunday afternoon PC band concert at the Luneta, the
provincial inspectors and the omnipresent bolt-action
Springfield Rifle Model 1903.


Page 16


 



DO

 





 


TD
 

S

 NOD




SO
ON
 




Even in his virile years the Old Soldier failed not to rendezvous with PC old hands and other leaders of the
nation.


JULY-AUGUST, 1963


Page 17


O AN
M
R
A PA
PAIVAtG ACACCD LECEIOUCT IA 
ADOO  O 
PPO  NC STU A LS
PIoote  et JANHO
LNDON CADUGO FOLTADIS D 
ORL A


S RLYES
  A
B


HSA
 
AD CO N CIS
   
  
  
AOO 


AL
 

 
 AS 
A LSS M
P  
 A 
ODOIO CA PANN 


NO 
OA D
HDLIDD
E
BEDL AO OD
ADDO  D 
OCA ALO APOL MAPN
O A  ANUO 
 
 C A



PI
AARDDO


V
A OIO
A
HNUO
 I


Biographical data of some of our men, culled in a nutshell,


Page 18


 


E
DRO
  O

ARLO

 N
OO CA ANO
d M 
AOO A 

NOOELAD
S

AA  
IAUIO
COS LA
E C
 

 OO 


A 

 

 DDD

S
  
C M
NO ON  N
ETI
 
I 
A

 DAE
SO A
OO  
 A
 I

ENA 
O AN
TUA



 


OAA 




SCA
N 


 

AN

O


Happy days for the Jardeleza, the Torralba, the Kangleon, et al, in their poses of the lapsed thirties.


TULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 19


NLSTOR


S


A


s Snobbishdies
The Ler

LES






SO 


ND

A 
 



S
D





A page of a 1937 copy of the “Khaki & Red” magazine been recruited into the taddling year-old Philippine Army
reminds of intimate names of old PC personnel who have


Page 20


 


PI


E
S

I
E








A

VENO
E

VE


A

E



S
A
 NOA
A
TIO

V
ANN


S
S

A
A


N


H


S




VI

A

S



EN


UDI

A


AD


N




SLL L
E
NCOCOU
C
 DO
S
C  
SA
HD

SAN
SC E

 NLA G
  O
 P
N
 
U D
 
E
M


H
A UI


 D


MA O 
IO





Durable “Khaki & Red” magazine weathers the vicissitudes of time.


TULYACGUST, 1963


Page 21


Personnel of TROOP INFORMATION & EDUCATION OFFICE, publisher of " " Magazine. Standing, left to right: SySgt F. Miguel, Chief Clerk; Mr. Joe Halili, Managing Editor; Cpl E. Alonzo, Driver; Mr. Conde
Ubaldo, Advertising Manager; Mr. D. Devela, Message Center Clerk; Mr. Carlos F Orevillo, Writer-Researcher and
editorial assistant; Mr. V. Cruz, Messenger and Coffee Manager; MISgt L. Mallari, Editorial Asst.; Mr. J. Eusebio Jr.,
Staff Artist; and Sgt P. Gregorio, Fiscal & Supply Clerk.
Sitting, same order: Miss T. Salcedo, Typist; Capt Willie Chavez, Ex-0 and Asst. Chief; Maj Constante Ma Cruz,
Chief, and Editor and General Manager, and Miss E. Cruz, Typist.


Officers And Men Of The PC Special Mission Group
1st row, left to right: Sgt. E. Fernandez, S4Sgt R. Roldan,
Sgt J. Caburian, TASgt L. Flores, Sgt A. Marcelo, Sgt
R. Manzano, MiSgt F. Pura. 2nd row: Ist Lt B. Feliciano,
Ist Lt N. Maines, Capt A. Adamos, Lt Col A. G. Ilomin,
Capt F Sarmiento, Ist Lt B. Diego. 3rd row: S4Sgt D.
Malabuet, S4Sgt J. Cruz, Agt. S. Santos, S/Sgt M. Caluza,
Sgt E. Talucod, T/Sgt L. Rosales, T/Sgt T. Cpl O Barba,
Aglugub, MISgt E. del Rio, TASgt F. Lubrin, Sgt B.
Johnson, T/Sgt J. Garcia, MISgt H. Espaldon, S7Sgt A.
Quidante, and Sgt R. Zapata.


Page 22
 


Office of the President of the Philippines
Presidential Committee on Administration
Performance Efficiency
Malacanang, Manila
June 13, 1963
Major Constante Ma. Cruz
Chief, Troop Information & Education Office
Headquarters Philippine Constabulary
Camp Crame, Quezon City
Dear Major Cruz:
I would like to thank you for your help in
publicizing our work on the Legal Primer in the
"Khaki and Red” the official publication of the
Constabulary, as well as for your thoughtfulness in
sending me a copy of the magazine.
We now have started distributing copies of the
primer to all interested law enforcing agencies, and
we are confident that the result of the work to
which you contributed so much will be felt soon
in terms of greater efficiency in prosecuting smugglers,
Warm regards, and best wishes.
Sincerely yours,
(Sgd.) Eleuterio Adevoso
Presidential Executive Assistant


Isang araw ng Pebrero noong 1901, pagkaraan ng
kulang-kulang na isang buwang paglalakad sa mga kabundukan at bangin sa pagitan ng Isabela at Nuweba
Esiha, isang pangkat ng mga manghihimagsik na nagbuhat sa Palanan at may dulang sulat ng Pangulong
Emilio Aguinaldo ang sumapit sa nayon sa San Juan,
Pantabangan, Nuweba Esiha. Ang nayong ito ay may
layong 70 kilometro buhat sa San Isidro, na noo'y kabisera pa ng Nuweba Esiha.
Nang sila’y makilala ni Konsehal Guillermo Huerta,
ito'y dah-daling sumugod sa munisipyo at nagbalita sa
punong-bayan ng Pantabangan, si Francisco Villajuan, na
ang mga nagsidating ay sandatahan.
Hapung-hapo ang mga kawal na dumating. Kung
makailan silang sumala sa oras at akala nila’y hindi na
sila makasasapit sa Pantabangan. Sa isang ilang, na
kung tawagin ay Tuntunin, may ilang milyang layo sa
Baler, ay nasagupa sila ng mga sundalong Amerikano
at sa kanilang pagurong at pag-iwas ay natiwalag si
Cecilio Segismundo at ilan pang kasamahan. Ang mga
nalabi sa kanila, na humarap sa punong-bayan, ay sina
Ambronio Sanz, Pedro de Ocampo, Ciriaco Reyes, Julian
Baltazar, Pedro Marcelo, Alvaro Mariano at Angel
Iniwan.
Nang ipangako sa kanila ni Villajuan na sila’y hindi
maaano, magsiharap lamang kay Ten. James Davis Taylor ng Hukbong Amerikanong nakahimpil sa Pantabangan, dali-daling isinalong ni Pedro de Ocampo ang kanyang baril.
Nang sumunod na araw, si Cecilio Segismundo, kasama nina Pedro de Ocampo at Candido Uraga, ay kusang humarap kay Ten. Taylor at ang mahahalagang
paketeng ukol sa mga pinuno ng himagsikan ay ipinagkaloob sa punong Amerikano. Isang sobreng ukol kay
Hen. Urbano Lacuna ang binuksan ni Ten. Taylor.


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
The author was born in 1886 in San Isidro, Nueva Ecija,
son of Atanacio Abad and Dona Hermogena Kabigting
Yuson. At the age of 21 years, he was an assistant
bookkeeper in the Bureau of Public Works. From 1909
to 1915 he continuously wrote in the vernacular newspaper during the time, Muling Pagsilang, about the necessity of organizing a national bank, which crusade finally
resulted in the creation of the Philippine National Bank,
He was awarded on June 19, 1961 The Pro-Rizal Patria
Award by President Garcia “in recognition of his distinguished contribution to the promotion and advancement of our national progress and the stimulation and
encouragement of love of country
and also for being
fthe one and only cellector of historical documents on
Spanish-Filipino-American relation. Mr. Abad is a niember of the Philippine National Historical Society. He is
the author of the following books in Tagalog: General
Luna’s Death, The Supremo Andres Bonifacio, The Capture of General Aguinaldo, The Biography of Marcelo H.
Del Pilar, History of Nueva Ecija, History of the Revolution in Nueva Ecija, Biography of Dr. Jose P. Rizal.
In English he wrote the following books: General Sakay,
Bandit or Patriot?, Dictionary in Filipino Tagalog (year
1920), Dictionary in English-Tagalog (50,000 words),
American-Filipino War (1963). He was the Chief Clerk
in the Bureau of Public Works at the age of 26; chief
accountant for six months in the Philippine Senate, later
was promoted to Chief of the Disbursement Division of
the Philippine Senate until his retirement in 1952.


TAng Tataksil na Tagkadinag
Kay Aguinaldo Sa Palanan
Sinulat ni ANTONIO K. ABAD


Sa naturang sulat ay ibinalita ni Aguinaldo kay Lacuna na ang kanilang kuwartel heneral sa Palanan ay
matatag at di magagapi nang gayun-gayon lamang ng
lulusob na kaaway. Ipinaguutos ni Aguinaldo na pagtipun-tipuning lahat ang mga manghihimagsik at magsisama na sa Palanan, tuloy nag-aanyaya ang heneral sa
kanyang kaarawang idaraos noon sa ika-22 ng Marso,
1901.
Karakang nagpabalita si Ten. Taylor kay Hen.
Funston sa San Isidro ukol sa pagsuko ni Segismundo
at pagkakuha ng mahahalagang kasulatan. Ipinagutos
naman agad ni Funston ang madaliang pagpapahatid kay
Segismundo sa San Isidro, kasama ang mahahalagang
papeles.
Si Cecilio Segismundo ay tubo sa Kailokohan at hindi
talagang kawal ng himagsikan. Kaya lamang siya naging manghihimagsik ay dahil sa kalupitan ng mga boluntaryong Ilokos at nang maparaan sa Dupax ang pangkat ni Komandante Nazario Alhambra ay minabuti niyang sumama hanggang sa Palanan. Pinagtiwalaan siya
ni Aguinaldo hanggang sa siya'y mahirang na taga-paghatid ng sulat.
3 Me
 ANG PAGTATAPAT NI SEGISMUNDO
Ipinagtapat ni Cecilio Segismundo kay Hen. Funston
ang buong nalalaman niya. Si Heneral Aguinaldo ay
nasa Palanan, isang maliit na bayan sa Isabela at may


layong siyam na kilometro buhat sa baybay-dagat. Doo'y
may isang pangkat ng mga kawal Tagalog, na pinamumunuan ni Komandante Alhambra, at sa paligid ng bundok ay nakataliba naman ang isang munting pulutong
ng Cuerpo de Senales na pinamumunuan ni Kapitan
Pascual Velasco. Ang tanging landas mula sa libis ng
Kagayan patungong Palanan ay natatalibaang mabuti,
bukod pa ang mga kakamping Baluga at Ilungot na
nagtatanod.
Ang ilang liham na sumakamay ni Hen. Funston ay
hindi karakang naisalin sa pagka’t nasusulat sa kodigo
o hudyat. Sa pamamagitan lamang ng kastilang si Lazaro Segovia nakuhang maisalin ang nilalaman ng mga
liham.
Natalos na ang Pangulo ng Republika ay humihingi
ng 400 kawal na pawang pili at sandatahan upang ma
karagdag sa lakas na nasa Palanan. Inaatasan din si
Hen. Baldomero Aguinaldo na maging pinuno ng buong
hukbo sa Gitnang Luson sapagka’t si Hen. Alejandrino'y
may-sakit at hindi lubos na makaganap sa tungkulin.
Mabilis na nag-isip ng paraan si Funston. Ipinasiya niyang magtipon ng mga sundalong Pilipino na
magpapanggap na manghihimagsik at kabig ni Aguinalac. Noon di'y sumulat siya sa ayudante heneral sa
Maynila at naglahad ng kanyang balak. Magsasama siya
ng isang pangkat na Makabebe, sasandatahan ng mauser
at remington, bibihisang tulad ng manghihimagsik, sa(Continued on next page)
Page 23


JULYAUGUST, 1963


samahan ng apat o limang opisyal na Amerikano na palilitawing bihag, at gagawa ng paraan upang malinlang
at matutop ang mailap na heneral na Pilipino.
Pagkaraan ng ilang araw, si Funston ay ipinatawag
sa Maynila. At doo’y narinig niya ang pagsang-ayon
nina Hen. Wheaton at Hen. Arthur MacArthur (ama ni
Hen. Douglas MacArthur) sa kanyang panukala at ang
utos na pagbibigay sa kanya ng kailangang sasakyangdagat na magagamit patungong Palanan.
Masiglang nagbalik sa San Isidro, Nuweba Esiha si
Funston. Pagdaka’y ipinatawag niya sina Hilario Tal
Placido, Gregorio Caanit, Dionisio Dato, Cem. Seg smundo at ang Kastilang si Lazaro Segovia. Pinulong
sila ni Funston at inanyayahang lumuwas ng Maynila
upang dakpin ang isang taong pinagmihinalaang kaalan
ng mga manghihimagsik.
MGA BILANGGO NG DIGMA SA SAN ISIDRO
Bagama’t ipinakalilihim-lihim ng mga pinunong
Amerikano ang binabalak na pagbihag kay Aguinaldo,
yao'y kumalat din at nakarating sa iga bilanggo ng
digmaang nakapiit sa San Isidro. Nang matalos iyon ng
isang bilanggo na ayaw pang manumpa sa bandilang
Amerikano, lihim itong sumulat sa ilang dahon ng papel-sigarilyo at yao'y ipinadala sa Palanan sa kanyang
kapitan na noo'y nasa bayan at hindi pa nakikilala ng
mga tiktik ng pamahalaan.
Anang liham —
"Minamahal kong Pangulo:
May mga tiyak akong balita na ang Koronel Hilario
Tal Placido at ang opisyal na si Lazaro Segovia ay nagsiharap sa hukbong Amerikano, at isang alingawngaw
na may katotohanan na ang mga nasabing opisyal ay
magsisitungo sa inyong kinaroroonan na may kasamang
mga kawal.
Crisanto de la Fuente”
Si Crisanto de la Fuente ay naging komandante ng
isang pangkat ng hukbong Pilipino ni Hen. Venancio
Concepcion at siya’y nabihag sa isang labanang naganap
sa pagitan ng Pangasinan at Nuwepa Esina. Sa pagaalaala niyang baka hindi umabot iyon sa Pangulo ng
Republika. muli siyang sumulat sa pilas ng papel-sigarilyo:
"Koronel Villa:
Sang-ayon sa mga tiyak na balita, may mga gayak
na paraan upang dakpin si Aguihalao't mga kasana niya.
Inyong talasan!
Crisanto de la Fuente”
Bukod sa dalawang liham na ito'y may isa pang
sulat na ipinahatid si De le kuente, subali't ni isa'y
walang nakasapit sa Palanan dahil sa ang buong kaparangan sa dakong hilaga ng Nuweba Esiha ay mahigpit
na natalibaan ng nga sunaaiong Amelikano.
Hindi alam ng magkakasamang Tal Placido, Cadhit,
at Bato, ang talagang pakay nila sa pagluwas ng Maynila.
Sa kanilang pagialakbay ay maalanbayan pa bula no
mga kawal, bansa si lal riacido at hang sumapit sila
sa San Fernando, Pampanga, ay nag-isip siyang tumakasa pag-aalaalang sila'y ipatatapon sa Guwam.
Pagsapit sa Maynila, sila’y itinuloy sa isang otel sa
Intramulos, ha bihatawag na “Cuatro Naciones". Ang
Kastilang si Segovia ay humiwalay sa kanila pagdating
ng lunsod at nagtuloy sa paniig hamagaanan.
Ang nakatatalos ng talagang pakay nila sa pagluwas ay sina Segismunao at Segovia; sa pagkakaalam naman nina Tal Piacido, Cadhit at Bato ay may isang pinuno ng himagsikang ipinadarakip, ang tatio'y naging
balisa.
Malimit na dumalaw sa otel ang ayudante ni Funston, nguni't yaon man ay wala ring binabanggit sa kanilang dapat gawin. kaya lamang sila amadalaw ay
upang tingnan ang kanilang kalagayan at tanungin ng
mga kailangan.
At hindi naglaon — dahil marahil sa pagkaantala ng
mga kailangang dalhin sa paglalakbay ni Funston — silang magkakasama’y pinauwi sa San Isidro, na palang
naglibang o nagbakasyon lamang sa siyudad.
PAGHUWAD SA LAGDA NI LACUNA
Isang katusuhan ni Funston ang kanyang pagpapahuwad sa lagda ni Hen. Urbano Lacuna. Yao'y ipina

huwad niya kay Roman Roque sa dalawang papel na
may tatak na “Brigada Lacuna”. Si Roque na may katangian sa pamamaris sa ano mang sulat ay dating puno
ng hukbong Pilipino na sumuko kay Funston sa San
Isidro.
Ang papel na may tatak na "Brigada Lacuna" ay nasamsam sa isang kampamentong iniwan ng mga kawal
Pilipino pagkatapos ng isang madugong labanan noong
Oktubre, 1900. Bukod dito’y natagpuan nila ang panatak at ilang sulat na may lagda ni Hen. Lacuna na
siyang hinuwaran ni Roque. Walang kamalay-malay si
Roque sa kalatas na ilalagay sa papel na may huwad na
lagda.
Nang maihanda nang lahat ang kailangan si Funs
ton ay nagpauna nang lumuwas uli ng Maynila. At katatapos lamang ng buwan ng Pebrero, 1901, nang tumanggap ng biglaang utos sa himpilan sa San Isidro
upang paluwasin sa lalong madaling panahon sina Tal
Placido.
Tulad ng unang pagluwas, muli silang tumuloy sa
Cuatro Naciones sa Intramuros. Doo'y agad silang dinalaw ni Funston na nagbalitang sila’y sasakay sa isang
lantsang tutulak sa pampang ng Ilog Pasig. Gayon na
lamang ang pagkabalisa at panglaw nina Tal Placido at
Cadhit; akala nila’y ipatatapon na sila sa pulo ng Guwam.
Kinabukasan, isang pangkat na Makabebeng walang
pasang banli ang lantalo io ba gabiaio  a
lantsa ang naghatd sa kanila sa bapor pandigmang Vicas
bana na naghihintay sa kalagitnaan ng look at pinamumunuan ni Kapitan E. B. Barry.
ANG PAGLALAKBAY NG VICKSBURG
Gabi ng Marso 6, 1901 nang tumulak sa Look ng
Maynila ang Vicksburg. Ang kasama sa lakad na yao'y
81 Makababeng hinag
Pilipino Laha' sila’y may mabuting pangangatawan at
nakapagsasalita ng Tagalog. Lima naman ang pinu

Page 24


 


nong Amerikanong kasama: si Hen. Funston, ang magkapatid na Kapitan R. T. Hazzard at Ten. Hazzard,
Ten. B. J. Mitchel, ayudante ng heneral, at Kapitan
Harry W. Newton. Si Newton ay ipinagsama sapagka’t
ito’y nakarating nang minsan sa look ng Kasiguran.
Ang limang pinunong Amerikano ay palilitawing
bihag ng mga kawal Pilipino at ang mga Makabebe
naman ay magpapanggap na manghihimagsik na galing
sa Nuweba Esiha. Sila’y pamumunuan ni Tal Placido,
na magkukunwang Tenyente-Koronel ng hukbong Pilipino.
Si Tal Placido ay naging komandante at nasugatang
kasama ni Hen. Luna sa labanan sa Kalookan; nadakip
siya sa Haen, Nuweba Esiha, na kasama ni Hen. Pantaleon Garcia. Nanumpa siya sa bandilang Amerikano at
marami nang naibigay na impormasyon kay Funston.
Ang makakatulong ni Tal Placido ay si Segovia
na may ranggo namang kapitan. Si Segovia ay dating
sarhento ng pamahalaang Kastila, pagkatapos ay naging
tenyente ng mga Pilipino at naging ayudante ni Hen.
Mariano Llanera. Sumuko siya kay Funston noong
Mayo 1900 sa San Isidro.
Ginawa ring unang tenyente si Cadhit, na siyang
pinaka-ayudante ni Tal Placido, at sina Segismundo at
Bato ay kapwa pangalawang tenyente naman.
Ang mga Makabebe’y binigyan ng tig-isang mauser;
ang iba nama’y ng remington at ilang Krag-Jorgensens.
Ang marami sa mga baril na remington ay sira at kailangan pang kumpunihin ni Cadhit. Binigyan naman
ng tig-isang rebolber ang mga kunwa’y pinuno ng pang
kat. Binigyan din sila ng mga kaukulang damit upang
sila’y mag-anyong pangkat ng manghihimagsik.
Nang sila’y nasa laot na at naglalayag ang Vicksburg
ay saka pa lamang ibinunyag ni Funston ang kanilang
pakay: ang pagdakip kay Hen. Emilio Aguinaldo sa
Palanan, Isabela.
Nang marinig nina Tal Placido at Cadhit ang pahayag ni Funston, sila’y nagulumihanan at nanghilakbot. Hindi nila kailanman inakalang iyon pala ang kanilang pakay. Subali’t hindi sila nakapagpahayag ng
pagtutol nang sabihin ni Funston na ang magtaksil sa
lakad na yaon ay tatanggap ng lalong mabigat na parusa, at lahat sila’y pagkakalooban ng malaking gantimpala kung magtatagumpay sa maselang lakad. Wala nang
nagawa pa sina Tal Placido kundi sumang-ayong tutupad sa iniatas na gawain.
Habang naglalayag ang Vicksburg ay tinatagubilinang mabuti ang mga Makabebe. Sinuman ang kanilang makausap sa bayang daraanan, ipamamalita nilang
sila’y nagbuhat pa sa Nuweba Esiha. — sa pangkat ni
Hen. Lacuna — na hinihingi ni Aguinaldo. Na isang
araw noong Pebrero ay nasukol nila ang ilang Amerikanong gumagawa ng mapa, napatay ang iba at ang
limang nalabi'y binihag at kasamasama nga sa paglalakbay na patungong Palanan.
Iping-utos ni Funston na ang mga Makabebeng
hindi maalam ng Tagalog ay huwag makikipag-usap sa
sinuman sapagka’t kapangapanganib na maramdaman at
mapaghinalaan ang lihim nilang gagawin.
PAGLUNSAD SA KASIGURAN
Pagsapit sa may baybayin ng Atimonan, Quezon
(noo'y Tayabas pa), ang ayudante ni Funston ay lumusad at humanap ng ilang malalaking bangkang magagamit sa paglunsad sa look na pagdadaungan nila sapagka’t hindi dapat lumapit sa baybayin ang Vicksburg.
Walang nakuhang bangka sa Atimonan kaya nagtuloy
sila sa pulo ng Polilyo. Doo'y nakatagpo sila ng tatlong
bangkang may katamtamang laki.
Ika-13 ng Marso nang sila’y buong lihim na pumasok sa look ng Kasiguran. Ang mga ilaw ng Vicksburg
ay pinagtatakpan upang huwag mapansin ang sasakyan
Noo'y nakahanda na ang sulat na ipadadala kay
Aguinaldo. Si Funston ang naghanda niyon at si Segovia naman ang nagsalin sa papel na may tatak na
“Brigada Lucena" at sa ibaba’y may hinuwad na lagda
ni Hen, Lacuna.
Ang sa mga sulat na pinetsahan ng Pebrero 24.
1901 ay nagbabalita ng pagkatanggap ni Lacuna sa mga
sulat na may petsang Enero 13 at 14 at gayundin ng
pagpapasalamat ni Lacuna sa pagkakahirang sa kanya


ni Aguinaldo bilang heneral ng brigada. Ang ikalawang
sulat namang may petsang Pebrero 28, 1901 ay nagsasaad na si Lacuna ay tumanggap ng utos ni Hen. Baldomero Aguinaldo, puno ng hukbo sa Gitnang Luson, na
ipinadala niya sa madaling panahon ang isa sa mga piling
pangkat na kawal sa Pangulong Aguinaldo. Tinukoy
rin sa sulat ang mga pinuno ng pangkat na darating.
Malakas ang ulan at malalaki ang alon nang ibaba
ang mga boteng taglay ng Vicksburg, at pagkaraan ng
katakut-takot na panganib na muntik nang ikasawi ng
ilan ay nakasapit din sila sa dalampasigan. Pagkalunsad
naman nila’y mabilis nang naglayag ang Vicksburg na
patungong Baler.
Doon na sila nagpaumaga, sa lilim ng isang malaking
punungkahoy. Walang naidlip sa kanila dahil sa patuloy
na pag-ulan.
Mag-iikapito ng umaga nang magsimula silang lumakad patungong kabayanan ng Kasiguran. Ang pagkain nilang dala’y sapat lamang para sa maghapong paglalakad. Ang limang Amerikanong kunwa’y bihag ay
nakaaamit-sundalo lamang, nakasumbrerong pangkampanya, nakapulinas at sa kanilang balikat ay nakasakbat
ang tig-isang makapal na kumot. Nguni't sa loob ng
kanilang damit ay lihim nilang iniingatan ang tig-isang
rebolber na di ipinamalay sa mga kasamahang kawal.
Naunang lumakad at namangka sina Cadhit at Segismundo na may kasamang apat na Makabebe. Dala
nila ang isang sulat na may lagda ni Tal Placido para
sa punong-bayan ng Kasiguran na nagbabalita ng kanilang pagdating.
Hindi nila dinatnan ang punong-bayan ng Kasiguran na umano'y nakipamista sa Palanan, kaya sa pangalawang punong-bayan na lamang naibigay ni Cadhit ang
sulat. Agad namang nagpahanda ang pangalawang pu

MOTOR
GEEDS Joe


EN
S
O


The "MS” (most severe) test
is a series of performance
tests for motor oils. DevA
eloped by the Americon Society for Testing Materials, it
is required by automobile
A
manufacturers. The "MS” test
Gil ! is used to determine whether
the motor oil meets all the
lubrication requirements for
the "most severe” type of
2
service.
Esso Extra Motor Oil exceeded all the test
requirements of the "MS” lest sequences!
For top performance, always use Esso Extro
Motor Oill


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 25


nong-bayan. Mag-iikaanim ng hapon, ika-14 ng Marso,
nang sumapit sa Kasiguran ang buong pangkat ni Tal
Placido. Tuwang-tuwa sa panonood ang mga tao sa limang bihag na Amerikano, habang nagpapakitang-gilas
naman ang mga sundalong nagbabantay.
Ang mga sundalo’y itmuloy sa ilang bahay na pinahanda ng pangalawang punong-bayan at ang limang
Amerikano naman ay ikinulong sa isang silid na mahigpit na natatalibaan ng ilang kawal.
Sa Kasiguran ay totoong salat sa inaaning palay at
ang karaniwang kinakain nila’y mais na giniling, kamote,
pindang na kalabaw at isdang nahuhuli sa tabing dagat.
Nang gabing iyon ay nabalitaan nilang magdaros ng
isang malaking pagdiriwang sa Palanan sa ika-22 ng
Marso alang-alang sa kaarawan ni Aguinaldo. Nabalita ring umano'y dumating sa Palanan sina Hen. Tinio
na may dalang 400 kabig na pawang sandatahan. Nahintakutan ang marami sa mga Makabebe. Napawi lamang
iyon nang malinawan nilang ang balitang yao'y gawagawa lamang ng ilang mapagbiro nilang kasamahan.
Noo'y nasa hilaga ng Luson si Hen. Tinio at kasalukuyang napapalaban sa libu-libong kaaway.
MAPANGANIB NA PAGLALAKBAY
Noong Marso 17, 1901, mag-iikawalo ng umaga, ay
tumulak ang pangkat sa hangaring makasapit agad sa
Palanan. Bago sila umalis ay naipadala na nila sa isang
Ilungot at dalawang taga-Kasiguran ang isang liham
na padala ni Tal Placido kay Aguinaldo at ang dalawa
pang may hinuwad na lagda ni Lacuna.
Sa kanilang pag-alis ay wala silang gaanong pagkaing nabaon. Gayunman, kung sila’y makapaghihintay pa
nang ilang araw, ipinangangako ng pangalawang punongbayan na sila’y makapagdadala ng sapat na pagkaing
kailangan. Nguni’t hindi na sila maaaring makapagtagal
sapagka’t may tipanan sila sa muling paglitaw ng Vicksburg na maghihintay sa look ng Palanan sa takdang
araw
Maraming hirap silang tiniis; ang kanilang dinaraanan ay matatarik na libis, masusukal na gubat, mapuputik na landas, habang halos walang tigil ang pagbuhos ng malakas na ulan. Sa daan ay natagpuan nilang
nakabitin sa isang sanga ng kahoy ang sulat na ipinadala nila bago sila lumakad. Wala ang sinuman sa tatlong inutusan nila. Nakasalubong sila ng isang baluga
at iyon ang inupahan nilang maghatid niyon sa Palanan.
Mag-iikaanim ng hapon noong Marso 22, araw ng
Biyernes, nang sapitin nila ang Dinudungan na may
landasing patungo sa Palanan. Hapung-hapo na sila sa
gutom at pagod.
Dinatnan nila sa Dinudungan ang isang matanda,
na may taglay na sulat buhat kay Koronel Villa para
kay Tal Placido. Ang sulat ay siyang tugon sa ipinadala nila sa Palanan. Sinasabi roon na natanggap ni
Aguinaldo ang liham at ang tagubilin ng heneral na
sila’y magpahinga sa Dinudungan hanggang sa tumanggap ng panibagong utos.
Nabalisa ang pangkat, lalo na ang mga pinuno,
dahil sa tagubiling iyon. Nagpulong agad ang mga puno.
Hindi maaaring humimpil sila nang ilang araw sa Dinudungan sapagka’t ang karamihan sa mga Makabebe ay
mahinang-mahina sa gutom at pagod.
Ipinasiya nilang sulatan si Koronel Villa at sila’y
humihiling na padalhan ng pagkain. Nilagdaan ni Tal
Placido ang liham. Kinabukasan ay dumating kaagad
ang maraming pagkaing buhat sa Palanan, kasama ang
isang sulat ni Koronel Villa na nagtatagubiling sila’y
tumuloy na sa Palanan, nguni't ang mga bihag na Amerikano'y iwan sa llog Dibulo at pabantayan na lamang
sa sampung sundalo, upang pagkaraan ng ilang araw
ay ihatid sa Isabela at tuluyang pakawalan.
Nguni’t hindi pinansin ni Tal Placido ang nilalaman
ng liham, at nang mag-iikawalo ng umaga’y nauna nang
lumakad ang mga Makabebeng pinamuiunuan nina
Tal Placido at Segovia. Pinagdalawa ang pangkat; ang
una’y kay Cadhit at ang ikalawa’y kay Bato. Ang
limang Amerikano namang kunwa’y bihag ay natatalibaan ng sampung piling Makabebe at sumusunod sa agwat na may ilang daang metro lamang.
Nang may ilang kilometro na lamang sila sa Pala

GREETINGS to the


PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY


on its


62nd Anniversary


Philippine Charity
Sweepstakes Office


BUY YOUR TICKETS TODAY FOR THE


Anniversary Draw on September 15, 1963.


BDE
FIRST PRIZE
-₱20,000.00


nan ay nasalubong nila ang 22 kawal ng Katipunan na
pawang nasasandatahang mabuti. Ang sarhento ng pangkat, si Andres Reyes, ay may taglay na isang sulat ni
Koronel Villa. Sinasabi sa sulat na ang pagtatanod sa
limang bihag na Amerikano ay isalin sa pangkat ni Sar
hento Reyes upang ang lahat ng tauhan ni Tal Placido
ay makasama sa Palanan at doo'y makapamahinga at
tuloy makapanood ng kaunting kasayahan.
Dahil sa pangyayaring ito, nilibang nila ang mga
kawal ng himagsikan at sila’y lihim na nagpulong ukol
sa paraang gagawin
Sa wakas ay naisip nilang magpabalik nang lihim
sa ilang kawal upang ibalita kay Funston ang panganib na darating. At nang malayo na ang dalawang
kawal na inutusan ay saka ibinigay ni Cadhit sa sarhentong buhat sa Palanan ang isang sulat na may lagda ni
Tal Placido, para sa sarhento ng destakamento sa Dibulo,
upang isalin ng mga yaon ang pagtatanod sa limang
Amerikano, At pagkuwa’y lumakad na ang mga kawal
ni Aguinaldo patungo sa Dinudungan.
HagSg
ANG PAGKABIHAG KAY AGUINALDO
Nang ikatatlo ng hapon ay sumapit ang buong pangkat ni Tal Placido sa Ilog Palanan. Dito’y naantala sila
sa pagtawid sapagka’t tao lamang ang maaaring sumakay. Malalim at laki ang ilog, na may kaluwangan din
naman.
Sa tawiran ay sinalubong sila ni Kapitan Tomas Magsarili, pamangkin at kinatawan ni Aguinaldo, bilang pakikilugod at pagbati sa mga kasamahang dumating. At
samantalang sila’y tumatawid, si Heneral Aguinaldo ay
nakatanaw mula sa bintanang paharap sa ilog.
Walang anu-ano, habang sinisipat ni Aguialdo ang
mga dumarating, sa-tatapat sa durungawan ng heneral
si. Komandante Alhambra. Sinabi ni Alhanibra kay
Aguinaldo na malabis niyang pinag-aalinlanganan ang
mga kawal na dumarating at hiniling niyang kung itu

Page 26


 


tulot ng heneral ay magpapaputok siya upang makilalang lubos ang dumarating na hukbo. Subali’t si Aguinaldo'y hindi lamang tumanggi kundi muntik pang magalit dahil sa matapat niyang paniniwalang mga kapanalig nga ang mga dumarating.
Sa di-kawasa’y nakatawid na lahat sa ilog ang mga
nakabalatkayong Makabebe. Huminto sila sa may dakong tapat ng bahay ni Aguinaldo, sa layong may ilang
dipa lamang. Sa gawing kaliwa nama’y nakahanay ang
may 16 na kawal ng himagsikan na may-sakit ang karamihan at kaya lamang nanaog ay dahil sa utos ni
Aguinaldo na sila’y sumalubong at bumati sa mga bagong dating na kapanalig.
Noo’y walang malakas na kawal sa Palanan kundi
ang pangkat na ipinadala sa Dinudungan upang magtanod
sa limang Amerikano at ang 25 kabig ng Cuerpo de
Senales na pinamumunuan ni Kapitan Velasco at may
ilang araw nang di sumisipot sa pagbabantay sa kabundukan.
Pagkatapos ng kaukulang paggalang sa matataas na
pinunong dinatnan, sina Tal Placido at Segovia ay buong
pitagang nanhik sa bahay ni Aguinaldo. Sina Cadhit
at Bato ay naiwang kasama ng pinagdalawang pangkat
at kapwa naghihintay ng hudyat.
Dinatnan nila sa itaas si Aguinaldo at ilang pinuno
ng Katipunan na nakapaligid sa isang mesang susulatan. Galak na galak ang kanilang dinatnan. Isa’t
isa'y nasasabik sa ibinabalitang paraan ng pagkabihag
nina Tal Placido sa limang Amerikanong umano'y iniwan
sa Dinudungan. Nguni’t ang totoo, ang mga kawal ni
Aguinaldo na ipinadalang magtatanod ay binihag at ikinulong nina Tal Placido bago sila pumasok sa kabayanan
ng Palanan.
Ipinahayag ni Segovia na siya’y naging ayudante ni
Hen. Llanera at makailang napalaban sa mga kawal
ng Amerika. Nang itanong ni Aguinaldo kung saan sila
kumukuha ng punglo’t baril, sinabi ni Segovia na sila’y
lihim na nagbibilin sa Maynila at sa ibang dako ng kapuluan. Si-Tal Placido naman ay sumasang-ayon sa
bawa’t sabihin ni Segovia: bihira siyang kumibo sapagka’t ipinagbawal sa kanya ni Funston ang magsasalita
ng ano man.
Pagkaraan ng may labinlimang minuto, sinabi ni
Aguinaldo na sila’y magpahinga muna, gayundin ang
mga kawal na naglakbay pa nang malayo. Hindi kaila
kay Aguinaldo ang pagkapagal ng mga bagong dating.
Nang si Segovia’y magtindig, na umiika’t halos hindi
na makahakbang, binati pa siya ni Dr. Barcelona at
inalok na gagamutin ang kanyang sugat.
Dali-daling nanaog si Segovia. Sa daan ay nasalubong niya si Francisco Ventus na nagtatanong kung
sino sa mga kawal na bagong dating ang marunong
humihip ng korneta. Nguni’t hindi iyon pinansin ni Segovia at pagkalapit sa hanay ng kanyang mga kawal
ay buong lakas na sumigaw:
Ho arli ni
—Oras na, mga Makabebe!
At halos kasabay niyon ay biglang bumuga ng kamatayan ang mga hawak nilang baril. Nagkagulo at
nagpanakbuhan ang mga tao. Kabi-kabila’y umaangil
ang sagitsit ng punglo. Datapwa, sa pag-aakala ni Dr.
Barcelona na nagkakatuwa lamang ang mga bagong dating, siyay’y sumungaw sa balkon at sumigaw:
-Huwag ninyong sayangin ang bala!
Lalo lamang nag-ulol ang putukan. Hindi pa rin
nakahalata si Aguinaldo. Patakbo pa siyang tumayo sa
balkon at sinaway niya ang sa akala niya’y malabis na
pagpapaputok.
 —Alto el fuego! — malakas na sigaw ni Aguinaldo
na pumipigil sa pagpuputok.
-Alto el fuego!
Lalong sumidhi ang putukan. Waring lalong nagulol ang galit ng mga bagong dating at pikit-matang
pinapuputukan ang bawa’t makita. Napahumindig si
Aguinaldo, natapik sa balikat ang manggagamot at napabulalas:
—Doctor, son enemigos!
At sabay na umurong ang dalawa at lumayo sa balkon. Agad sumunggab si Aguinaldo ng isang rebolber.
nguni't nang anyong papuputukan ang mga kaaway palang dumating, pinigil siya ni Dr. Barcelona sa isang


bisig, kasabay ang mahinahon at sumasamong wika:
-Huwag ninyong ibuwis ang inyong buhay, kailangan pa kayo ng ating bayan.
Nagyakap ang dalawa. Noon pa lamang nakaramdam si Aguinaldo sa tanang buhay niya ng isang matindi't nag-aapoy na galit.
Nagsala-salabat na noon ang punglo sa bahay.
Nang makita pala ng mga Makabebe na ang ilang
tauhan ni Aguinaldo ay nagsisipaglagos sa bintana
upang tumulong sa mga napipilang kasamahan o kaya’y
upang tumakas, pinaputukan nila nang walang taros ang
bahay na kinaroroonan ni Aguinaldo.
Ang pagkakaligtas sa tiyak na kamatayan ni Aguinaldo ay parang himala. Sa kabila ng nagsala-salabat
na punglo, siya’y ni hindi nasugatan. At nang magpanakbuhan nang lahat ang mga kawal ni Aguinaldo, ang
pangkat ni Tal Placido ay nagsigawan: —Mabuhay!
At sa sumunod na sandali, si Aguinaldo'y mabilis
na napaligiran ng mga Makabebeng nakaumang ang baril sa heneral. Isang Makabebe naman ang sumunggab
kay Dr. Barcelona, at nang ito'y anyong papuputukan
sapagka’t tumatangging lumuhod ay siyang paglapit ni
Cadhit at iniligtas ang buhay ng matandang manggagamot. Ilang sandali pa’y siyang paglapit nina Tal Placido at Segovia na ang hawak na rebolber ay nakatutok
kay Aguinaldo.
Kayo'y mga bihag ng Amerika!
tila makaharing wika pa ng isa.
Sa ilang saglit pa’y nanhik sina Hen. Funston, Kapitan Hazzard at Ten. Hazzard.
Buong kapaitang naipahayag ni Aguinaldo na ang
gayong kataksilan at pagkakanulo sa kanila'y isang kaparaanang imbi at hindi maituturing na tagumpay ng
kaaway. Hiniling ni Aguinaldo na sila’y pakawalan at
tulutang makapiling ng mga manghihimagsik, at saka
maglaban ang dalawang panig nang buong kabayanihan
at kagitingan. Nguni’t hindi sumang-ayon ang pinunong Amerikano at iminatwid na ang nais ng Estados
Unidos ay mapayapa ang Pilipinas at mawakasan na
ang madugong pagbabaka.
Maya-maya’y idinating naman ng dalawang Makabebe ang matapang na si Koronel Villa. Hahapay-hapay
siya at duguan ang buong katawan. Nang marinig pala
ni Villa ang putukan, siya’y dali-daling nasok sa isang
silid upang kumuha ng rebolber, nguni't natultulan siya
ni Segovia at napaputukan agad nang tatlong sunod.
Sa mga kawal ni Aguinaldo ay dalawa ang namatay
sa maikling labanang naganap, at sa pagkabigla ng iba
ay nagpanakbuhan sa gubat. Sa kanilang pagtakas ay
nakaiwan sila ng 18 baril at maraming punglo, bukod
pa ang may 6,000 pisong ginto’t pilak na nasa kumbentong pinaghimpilan nila.
Sa mga kawal ni Tal Placido ay iisa lamang ang
nasugatan, na ang ipinalalagay na nakatama’y ang nakatanod sa pintuan ni Aguinaldo. Ang tanod na iyon,
na nagngangalang Valeriano Beile, ay nainutok at lumaban hanggang sa huling sandali ng buhay. Si Beile ay
taga-Karanglan. Nuweba Esiha at ang isa pang nasawi
ay si Crispin Santiaguil, taga-Imus, Kabite.
MUNTIK NANG MAGBAGONG-LOOB ANG
lo
MGA MAKABEBE
Kinagabihan noong Marso 23, 1901, sa gitna ng pusikit na karimlan, ay nagtayo ng kuta sina Tal Placido sa paligid ng bahay na kinapipiitan nina Aguinaldo,
Villa at Dr. Barcelona dahil sa pangamba nilang lusubin
at agawin ng mga kawal ng Katipunan si Aguinaldo.
Sa utos ni Funston, si Cadhit ay nagpaputok nang tatlong sunod sa kanyang rebolber na deluses, bilang hudyat sa pinuno ng Vicksburg na naghihintay sa laot.
Ang tatlong bihag ay inilagay sa isang silid, kasama ang isang pinunong Amtrikano. Isang Makabebe
ang nakatalaga sa silid at siyang naghahatid nang pagkain sa mga nakapiit doon. Ang kawal na ito ang muntik
nang maging dahilan ng pagbabagong-loob ng mga Makabebe
Isang gabi, ang limang Amerikano ay nasa isang
silid at ang tatlo naman —sina Aguinaldo, Dr. Barcelona
at Kor. Villa — ay magkakasama sa isang silid. Sa
(Continued on page 80)
H


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 27


AEUUIINdI . dili
By Captain JOSE F. UNGCO (MC) PC
OIC Surgical Section
Constabulary Station Hospital,
Camp Crame


Pain in the abdomen may be localized or
generalized. It may be one of slight pains, to
one, so intense as to cause the patient to shriek
and break out into a cold sweat, depending on
the condition present. This is a symptom produced by many conditions, as stone in the urinary or biliary tracts, inflammation of the stomach, intestinal colic, gastric or duodenal ulcers, appendicitis, intestinal parasites, tuberculosis, syphilis, pneumonia and so on. When
pain is generalized, the most common cause is
peritonitis.
Peritonitis is the inflammation of the
serous membrane which lines the abdominal
wall. This is the most serious cause of abdominal pain. If the peritonitis is caused by
perforation, the pain is, at first, localized to
the site of perforation and the abdomen is retracted. Later, whether the peritonitis is or
not perforative, the abdominal wall becomes
distended and pain becomes generalized. Increase in the rate of pulse, rigidity and immobility of the abdominal wall are the most important signs. The pulse becomes more and
more rapid, the temperature is raised, the
bowels are constipated and there is nausea
and, perhaps, vomiting. A progressive rise of
pulse rate taken at intervals points to the need
for urgent operation. The early diagnosis of
acute generalized peritonitis is of vital importance; it has been estimated that each hour of
delay in opening the abdomen reduces the
chances of recovery by five per cent. Morphine and its derivatives and sedatives should
not be given unless and until the diagnosis is
established, for its administration may mask
the symptoms and obscure the diagnosis.
Enema should not be given, nor purgative
taken, for if the cause of pain is appendicitis,
it may perforate same.
The onset of pneumonia is sometimes announced by abdominal pain so acute that generalized peritonitis is closely simulated. The


rapid respiration rate may point to the lesion
in the chest.
Intestinal colic is due to many causes
which leads to painful contraction of the intestinal muscles. In true colic, the severe
attack consists of frequently recurring paroxysms which may be of all degrees. The
abdomen is generally distended. The abdominal muscles may be rigid. Pain may abe
accompanied by nausea and eructations. The
patient tosses about and finally selects a position in which he can bring pressure to the
abdominal wall. This is usually brought about
by eating some indigestible food. This may
be due to obstruction, or the effects of gastrointestinal irritants or poisonous drugs.
Tumors of the abdomen usually do not
produce much pain in the beginning. Pain
appears most often later when it produces pressure symptoms or causes obstruction.


Page 28


 


1. O
What is drug addiction?
A
The Worid Heaitn Organization de
fines drug addiction as a state of periodic or chronic intoxication, detrimental for the individual and society, produced by the repeated consumption of a natural or synthetic
drug. For lay purposes, it may be
defined as a state in which a person
has lost the power of self-control with
reference to a drug and abuses the
use of the drug to such an exten
that the person or society is harme.
It is produced by opium, morphine
and heroin.
2. 0
What are the characteristics of drug
addiction?

There are three characteristics of
drug addiction, namely:
a. An irresistible desire to continue
to take the drug and to obtain
it by any means. The addict
needs the drug as much as fooc
and drink.
b. A tendency to increase the dose
This means that the taking of
same amount after a certail
length of time has no effect.
c. A mental (psychological) and
general physical dependence on
the effects of the drug. Deprivation of the drug brings about
considerable discomfort and
mental unbalance.
3. O— How is drug addiction acquired?
AIt may be acquired in many ways. Imay be the result of a legitimate administration of the drug to relieve
pain. The craving is then gradually
engendered and the habit starts. Usually it results from a dose given by
one addict to another individual and


E
6
DRUG ADDICTION
Questions and Answers
(Prepared by the Narcotics Section, CIS, HPC, Camp
Crame)
repeated. In many cases drugs were
first taken as a relief from pain or
mistakenly taken as an aphrodisiac
or as a supposed cure for disease
(T.B.), or out of curiousity or devilment or for some misguided reasons.
Many who find themselves in the
midst of squalor and misery turned
to the drug in the hope/ of physical
or psychological relieff Little did
these individuals realize that once
they had experienced the illusion of
exhilaration and well being which the
dose produced, there would be a
constant irresistible urge to repeat
the experience. Once they succumbed
for the second time, the tendency
would be to have a third dose, the
habit was formed and to satisfy their
craving and obtaining the same degree of satisfaction, they were forced
to increase their doses, until they
found that it was impossible for
them to break the habit.
(Continued on next page)


To My
Bros.-in-Arms
GREETINGS
AND
MABUHAY
TO QUR 62nd
PC
ANNIVERSARY
Me — Today
AND WHEN YOU TRAVEL
LET ME BE OF SERVICE TO YOU!
BERALA IOUno, INC.
Means Better Service & Travel
(No Other Travel Agency Gives A Better Deal!)
433 A. Flores st., * Travels
Ermita, Manila
* Sightseeing Tours
Tels. 5-17-34
* Car Rentals
5-58-17


From:


REBECK
ESPIRITU
General Manager


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 24


What is the effect of drug addiction
4. 0
on the individual?
A — The plight of an individual addicted
to opium is bad. Morphine and heroin reduce him to abject slavery in
a matter of few months, the initial
habit-forming period being as short
as two weeks. Once the drug takes
hold, physical deterioration sets in,
mental breakdown is rapid and the
moral restraints acquired through
upbringing, education, family honors
and so on are swept away to satisfy
the craving for the drug. A drug
trafficker may not even know that his
wife or daughter may have turned to
prostitution to obtain the amount she
needs for her daily shots of the drug


What are the symptoms of drug adS.
O
diction?
A
a. Bloodshot, glassy eyes, dilated
pupils
b Pinpoint marks on arms, bloodstains on the sleeves
c. Continuous yawning, runny nose,
restlessness, nervousness, easily
annoyed, no appetite for food
Sleepiness and chain smoking
d.
e. Burhed holes on bed, clothing on
on hands
f. Spending large sums of money
g. Possession of pawn tickets
things missing from the home
h. Girl from a good family whe
becomes a prostitute
i. Possession of a hypodermic
needle, eye dropper, small glassine bags of white substance, resembling sugar
j. Association with other addicts.
at


THe Bukidnon PC mounted patrol and experimental unit
"ffirst conceived by Gen Atienza, CG IV PCZ, as an arm
of the PC in its operations against banditry and lawlessness. It had its first appearance when Pres Macapagal
visited Malaybalay, last Feb 63.


Morality In The Service
lo
We usually understand morality as the practice of rectitude in human conduct.
When a human act is in conformity to the
standard or rule of right behavior, it is said
to be morally good.
If the reverse is true, it is said to be morally
bad or wrong.
It is obvious that morality has reference to
some criteria or norms.
In fact, before we begin to act all in regard
to certain objects, we know that some objects
of desire and action are good while others are
evil,
The objective ultimate standard of righ?
moral action is the Eternal Law of God, because
that is the ruling of Divine Reason, determining from eternity all the acts of all creatures.
in accordance with the nature of each and
sundry.
In the human sphere where there are free
acts in the moral order our acts are determined
by God in accordance with our nature as free
agents.b ne


 


Page 30


Right reason is a practical judgment of reason, issuing a general
order that good is to be done and evil is to be avoided: it is the proximate, immediate and general standard of right moral action.
Our human acts, being concrete and particular, the act of right reason which dictates them is the practical judgment called conscience.
Conscience, then, is the proximate, immediate and particular norm
of concrete acts of morality.
The command which conscience issues is not issued by reason as
itself commanding but only as proclaiming and imposing the command,
as it were, of a higher headquarters.
Conscience, so to speak, is an adjutant issuing the command on
behalf of his commander.
But how do we know that reason is right in its dictates?
We know it by means of our human nature which is the radical
objective criterion of right moral action. Some acts befit human nature because they maintain and perfect it and conduce it to the final
end, while others, opposed to it, are against that human nature.
(Continued on next page)


C
ANO
WASRUUI
CANNOT MELT


RETINAX AX
Crease wMicrogel


Its got to be good to be Shell


PC officers, soldiers, and
Municipal Police Force of
the Year 1962-63
Outstanding PC Provincial
Commander of the Year
Major Jose B GutierrezI PCZ
Zone Provincial Commander of
the Year
Major Severino R Ruaro I PCZ
Lt Colonel Artemio S Espidol
II POZ
Lt Col Pantaleon E Revilles
IIl POZ
Major Benjamin G Berenguer
IV PCZ
Outstanding PC Company Commander of the Year
Captain Cirilo A Bueno, Jr
III PCZ
Zone PC Company Commander
of the Year
Captain Tomas P Diaz I PCZ
Captain Jorge 2 Villena II PCZ
Captain Alfredo F Basas
IIl POZ
Captain Angel P Garcia
IV PCZ
HPC Company Commander of
the Year
1st Lieut Rodrigo B Gutang
HPC & HSB
Outstanding PC Junior Officer of the Year
2nd Lieut Camilo M del Mundo
IIl POZ
Zone PC Junior Officers of the
Year
1st Lieut Celestino D Sicat
POZ
1st Lieut Buenaventura P Viray
II PCZ
1st Lieut Aniceto S Simoy
IIl PCZ
2nd Lieut Soliman G Mendoza
IV POZ
HPC Junior Officer of the Year
1st Lieut Orlando Q Antonio
PGB
Outstanding PC Soldier of the
Year
S Sgt Jose S Almazan, Ur
IV POZ
Zone PC Soldier of the Year
Sgt Juan C dela Cruz I PCZ
Sgt Crisanto C Potil II PCZ
S Sgt Teodoro C Zata
III PCZ
S Sgt Castor A Guerta
IV PCZ
HPC Seldier of the Year
S Sgt Remigio H. Mabagos
CIU
Outstanding Municipal Police
Force of the Year
Municipal Police Force, Bauan,
Batangas
II PCZ
(Police Lieut Quirico A Garcia
- Acting CP)
Zone Municipal Police Force
of the Year
Municipal Police Force, Floridablanca. Pampanga I PCZ
Municipal Police Force, Mauban,
Quezon
II PCZ
Cagayan de Oro City Police
IV PCZ
Force


JULY-AUGUST, 1963


Page 31.


MANILA RAILROAD COMPANY
TUTUBAN TERMINAL * TEL. 2-00-11
BENGUET AUTO LINE * MANILA PORT SERVICE
LUZON BUS LINE


If you ask the man in uniform why he has
been trying, despite the odds, to be honest all
these years, he will tell of at least one of these:
the God above our heads, the dignity of human
nature, the dictates of his conscience.
Most of them will just make mention the
service which includes all the other answers.
For, morality is so ingrained in the service
that this raises up or falls down with that.
Morality is the code of the service.
It is written in Army rules and regulations,
in the Articles of War which are articles of war
against what is immoral and, even of what is
merely unbecoming, in various executive ordersin directives and memoranda, in the work of
its indefatigable Chaplains.
But above all, morality in the Service is
there because it is not a command responsibility. Is not the commander ever responsible for
what his command does or fails to do?


Last 31 December, our Commander-in-Chief,
the President of the Philippines, said: "I appeal
to all officials and employees of the Government,
both national and local, from the humblest to
the highest, to support the drive for moral regeneration. Let us give chance to our people to
have a good government and to enjoy thereby a
better life by serving thern honestly, unselfishly
and well. Let us bequeath to our children honor and a good name they can be proud of. Let
it be enough that we have a position which gives
us dignity and a means of modest livelihood.
Let us remember that life on earth has to end,
the ill-gotten sums that may be acquired through
abuse of our public trust will avail us naught
at the hour of our death, and instead, we shall
on that account carry to the grave a sense of
guilt that we have not led honest lives. If we
need additional income, let us seek it through
legitimate investments and honest way but not
through misuse of our position or official influence. By doing this, we shall help develop
a prosperous country and a noble and happy
race.”

The men and women who are in the service
are expected to be the first to have responded
to that appeal for morality.


On The Occasion Of Its


62nd Foundation Day
The Bernardino Carlos
Construction Company
Greets


THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY


1282-C. Quiricada Extension
Tondo, Manila


Page 32


KHAKI & REL


From the pulpit and elsewhere, the preachers exhort
the faithful to reserve Sabbath Day for the Lord. Among
us Catholics, we consider Sunday as Sabbath Day, hence
the familiar sight on Sunday mornings and late afternoons, of men, women, and children trooping to the
churches to revere and/or commune with the Lord. On
the other hand, we also see another familiar scene
shortly after noontime on Sundays, of men from all walks
of life, likewise trooping, but not to the temple of God
with the familiar sign of the cross, but to a coliseum
with an equally impressive sign, that of a red banner
with the ensemble of a proud and pugnacious rooster,
which place is no other than the arena of the fighting
cocks. While the faithful and devotees silently murmur
their prayers, the “aficionados" on the other hand shout
on top of their voices their bets and preferences, using
the characteristic lingo — "sa pula, sa puti, logro dies,
logro once.” Just as we find churches and places of
worship throughout the country, we likewise find cockpits from Batanes to Jolo. The game, if ever it is, commands nationwide patronage.


Legal Opinion Digest


Cockfighting And
The Law
By Capt MAXIMINO R DIONISIO
Office of the Constabulary Staff Judge Advocate


A SPORT OR A VICE? As to whether or not
cockfighting, with all its attendant evils, can be considered a sport or a vice, Mr. Justice Gregorio Perfecto
gives the answer in his concurring opinion in the case
of Gregorio Miguel vs. Vicente Tose, et al (G.R. No.
L-416, Prom. April 30, 1948).
Says Justice Perfecto:
“Such forms of vice and gambling are regulated
by express provisions of law, such, as the Spanish
Royal Decree about cockfighting which, as stated
in the decision penned by Mr. Justice Tuason, continues to be in effect.
“Evidently, all the preaching of Rizal agai
cockfighting, due to its evil and demoralizing effects, have been in vain. More than half a century
has elapsed since his death. We have enshrined his
hallowed memory as our number one hero and as
one of the greatest moral figures of humanity. We
have been making vociferous avowals of adherence
to the lofty ideals and doctrines he bequeathed us
through his immortal writings and the noble example of his life. But the sanguinary gambling
continues unabated and the sordid greed of the
gamblers is shamefacedly brought to the temples
of justice, in a litigation about money besmirched
with rooster’s blood.
“While applying the law in this case, placed as
we are in one of the highest forums of our nation,
and in a position of national leadership, we feel it
our duty to state that it is about time to marshal
all the moral forces in all sectors of the country so
as to emancipate our people from the degradi


shacklers of legalized gambling. As it will be a
long way for our country to reach the acme of material progress, let us find compensation in striving
to be always in the forefront on all matters of permanent cultural value, on all things that would develop, enhance and elevate the noblest qualities and
the dignity of a human being."
In the case of Quimsing vs. Lachica, (G.R. No. L14683, Prom. May 30, 1961) our Supreme Court thru Mr.
Justice Roberto Concepcion finds another occasion to
comment on this nation-wide game. Says Mr. Justice
Concepcion:
“x x x it is a matter of common knowledge
that cockfighting is one of the most widespread
vices of our population, and that the government
has always shown a grave concern over the need
of effectively curbing its evil effects. X X x’
HOW PLAYED. — As established by customs and
adhered to by the aficionados there are three principal
varieties of this game. The most common is that of a
fight to the finish of a pair of roosters of about the
same size and equal weight, each fitted with a very
sharp, pointed and single bladed gaff. These cocks are
made to fight each other until death or until one runs
away in virtual surrender or defeat. In this type of
play, each fighting cock is at the start held by a person “sultador” thence released simultaneously with the
other at a given signal. The signal is given by a referee called the “sentenciador" who takes control of the
bout. Unlike in boxing, this referee acts as the sole
judge of the game. His main job is to promptly proclaim the winner of each bout. He must therefore en

JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 33


joy the respect and confidence of the cockfighting fans.
The other type of play is called the “battle royal'
wherein more than two fighting cocks, each one armed
with a gaff at the left lower leg, are made to fight one
another to the finish. Here is a situation where there
is expected to be one winner but more than one loser.
The third and last type is a marathon bout called "patakbuhan". This is similar to the first type except that
no gaff is used. The cock who runs away is declared
the loser.
WHERE PLAYED. — As authorized by law, cockfighting bouts must be held only in a duly licensed cockpit. Lately, however, it has been observed that cockfights have been held and perhaps still are being held
in other places of amusement not duly licensed as cockpit, like the Philippine Racing Club in Makati and in the
Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City. Where the bout is
held in an improvised arena (sometimes at the backyard) which is of course not a licensed cockpit, the cockfighting is called “tupada”. This is prohibited by law
and is punishable under Art 199 of the Revised Penal
Code.


Trawl "MARIA LOURDES-B” caught by illegal fishing
team of the 43rd PC Company operating in Sorsogon Bay,
violating Republic Act No. 3048.


Basaludin Jaotong, outlaw leader, turning over his TSMG Cal 45 to Lt Col Rizalino Ma Garcia, Provl Comdr
Sulu PC, during the effectivity of his surrender at Km
35 boundary, Seit Lake, and Camp Andres, Luuk, Sulu, en
11 May 63.


Page 34


 


A



ora


AO


SEMBLANCE OF FAIR PLAY. — The consensus
among the cockfighting fans is that cockfighting is the
game where fair play is observed the most. This is so
on the assumption that the fighting cocks involved are
not susceptible to fraudulent schemes such as a “combination fight” For instance, in horse racing, much depends upon the jockey, which is not so in cockfighting.
Furthermore, among bettors, the honor system is observed. To illustrate, betting is normally done by “oral
calls" without the necessity of actually handing out cash
to one another. After the bout, the loser pays his due
to the victor without question. In fact, bettors need not
have direct dealings with one another. In practice, an
experienced go-between or broker, known as “Cristo",
who is usually gifted with wonderful memory, does all
the rudiments of matching bets among bettors on a percentage basis.
The game, however, is not completely foul-proof.
Among the possibilities of foul-play are: (a) the discreet
poisoning of the fighting cock of an adversary shortly
before the start of any bout in order to insure victory
and (b) the improper harnessing of the gaff to an opponent’s fighting cock thereby reducing the chances of
the said cock to inflict injury to its adversary. These
fraudulent practices however, are rare.
THE LAW IN POINT. — At the outset, let there
be first a distinction between the term “cockpit", which
is the place where the cockfighting is held, and the term
“cockfighting", which is the fighting bout itself. Our
laws regulate “cockpits” and “cockfighting” separately,
Borrowing the language of our Supreme Court in the
case of Quimsing vs. Lachica, while “Section 2243 (i)
of the Revised Administrative Code empowers municipal
councils to regulate cockpits, yet the authority of said
council over cockfighting is found in Sections 2285 and
2286 of the said Code, not in Section 2243 (j). Similarly.
Article 199 of the Revised Penal Code punishes, not illegal cockpits, but illegal cockfighting.” Quoted hereunder are Sections 2285 and 2286 of fthe Revised Administrative Code:
“Section 2285. Restriction upon cockfighting. —
A1
Cockfighting shall take place only in licensed cockpits and, except as provided in the next succeeding
section hereof, only upon legal holidays and for a
period of not exceeding three days during the celebration of the local fiesta. No card game or games
of chance of any kind shall be permitted on the premises of the cockpit."
“Section 2286. Cockfighting at affairs and
carnivals. — In provinces where the exposition of
agricultural and industrial products of the province,
a carnival or any other act which may redound to
the promotion of the general interests thereof, shall
be held on a suitable date or dates, the council of
the municipality in which such fair, exposition, or
carnival is held may, by resolution of a majority
of the council, authorize the cockfighting permitted
at a local fiesta to take place for not to exceed
three days during the said exposition, fair, or carnival, if these fall on a date other than that of the
local fiesta. Where this action is taken, cockfight.
ing shall not be permitted during the local fiesta
unless a legal holiday occurs at such period in which
case cockfighting may be permitted upon the holiday.”


PRID
A
AIUS CORRECT DRIVING HABIT


EQUALS


ECONON


Get
a tankful
Of
FILPRIDE
GASOLINE
today


SS ESHH
FILPRID


It will be noted that in the above quoted Section
2285, RAC, “cockfighting” is permissible on legal holidays, meaning all legal holidays without exception. This
portion of Section 2285, RAC, has already been modifiea
three times namely: (a) by RA No. 137 prohibiting the
holding of cockfighting on July 4th of each year; (b)
by RA No. 229 prohibiting the holding of cockfighting
on the 30th day of December of each year; and (c) by
RA No. 946, prohibiting the holding of cockfighting on


Campaign on loose firearms for the month of May 1963
by Negros Oriental PC yielded these unlicensed guns.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 35


Maundy Thursday and Good Friday.
Section 2286, RAC, treats of the holding of cockfighting during an “exposition of agricultural and industrial products of the province, a carnival, or any
other act which may redound to the promotion of the
general interest thereof” for a period of not exceeding
three days in lieu of the holding of said cockfighting
during the celebration of local fiestas. The cockfighting being held during this period is commonly known
as "Pintakasi."
Deliberately, perhaps, many municipal and city
councils expand the meaning of this provision of law by
declaring more than one exposition, carnival, or fair,
during the year so that "pintakasi" may be authorized
more than once a year. To some extent, some municipal councils, by resolution or ordinance, declare every
Thursday, or Friday as the case may be, as "fair, carnival, or market" day and at the same time authorize
the holding of cockfighting on the said day or days of
the week in addition to Sundays and legal holidays. It
is submitted that this interpretation of the law is erroneous. Since the holding of the "pintakasi" during an exposition, carnival, or fair is authorized where no such
“pintakasi" was held or is to be held during the celebration of the local fiesta, it follows that this pintakasi
may be held only once a year because a fiesta must also
be held only once a year (Sec. 2282, RAC).
It seems that what emboldens the different city and
municipal councils to arrogate unto themselves the
power to regulate “cockfighting,” (not cockpit) is the
seemingly ambiguous provisions of RA No. 938 as
amended by RA No. 1224, quoted hereunder:
“The municipal or city board or council of each
chartered city and the municipal council of each
municipality and municipal district shall have the
power to regulate or prohibit by ordinances the es

A PC raiding team under 1st Lt Felix Chaguile raided
Apid Island, Inopacan, Leyte, on 17 May 1963 and found
55 cases of abandoned smuggled blue seal cigarettes inside
a cave in said island, Members of the raiding team were
TSgt Jorge Almaden, SSgt Pablo Nidera, Cpl Pascua
Regis and Cpl Pedro Mil. The smuggled blue seal “Union"
cigarettes were turned over to Bureau of Internal Revenue
authorities at Tacloban City on 18 May 1963. Photo shows
from left: Maj Jose Bass, provincial commander, Cpl Mil,
patrol member, Lt Chaguile of the 59th PC Company,
patvol leader; Col Regis, patrol member, Sgt Nidera,
patrol member and Capt Lorenzo D. Dima-ala, assistant
provincial commander.


tablishment, maintenance and operation of nightclubs, cabarets, dancing schools, pavilions, cockpits,
bars, saloons, bowling alleys, billiard pools, and other
similar places of amusement within its territorial
jurisdiction: Provided, however, That no such
places of amusement mentioned herein shall be established, maintained and/or operated within a radius of two hundred lineal meters in the case of
night clubs, cabarets, pavilions, or other similar
places, and fifty lineal meters in the case of dancing
schools, bars, saloons, billiard pools, bowling alleys,
or other similar places, except cockpits, the distance
of which shall be left to the discretion of the municipal or city board or council, from any public
building, schools, hospitals and churches: Provided,
further, That no Municipal or city ordinance fixing
distances at which such places of amusement may
be established or operated shall apply to those already licensed and operating at the time of the
enactment of such municipal or city ordinance, nor
will the subsequent operating of any public build.
ing or other premises from which distances shall
be measured prejudice any place of amusement already then licensed and operating, but any such
place of amusement established within fifty lineal
meters from any school, hospital or church shall
be so constructed that the noise coming therefrom
shall not disturb those in the school, hospital or
church, and, if such noise causes such disturbance
then such place of amusement shall not operate during school hours when near a school, or at night
when near a hospital, or when there are religious
services when near a church: Provided furthermore, That no minor shall be admitted in any bar,
saloon, cabaret, or night club employing hostesses:
And provided, finally, That this Act shall not apply
to establishments operating by virtue of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred eighty-five nor
to any establishment already in operation when Republic Act Numbered Nine hundred seventy-nine
took effect.”
Many municipal councils consider the aforementioned
law as an amendment by implication of Sections 2285
 


Page 36


Marclies and Bivouac — 28 kilometers with 1st Lt. E
A Ocampo, Jr., of the Negros Oriental PC, who is leading the group.


and 2286 of the RAC, thus they contend that they have
power to authorize the holding of cockfighting on any
day of the week and as long as they want to.
In the case of chartered cities, their respective
charters contain certain provisions which their respective
councils find convenient to exploit towards authorizing
cockfighting oftener than what the Revised Administrative Code authorizes. An example of such provision is
Section 21 of Commonwealth Act No. 158, otherwise
known as, The Charter of Iloilo City, which is quoted
hereunder:
“Section 21. Except as otherwise provided by
law, the Municipal Board shall have the following
legislative power x x x to tax, fix the license fee for,
and regulate among others, theatrical performances
x x x and places of amusements (par. j) x x x.”
Taking advantage of RA No. 938 as amended by
RAs No. 979 and 1224, many city and municipal councils
passed ordinances and/or resolutions authorizing the
holding of cockfighting on days other than those authorized by the Revised Administrative Code. Following
are examples of such ordinances:
(a) Ordinance No. 7 of Caloocan City which
took effect on March 13, 1962, wherein cockfighting
is permitted on any ordinary day upon prior application and permit issued by the City Mayor;
(b) Ordinance No. 60-4346, Quezon City which
took effect on March 13, 1962, wherein cockfighting
is permitted on Saturdays.
TEST CASE. — In the expectation that this variance
in the interpretation of the various laws relating to
cockfighting might be settled once and for all by the
proper court, the Iloilo Constabulary Command, either
on purpose or by accident, forced the isrue by raiding
the cockfighting being held on February 13, 1958, which
was a Thursday, at Molo District, Iloilo City, notwithstanding the existence of a City Ordinance and a permit issued by the City Mayor authorizing the said cockfighting. This Constabulary action gave rise to the
celebrated case of Quimsing vs. Lachica, cited earlier.
The dispositive portion of the decision in this case is


quoted hereunder:
“Thus, the issue boils down to whether Republic
Act No. 938 as amended, gives local governments a
blanket authority to permit cockfighting at any
time and for as long as said governments may wish
it. “Upon mature deliberation, we hold that answer must be in the negative. To begin with, repeals and even amendments by implication are not
favored, whereas an affirmative answer would entail a vital amendment, amounting, for all practical
purposes, to a repeal, of Section 2285 and 2286 of
the Revised Administrative Code. Secondly, grants
of power to local governments are to be construed
strictly, and doubts in the interpretation thereof
should be resolved in favor of the national government and against the political subdivisions concerned. Thirdly, it is a matter of common knowledge that cockfighting is one of the most widespread vices of our population, and that the government has always shown a grave concern over
the need of effectively curbing its evil effects. The
theory of petitioner herein presupposes that the
Republic of the Philippines has completely reversed
its position and chose instead, to place the matter
entirely at the discretion of local governments. We
should not, and can not adopt, such premise except upon a clear and unequivocal expression of the
will of Congress, which insofar as said premise is
concerned, is not manifest from the language used
in Republic Act No. 938, as amended.
“Lastly, “cockpits" and “cockfighting" are regulated separately by our laws. Thus, section 2243
(i) of the Revised Administrative Code empowers
municipal councils “to regulate cockpits.” Yet, the
authority of said council over “cockfighting” is
found in sections 2285 and 2286 of said Code, not
in said section 2243 (i). Similarly, Article 199 of
said Revised Penal Code punishes, not illegal “cockpits", but "illegal cockfighting” What is more,
participation in cockfights “on days other than
those permitted by law” is dealth with in said article separately from participation in cockfights
"at a place other than a licensed cockpit.”
“So, too, the authority of local governments,
under Republic Act No. 938, as amended, to "regulate x x x the establishment, maintenance and
operation of x x x cockpits, does not necessarily
connote the power to regulate “cockfighting” except insofar as the same must take place in a duly
licensed “cockpit.” Again, the first and second
proviso in section 1 of said Act, regulating the distance of cockpits and places of amusement therein
mentioned from any public building, schools, hospitals and churches," and the third proviso of the
same section, prohibiting the admission of minors te
some of these places of amusement, suggest that
the authority conferred in said provision may include
the power to determine the location of cockpits, the
type or nature of construction used therefor, the
conditions to be observed for the protection of persons therein, the number and/or by each operator,
the minimum age of the individuals who may be
admitted therein, and other matters of similar nature — as distinguished from the days on which
(Continued on page 88)


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 37


How To Meet A President
By ISt Lt. DIONISIO S. TAN-GATUE, JR.
Presidential Guard Battalion, PC


Citizens Day at Malacanang


Now it can be said, and quite safely, that
it is easier to meet the President of the Philippines than to see a typical government big shot.
Early Friday morning, at around seven
o’clock, take an extra-ordinarily heavy breakfast,
wrap yourself up a "baon", put on an old,
cheap-looking polo shirt, not necessarily the
long-sleeved variety, take a jeepney on the nearest route to Malacanang gate No. 4 and join a
line, just like seeing a popular movie in a
downtown theater which, in all probability,
must have been formed as early as five o’clock
by people from the provinces, and there wait
for seven thirty. At seven thirty on the dot, a
short, curly-hair young man from the Office of
the Appointments Secretary will hand you a
slip of paper on which to write, among other
things, your name, address, the purpose of your
visit or matter you wish to bring to the attention of the President, what action you request
to be done on the matter and to whom it is to
be referred. Just as soon as you finish filling
up this blank slip, the Sergeant of the Guard
of the Presidential Guard Battalion on duty will
request you to proceed to the Palace front
Door where you will line up again to wait for
eight o’clock, the time the President normally
receives the citizen visitors. Find your place.
It’s strictly first come, first served. The slip
of paper you have just filled up is numbered,
and if your number, for instance, is fifty, you
can be sure that you will be the fiftieth person
to meet the President, not the forty-ninth or
the fifty-first. That’s how the guards can be so
thorough.
While patiently waiting for the appointed
hour, don’t be self-conscious. There is nothing
wrong even if the guards will look at you in a
quizzical manner. It’s just that three persons
out of your group of a thousand and two souls,
by experience, are potential trouble makers,


cranks, drunks or tucking pistols and balisongs
in their waists. For so big a crowd, that is
good enough percentage.
At eight o’clock sharp, the line moves up
the stairway leading to the President’s study
room in groups of ten persons. If you are
number fiffty, you will be the last man of the
fifth group to go up. Naturally, while waiting
for your turn, you will expect some wise guys
to insert in the line. But don’t gripe. If he
is not a security man out to take a closer look
at you, he will not escape notice from eagleeyed guards. From among these characters, too,
here are some people you will probably meet
with their familiar, oft-repeated remarks:
The VIP: “Im the president of the Mancommunidad Chabacana, with five thousand
voters, I mean, member.
The Relative:
I’m a long-lost cousin-in-law."
The Cabalen: "I’m from Lubao."
The Infirm: “I need a brand-new wheelchair in order to reach the poling place this
November."
The Poor Boy: “I also tend five carabaos
in waterholes as big as those found in Floridablanca.
The Beauty Contestant: "I like him.”
Some people especially from the provinces
make it a point to bring pasalubong’ to the
President. Well, that can’t be helped. Whether
they bring fresh carabao’s milk from Pangasinan, live mudfish, wriggling in basket-shaped
banana stalks from Paete, Laguna, or special
home-made "bagoong” from La Union, don’t
mind the bearers and don’t mind the odor. It
(Continued on page 72)


Elements of the PC Zambo Norte and Ranger Teams engaged these out-laws in a bloody battle. All were killed,
their various arms were captured. In this encounter, Capt.
Mangondato was hacked on the head. He was awarded
the Gold Cross Medal, pinned by the President himself,
while the men were awarded the Bronze Medal.


Page 38


 


On Our Defense Problems
By Lt WILFREDO D. VIRAY, PN


The vast expanse of our territorial waters necessitates
the constant employment of fast and highly-effective ve.
sels for seuward defense and law-enforcement.


At no other time in our history has the matrix of
eur defense problems been placed under closer scrutiny
than the present. This is a healthy sign and is most
heartening indeed, as the country begins to demand more
and more no less than the precise solutions to our everchanging problems of security. And it is the beauty of
a free society such as what we have that citizens can
take part actively in the great dialogue of defense planning and strategy.
The central theme of the discussion on defense and
security has been, simply, how best we can optimize on
efforts along this line, or how we can get the most by
way of security with the least expenditure of resources.
This problem is an old one and indeed, our difficulty
will lie only on how well we shall apply standardized
concepts on the prevailing local and international conditions.
We have to accept, first of all, the truism that defense considerations are both a science and an art. In
their scientific aspect, people are generally agreed on
what considerations should prevail or what factors should
be controlling in military planning. It is in the realm
of the military field as an art, or in “the right reason
of things to be made,” where men are apt to split hairs
and disagree.
In defense strategy, as it is in other fields of knowledge, academic discipline is essential. The seemingly
insurmountable pile of problems will never admit of solution unless approached methodically and with rigor.
seeking as it were a solution that is complete and minimizing as much as possible the isolated exceptions.
Present-Day Realities
To many, the defense establishment is an organization that is unique and quite apart from other functions
of government. While it is true that the armed servicesi
exist to fight and thus provide security to the nation,
their reason for being should be viewed on a broader
perspective.
That all governmental activities are intertwined in
the pursuance of the national interests is a fact that


deserves utmost arpreciation. And in this light, that is,
in support of the national objectives, the armed establishment exists for a variety of reasons.
Conflict is in the nature of men. Conflicting interests are in the nature of nations. And though there is
evidence to show the improbability of another global
war, new forms of combat in limited scopes have been
devised. New weapons, new munitions, new advanco
ments in science and technology are now engaging in
modified scales of warfare. But whatever the form and
sophistication of the new warfare in question, the basic
element of conflict is present, the conflict that arises
when diplomacy breaks down.
And yet a nation’s armed strength may insure that
diplomatic relations are not severed and, therefore, preserve peace even in the absence of war. Diplomacr
and military power therefore go hand-in-hand in working
for the national aims.
A country’s defense establishment is more of an
entity for maintaining the peace rather than an instrument for fighting a war. This fact brings to light the
full significance of the role of the armed services in
war and peace. And keeping this notion in mind, we
readily see that the concept of an armed force “for de
fense only” is absurd.
On a broader canvas, the missions of the defense
establishment can be summed up as follows:
(1) To act as a deterrent for aggression and sub.
version by any foreign power;
(Continued on next page)


Banz
after they had
Jeering Japanese
ld War II.
captured a hill in B
taan during y


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 39


(2) To complement diplomacy and statecraft;
(3) To conduct warfare during actual conflict;
(4) To assist in the accomplishment of other national aims.
Tia
ni Ana aa
The Core of Our Problems
sonbhi'r
The Armed Forces of the Philippines is presently
supported by the taxpayers’ money to the tune of some
P284-M annually. To many, this means no more than a
subsidy to a sprawling complex of “forces in being.
But even considering the AFP as such, that is withov.
regard to its peacetime functions, we find that our forces
re meager when placed side-by-side with those of ou
Asian neighbors. And while it is true that there is no
ixed rule on how much percentage of the gross national
product should be spent for defense efforts, the merits
of any particular situation in any particular regios
should be the controlling factor. In our case, a major
build-up and not a drastic trimming, is urgently necessary.
If we cannot aspire to match our neighbors force by
force due to the limitations of our resources, then a
certain standard of parity should be achieved in order
hat there will not be a glaring imbalance of forces in
our region. The existence of a power vacuum alongside
lynamically powerful forces is portentous of agitation
and turbulence. A great disparity between nations in
ictual and potential strength, whether in the military,
cultural, or economic field, always brings about the
novement of forces from the stronger to the weaker.
A continuous adjustment, both quantitatively and
qualitatively, should be effected in our defense system
o neutralize or nullify ever-changing threats that may
confront us. Flexibility in defense thinking is therefore
f primary importance. Our forces should be capable of
neeting shifting exigencies over land and sea, and in
he air, and should be able to concentrate at points where
 decision will have a profound influence in the overall
urtherance of the national interests.
Our greatest problem is how best to live within our
neans and still provide the necessary measure of defense
and security to the nation. What has resulted is a
somewhat overstraining of our physical and mental poers. Speaking of the navy, this has meant the accomplishment of numerous missions, both naval and civic,
virtually on a shoestring. Added to this have been the


Photo shows Capt Cesar G. Villarin, CO 53rd PC Company
inspecting Muslim Kumpit “Millena” which was loaded
with untaxed blue seal cigarettes.'The kumpit was intercepted in the waters off Dalaguete, Cebu.


tedicus and backbreaking tasks  of operational training and fleet maintenance.
18 33
Taking the case of our naval establishment further,
problems are ever surmounting in the maintenance and
operation of vessels and equipment that have long outlived efficient use. The demands for greater ship endurance, sturdier ship construction, and greater speeds
are getting more and more acute as our naval service
feels increasingly the absence of more appropriate ship
types. no ce anobulos
q o1i nadi esel
Our patrol and other light craft are still pegged to
speed that are “unthinkable" in our present era. While
other nations build their navy, we continue to shore and
patch up old ships that "look like new” only because of
our own ingenuity
There is a grave deficiency in our seaward defense
forces which we can obviate immediately using 100%
Filipino capital and labor.  And this is the constructio:
of motor torpedo boats which, by appropriate design,
can make runs up to around 35 knots. Similar vessels
constructed by the more technologically advanced countries easily make around 45 knots, complete with surfaceraiding and anti-submarine warfare armaments.
In this respect, we do not have to look very far
for the necessary example and incentive. The very firs"
vessels of our Off-Shore Patrol (OSP) prior to Worl
War II were three Q-boats, forerunners of present-da,
motor torpedo boats, And we, have constructed this type
of fast patrol boat even before the war!
a
Money would not be a major problem in the acquisition or construction of this ship type for the Philippine
Navy because cost consideration would not be appreciable.. And for the money, as the saying goes, nothing
more can be desired. These small but fast torpedo boats
will afford us  the greatest return for whatever money
that may be invested for ship acquisition and operation.
The problem of a small navy coexisting with a
mammoth fleet of a hostile sea power is one of importance to us." History is replete with examples of this
predicament and we have only to turn to the recorded
past to draw guidance in the solution of our own problem. The quickest though not necessarily the best
"way out” is through alliance with other foreign powers,—
thereby endeavoring to achieve a semblance of that
proverbial balance of power. This we have plunged into


KHAKI'& RED


Page 40


through bilateral and multilateral treaties and alliances.
But a solution to the problem that would depend entirely
on our own would suggest the employment of forces that
would make maximum use of the elements of concealment and surprise, speed and striking power. These
are precisely the requirements and catalysts which have
brought about the invention of the submarine and the
construction, of light and fast patrol torpedo boats.
For our purposes, therefore, since we are and will
be for some time the naval “underdog” in our hemisphere,
the employment of submarine and fast patrol torpedo
boats would afford us the best means to offset our tremendous material disadvantage,
The Spirit of Defense
-Let us now take the case of evolving sur concept
of defense. In this respect, the term “defense" should
be fully clarified. To borrow Mahan’s concept, whichhas permeated defense thinking not only in the United
States but also in Europe, an armed establishment for
defense is one that will be used only when attacked. The
actual operations that may be conducted ean, therefore,
be both offensive and defensive in nature. The spirit
of defense is by no means only defensive in form.
To think of national defense in terms of "digging in"
and waiting for the enemy simply because our armed
forces are for “defense only” is therefore fallacious. We
should forever banish the thought of fighting tomorrow’s
conflict with the weapons and mentality which we have
used in the past.
Politically, economically, and culturally, we stand
today on a different light compared to our predicament


Officers and EM of PC Masbate: Major Morris H Pedroza, Provl Comdr; Capt. Buenaventura C Casena, Company Commander; 69th PC Co. Masbate; T/Sgt Leopoldo Lanuza, Chief Provl Ha. PC Masbate; T/Sgt Wenceslao Honrubia, Chief Commo.; S4Sgt Juan L. Desilos Jr;
Actg Co. FISgt; SiSgt Gerardo Gotis, S7Sgt Lucilo Escape, S7Sgt Salvador Ramos, S7Sgt Ramon Taumbaga,
S7Sgt Bernardo Villanueva, Sgt Roselo Borras Sgt Joaquin Salvador. Sgt Cesar Dellomas, Sgt Pablo Bolon,
Sgt Joselito Enage, Sgt Antonio Ariate, Sgt Dioscoro
Cabug, Sgt Demetrio Manlangit, S7Sgt Andres Castillo,
Cpl Arseno Elarieg, Cpl Eriberto Legronio, Col Leonardo
Bresoto, Cpl Jesus Cabug, Col Alfredo Peralta, Cpl Sofronio Bartelay, Cpl Jesus Gulecino, Cpl Cristito Cervantes,
Cpl Benveindo Prado, Col Edmundo Rosales, Col Ray¡mundo Condat, Cpl Ireneo Maranon, Pfe Agapito Tabug,
Pfe Nicolas Rosoro, Pfe Cornelio Medalle, Pfe Pedro For
mareje, Pfe Wilson Judal, Cpl Mecail Canonco.


A peace and order conference was held at Davao City
by Brig Gen Rigoberto J. Atienza, IV PC Zone Commanding General on 6 June 1963 attended by Davao Governor Vicente Duterte, Davao City Mayor Carmelo Porras and different Municipal Mayors of Davao province.
Among those taken up during the conference were:
Acquisition of high-powered firearms for local police, police training, illegal fishing, illegal slaughter of carabaos and also behavior of PC personnel in Davao, Shownin picture above is Gen Atienza with Lt Col Celso Songcoya, Davao PC provincial Commander, Provincial Board
Secretary of Davao province and Secretary of the Municipal Board of Davao City.
just prior to World War II. As an independent country
free to decide its own fate and fortune, we have to
appreciate the realities of international relations, parti
cularly the realities of war. We have to see that
neither war nor its aftermath is absolute. At most
settlements or terms that are born of victory or defeain war are merely interim arrangements. Subsequenevents may make enemies of friends and vice versa. A
strategy that may result in national extinction woulo
be sheer folly. Survival with honor should be the objective.
no 109
sbiisl
As much as our resources will permit, let us carry
warfare, should it come again, away from our shores
We should build a strong, potent force in being and build
our reserves. But a deep reserve force presupposes the
corresponding stockpile of materiel and munitions, the
existence of arsenals, armories, depots, and mobilizatior
centers. Otherwise, the Citizen ARMY, the core of oun
reserve force, will remain just that even after a statof emergency has been declared or at most, it may
serve only as a paramilitary force with scant weapons
and equipment,
994
Warfare is a many-faceted affair. Let us not get
carried away by any single innovation or device, or by
any new technique or doctrine. But let us have an eye
for progress and development. Let us; assimilate new
things that come up which we find noteworthy in our
defense efforts. Let us incorporate into our system
new doctrines on warfare which will serve our purposes
efficiently and effectively.
 Finally, in our despair to cut down on defense spending, we cannot possibly become too exceptional or isolationist in attitude. Since collective security is ar
essential feature of modern times, we have to conforn
with our defense partners in more ways than one. Our
use of modern weapons and techniques according to, the
collective standards is inevitable, Collective security as
our best chance for survival in the present bipolar con,
fetap ethi bas adunt bopubong oels vedT .ofisi


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page, 4l


A!
A Democracy
IIS THE KING OF MOGMOG
DS
ITHIATOLL GROUP


x Ulithians with the
Assistant Provincial Commander
C Samar. These people were stranded from the Fasaroi
land of the Ulithi Atoll group, US Territory.


On April 11, 1963 a group of Ulithians
leaded by Mr. Pedro Yamalmal sailed out of
asarai Island in a banca. They were bound
or Fais Island to buy tobacco and to barter
bod stuff. Unfortunately, however, a strong
ale hit them. For three days the typhoon
ounded their banca and torn to pieces its sail
ntil finally the men found themselves way out
n the mid Pacific. Losing their bearing, they
ept on paddling until they landed at San
ulian, Samar, on May 3, 1963, tired and exausted with nothing except water.
The companions of Mr. Yamaimal were: Yaones Egwig, 40, single; Luis Yolores, 42, maried; Joseph Yormar, 45, married; Pablo Hoeur, 40, married; and Menchor Mayulfa, 50,
narried.
Mr. Yamalmal is the only member who
nows how to speak English, read and write
OO.
According to Mr. Yamalmal their ruler is
ing Malifich, the recognized ruler of the Ulithitoll group, comprising the islands of Falolop,
asarai, Asor, Lother and Mogmog. The King
esides at Mogmog. This Kingdom has long
xisted. It is under the Yap island group disrict, with an administrator, and under the
ommissioner of Saipan.
What is admirable in this Kingdom is that
rinking, gambling and immorality are not toleated. The King wields absolute power over
is subjects, known as the Ulithian. They are
ll Roman Catholics and are provided by the
ing adequate education. Mr. Yamalmal furer informed the Samar PC that all teachers
here are native. The people grow rice, cocout, potatoes, papaya, squash, vegetables and
arro. They also produced tuba and the group


enjoyed very much our tuba in Samar. The
only difference, according to Mr. Yamalmal, is
the complexion, theirs is white. From their
physical appearances, they are healthy, strong
and sturdy. In spite of the 23 days without
food, they still looked hale and healthy when
they landed at San Julian. The first thing Mr.
Yamalmal and members asked upon arrival at
Camp Lukban, Maulong, was to request for a
Catholic priest to say a thanksgiving mass for
them for their safety.
The American Embassy was informed of
the fate of these Ulithians.
They liked to go back home on their borrowed banca, which is about 35 years old, according to Mr. Yamalmal. They are now waiting for a word from the US Embassy and from
the US Naval Station at Falalop island. Except for a few dollars and a navigators camp,
these people are practically only with G-string
like our own Igorots.


A thorough check-up on logs for export owned by the
Lanao Export Corporation is made to determine smuggled
logs.


Brig Gen Dominador F Garcia, Chief of Constabulary
spearheads 1963 mass blood donation drive in the PC at
ceremonies held at the Officers Club, Camp Crame, on
16 April 1963, in coordination with Philippine National
Red Cross, Quezon City Chapter officials. Photo shows
Gen Garcia being bled, while Red Cross workers, members of the PC Ladies Club and PC Officers look on.


age 42


 


Care Of The Human Dentition
By: Captain ROMEO C CASTRO
OIC Periodontia Section
1105th PC Dental Dispensary
HPC, Camp Crame
(Last of a Series)
It has been pointed out in my first article about
the importance of conserving the temporary teeth in view
of the fact that this has a very important bearing in the
eruption of the permanent ones. This matter should not
be overlooked for the simple reason that the consequences
are immeasurable from the stand point of esthetics. The
only safe plan, therefore, is the frequency of recalls for
a periodic checkup until the full complement of the permanent teeth has erupted. It is therefore the primordial
object of this phase to emphasize to the patient the importance of a need for judicious and careful advices every
now and then.
IMPORTANCE OF THE FIRST PERMANENT MOLAR
One of the greatest events in the life of a child is
the eruption of the first permanent molar usually at his
sixth birthday. These are four in number, one on each
side of both upper and lower jaw. They are considered
one of the most important teeth in the Dental Arch, on
account of the fact that they are the largest, strongest,
and most effective weapon in the mastication of food.
The loss of this can cause disarrangement of the entire
sets of teeth and can bring about a serious defect in the
facial expression of the child. In other words, when the
first permanent molars are lost, the damage is irreparable
unless corrective measure is made. When lost at early
age, the normal set up of the remaining teeth is usually
deranged by the falling backward of the bicuspids and
the forward movement of the remaining molars. Next


COMPLIMENTS OF


to fall out oof alignment is the moving of the centr
incisors away from the median line causing a space be
ween the two central incisors, thus seriously destroyin
the expression of the mouth.
In a family where there is a considerable high su
ceptibility to dental caries, the sixth year molars are a
ready deeply decayed before the eighth year of the chil
In about ninety-five percent (95%) of cases, the loss
the first molar is through decay. It is therefore su
gested that this should be filled up right away to prevel
its loss.
During childhood period, generally speaking, paren
do not know the presence oof the first molar when th
child reaches the age of six. The truth is that they ar
prone to be neglected in view of the fact that these teet
erupt behind the temporary molars without their droj
ping from the arch. Needless to say, there are no othe
teeth that are often lost from inattention other the
the first permanent molar.
IDEAL TOOTH BRUSHING
Every person young and old should be under the dired
supervision of a dentist if he desires to maintain a hig
standard of mouth hygiene. The reason behind th
matter is quite obvious, because the individual may d
more harm than good due to incorrect method in the us
of the tooth brush. This presentation, therefore, is cho
sen with the belief that each person should be taugl
about the correct technic until he has mastered it wel
The most ideal and simple device designed for clean
ing the teeth is the tooth brush. It should be carefull
selected to suit every individual need. As soon as th
proper type is selected, it is placed in cold water for
few minutes and the dentifrice of choice by the patien
is applied to the bristle of the tooth brush. The teet
are then in an edge to edge bite and the brush is place
(Continued on page 78)


ONEMOHL OAILATARERA
Ges
GETAAL MIETAOTANADIOL


PATERNO SERDENIA
Manager


1508-10 Felix Huertas, Manila


Tel. 3.75.30


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page



Philippine Constabulary band


It was o1 years ago when the original Philppine Constabulary Band was organized by the
late Lt. Col. Walter H. Loving. Two years thereirom, that was in 1904, Governor General W. H.
Taft sent it to the St. Louis Exposition, where
it was extended, in recognition of its fine showing, the privilege of alternating with the world’s
finest. Governor Taft left the Philippines not
long after the return of the band to this country,
but before finally departing, he had the band
equipped with string instruments. In 1907,
when he came back, no longer as civil governo.
of this Islands but as Secretary of War of the
United States to inaugurate the Philippine Assembly he had the pleasure of hearing his brainchild play as a band and then seeing it suddenly
transformed, in its entirety, into a symphony
orchestra.
In 1909 when Taft was elevated to the highest position within the gift of his people, as
President of the United States, he did not forge.
the Philippine Constabulary Band. Upon his
election, he invited the Filipino military band to
Washington and when the day came for him to
march from the House of the Capitol to take his
oath of office, it was to the Philippine Constabulary Band that he gave the honor of escorting
him.
IMganaz
The Philippine Constabulary Band went to
America for the third time in 1915 to take part
in the Panama-Pacific Exposition. While there,
it played itself into the hearts of the American
people once more and added luster to its name
and fame to the Filipinos as musicians. Cassasa,
the renowned director of the Italian Band, which
served as the official band of the Exposition,
ranked the Filipino military band among the
World’s greatest. On the occasion of a banquet


10:


at the exponsition, Sousa, King ol Marches at
that time, did not hesitate to state in public that
in his opinion the best organized unit among the
great bands of the worid was thePhilippine
Constabulary Band.
From March 1915 to the closing of the exposition, December 1915, the late Capt. Pedro
Navarro, then Sergeant, directed the band upon
Col. Loving’s extended leave in America. Equally
elated by the exceptional showing of this young
Filipino Sergeant, President Manuel Quezon
sought the Sergeant out. Resident Commissioner at that time to Washington, the impressive,
dynamic Filipino leader was on the way back
to the Philippines with the Jones Law in his
pocket. What he said when he met Navarro is
something that should be recorded. "Navarro,
he said in eloquent Spanish, as he rocked the
hand of the bewildered Sergeant in a vigorous
hand shake, "I heard a great deal about you anc
your band in Washington. I am greatly delighted to know that under your baton we have a
band that can stand side by side with the best
they have in this Exposition. As soon as I get
to the Philippines, I shall see to it that you get
your just reward."
 Shortly upon the band’s return from the
Panama-Pacific Exposition, Sgt Navarro was
commissioned Third Lieutenant, then he was designated to be the director of the band upon the
retirement of Col. Loving. In 1917, Lt. Navarro
(who was later retired as Captain) was succeeded by Lt. Jose Silos, as the third Director
of the Band. usid somesl silan or-8oa
After a year, Lt. Silos left the service and
Col. Walter Loving was recalled to the Philip

Page 44


 


pines to reorganize the Band. Capt. Alfonso
Fresnido (then a Sergeant) was commissioned
Third Lieutenant and was sent to the United
States for further musical training. Upon his
return to the Philippines in 1923, he was designated the fourth director of the band.
In 1938 Col. Loving was again recalled by
President Quezon to prepare the band for its
participation at the Golden Gate Exposition in
San Francisco, California. As in its previous
tours of America, the Philippine Constabulary
Band won again the admiration of the American
people.
The PC Band was not reorganized until 1946
when the Philippine Constabulary was yet known
as the Military Police Command. Under the
supervision of young but able Captain (then
lieutenant) Jose M. Campana, the band was
again put together and has since grown from
the handful of musicians in 1946 to a 7o-piece
band in 1949. It had none of the pre-war veterans of the band, for the few, survivors of the
pre-war organization was taken over by other
bands of the AFP. The new PC Band may not
be as famous as the old, but Capt. Campana
saw to it that the new organization followed
the latter’s glorious traditions. And as a fitting
compensation to his tireless efforts and initiative, Capt. Campana was promoted to the rank
of major on 1 June 1959 It is with deep regret
however, that Major Campana had to leave the
service due to failing health.
T
THE PC BAND TODAY
Ist Lt Honorato S Pedro assumed command
of the PC Band on 1 Oct 1962. Of the military
band conductors today, he is the only violinist
in his own right. Young and good looking, he
has quite a musical background. He started as
a violinist in a conservatory of music, was a
member of the Manila Symphony Orchestra, and
had toured eight Southeast Asian countries with
the Barangay Dance Troupe during the first Philippine Floating Exposition. His musical background is further satiated by the fact that he
was enlisted musician for ten years under the
able tutorship of Col Antonino Buenaventura.
The son of a pre-war PC Band member, his
assumption as commanding officer and conductor of the PC Band gave fulfillment to the lifelong wish of Col Loving, that officers and conductors of the famous organization should emanate from its members.
0119818
batostib bun basi
5in9 sIT
PC BAND PERSONNEL
Msnosas
IST LT. HONORATO S. PEDRO, DOL (PO)
as bas zun
2
CO & Conductor
 MSgt Leon M Clanor, INE (PC)
Asst Conductor
ds tisnasl.


— B Flat Clarinet
Piccolo
Sgt Benjamin O Villareal SSgt Lauro E Buenaflor


Flute


Sgt Salvador P Federico


Pfe Guillermo J de Guzman Sgt Lino C Peregrina


Oboe
Pvt Porfirio P. Arbolado
E Flat Clarinet
Cpl Irineo P Barbon


Cpl Jacinto Z Garcia
Cpl Ricardo G. Eusebio
ni
Pfe Rogelio H Cruz
Sgt Raymundo L Colocado


Ist Lt. HONORATO S. PEDRO


Cpl Mauro C dela Cruz
Pfe Romeo R Alejo
Sgt. Maximo Mi Roma
Cpl Leonardo U Encabo
Cpl Mario D Sesante
Alto Clarinet
Sgt Conrado R Halili
Bass Clarinet
SSgt Iluminado M Atajar
da dellud
Bassoon
TSgt Pedro P Moral
Sgt Patricio E Biglangawa
Alto Saxophone
Cpl Florencio C Porteria
Cpl Roberto C San Pedro
A?
Tenor Saxophone
Sgt Aladin M. Ramos
Sgt Emelito S Vida
Baritone Saxophone
TSgt Esmeraldo A Moral


French Horns
Cpl Alfredo C Bago
Cpl Avelino P Mejico Jr.
Cpl Alfredo A Medina
Cpl Hospicio P Colocado
Sgt Bernardino S Calupad
Trombones
Cpl Ricardo G Reyes
Cpl Marcelo S Bayugo
Sgt Leonardo M Camantigue
Cpl Francisco G Mugel
Cpl Alfredo S Alfonso
Euphonium
19h
Sgt Emperatro P Mejico
Cpl Venus P Bote
Elsses
Cpl Amando C delos Santos
Cpl Lamberto G Lozares
Sgt Jose S Sino
Pfe Jaboco M Esteban
 String Basses
Sgt Cresencio M Mateo
Percussions
MOC


Cornets T
omoAnami
SSgt Bienvenido F Matias Bass Drum & Cymbal
Cpl Severino E Herrera
Sgt Bernardino delos Santos
Sgt Crispulo S Camahalan TSgt Merope G Leano
Pfe Florencio D Manabat
Sgt Faustino R Rodis
""Sgt Isidro I Roxas
Cpl Uguideo S Javier


Sgt Ricardo H Buan
Cpl Edmundo N Palacao
- Snare Drum 1
Tympani
Chief Clerk, Sup 6 Fin Sgt
SSgt Constancio S
Madarang


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 45


THE CONSTABULARY MAN
(Author Unknown)


Do you know that careworn fellow
With shoulder straps of red,
With his woolen puttee leggins,
Campaign hat upon his head;
And whose suit of jaded khaki
Shows of service in the brush,
But whose calm eyes show the spirit
That hardships cannot crush?
CHORUS
Oh, it's hoot man, hike man,
Constabulary man;
As, half police and soldier,
He does the best he can.
He's always in for fun or fight
And doesn’t care a damn;
Foot or mounted, wet or dry,
Constabulary man.
His belly may be empty,
And his pocketbook also;
His clothes maybe are ragged,
But his spirit's never low.
And when there's trouble brewing,
Or the enemy's in sight;
You'll always find him ready
And willing for a fight.


Do his orders come at one A.M.,
He's on his way by two.
Tho's lacking rations for his men,
He'll stay till he gets through.
He may be gone a week or month
To Samar or to — well,
The daily papers never learn
en
What this young man could tell.
When economy becomes the cry,
You hear the people say,
We'll cut the P.C. strength in half,
They're drawing too much pay,
But when the cholera hits the town,
And the people are scared green,
It's the P.C. man who's on the job
Maintaining quarantine.
He's a doctor and a lawyer
And apothecary too,
He's a teacher and a padre
And has other things to do,
He's artillery and cavalry,
Tho' infantry the more:
He's sure United Service Man
A memben of this Corps.


Lowdown On Firearms


SECTION I. Definition of Terms —
1. “Firearm" or “arm" as herein used, ineludes rifles, muskets, carbines, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, and
all other deadly weapons for which a bullet, shot, shell or
other missile may be discharged by means of gun powder or other explosives. The term also includes air rifles
except such as being of small caliber and limited range
which are used as toys. The barrel of any firearm
shall be considered as a complete firearm for all purposes hereof (Section 877, RAC).
2. The word “ammunition" shall mean loaded shell
for rifles, muskets, carbines, shotguns, revolvers, pistols
and all other deadly weapons from which bullet, ball,
shots, shell or other missile may be fired by means of
gun powder or other explosives. The term also includes
ammunition for air rifles mentioned in this Section
(Section 290, CA No. 466).
SECTION II. Kinds of Licenses —
There are three kinds of firearm licenses being
issued, namely:
1. Regular License — issued to private individuals,
business firms or establishments, security and/or watchman agencies for the use of its security guards, in ac

cordance with Section 887 of the Revised Administrative
Code;
2. Special Permit — issued to government officiale
and/or employees for personally-owned firearms pursuant to Sections 881 of the Revised Administrative Code;
and
3. Certificate of Registration — issued also to government officials and/or employees for governmentowned firearms in accordance with Section 879 of the
Revised Administrative Code.
SECTION III. Legal Authority to Issue LicenseThe Chief of Constabulary is authorized and directed
to approve and disapprove applications for personal,
special and hunting licenses to possess firearms and ammunitions (Paragraph 15, Executive Order No. 8, dated
January 21, 1919).
SECTION IV.. Regular License
1. A regular license to possess firearm may be
issued to any applicant at least 21 years of age, of good
moral character, of sound mental and physical condition
and who possesses the qualification prescribed elsewhere
in this Section. No license shall, however, be issued to
any citizen or national of any country not having diplo

Page 46


 


Capt Basas, CO 92nd PC Company, and his men inspec
locse firearms seized by a patrol under Cpl. Tortosa at
Barrio San Roque, Hinigaran, Negros Occidental.


matic relations with the Philippines.
2. Applications for regular license shall be coursed
thru the following offices for investigation and recommendation:
(a) Previncial Governor and Provincial Commander
if applicant is residing in the province.
(b) City Mayor and Chief of Police, if applicant is
a resident of Manila, Baguio or Quezon City. Residents
of other chartered cities should course their applications
thru the City Mayor and Provincial Commander.
3. To Whom Regular License May Be Issued:
(a) Revolver or pistol license not heavier than caliber .38 may be issued to the following:
(1) A proprietor or owner of agricultural lands
assessed at P30,000.00 or more.
(2) An administrator or overseer of an agricultural land assessed at P30,000.00 or more.
(3) A lessee of government or private agricultural land, fishpond or pasture land assessed at P30,000.00
or more.
(4) A businessman with an invested capital of
₱30,000.00 or more, realizing a gross sales of P4,000.00
or more per business quarter.
(5) A professional in the active practice of his
profession who travels to isolated places and/or carries
large sums of money.
(6) An official or employee of business firms
holding responsible position who travels and/or carries
large sums of money.
(7) A US army or Navy veteran pensioner who
has rendered active duty service for at least 20 years
and receiving a pension for life of P400.00 or more.
(8) A retired EM of the AFP with at least 20
years of active service and receiving a monthly pension
for life.
(9) A civil service employee retired under Republic Act No. 660.
(10) A business firm or establishment for the
use of its officials and/or employees.
(11) A duly licensed watchman or security
agency for the use of its security guards.
(b) For caliber .22 pistol or revolver license, the
qualifications are the same as those in paragraph 3a
above, except the following:
:84a
(1) For property owners, or administrator, or
lessee, assessed value of the property is reduced from
P30,000.00 to P10,000.00 and


(2) For businessman, the capital investment is
reduced to P10,000.00, and the gross sales or income, to
₱3,000.00 per business quarter.
(c) License for Low Powered Rifle, calibre .22,
shotgun or air rifle may be issued to the following:
(1) A proprietor or owner of agricultural land,
fishpond, pasture land or timber land assessed at no
less than P1,000.00.
(2) An administrator, lessee or overseer of
agricultural, fishpond, pasture land or timber land assessed at P2,000.00 or more.
(3) A businessman or merchant who pays business taxes of P30.00 a year or who has an invested
capital of P1,000.00 or more.
(4) An owner of a homestead actually cultivated
by him.
(5) A regular school teacher of a public schosi
or institution recognized by the government.
(6) A veteran of the AFP on CDD status.
(7) An employee receiving a salary of P200.00 a
month or more.
(8) A US Army or Navy veteran pensioner receiving at least P200.00 a month.
(9) A retired EM of the AFP with at least 20
years of active service.
(16; Any applicant who possesses the requried
qualifications for revolver or pistol.
4. Persons who do not come within any of the
foregoing specifications but who satisfy the proper officials that they travel frequently in isolated places with
considerable sums of money in connection with their
business or calling may likewise be issued a license to
possess a firearm lower than caliber ,45.
5. Professional hunters and well known sportsmen
may be issued license for caliber 445 pistol or revolver
or any high powered rifle.
6. Every firearm applied for shall be test-fired
for ballistics examination and deposited pending approval of the application.
7. Upon approval of the application a firearm security shall be posted for each firearm before license is
issued.
E
8. Kinds of Firearms Securities:
The law provides for two kinds of securities required of private individuals, namely:
(a) Surety Bonds issued by authorized bonding
companies in the amount of P100.00 for each firearm in
favor of the licensee guaranteeing the safekeeping of a
firearm.
*
(b' Certificate of Deposit — There are two kinds
of Certificates of Deposit acceptable as security for a firearm license. They are (1) Firearm Certificate of
Deposit for P40.00 issued by the Philippine Postal Savings Bank, and (2) Certificate of Deposit issued by the
Treasurer of the Philippines for government bonds.
SECTION IV. Special Permit — to possess a firearm under Section 881 of the Revised Administrative
Code may be issued to any government official or employee to possess firearm in connection with the performance of his official duties.
SEC. 881 of the Revised Administrative Code provides that, any government employee can get any type
of firearms on Special Permit. Reserve Officers in the
Active Service may be granted possession pursuant to
this provision of Law. (Continued on next page)


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 47


1. Procedures in Filing Application —
(a) With the exception of the national and/or
high government offficials, application for Special Permit shall be coursed thru the following offices for investigation and recommendation:
(1. Provincial Commander, if applicant resides
in the province.
(2) Chief of Police of Manila, Quezon City or
Baguio City if applicant resides in any of these
cities,
(b) The application must be properly accomplished in PC Form No. 3 and recommended favorably by:
(1) Senate President or Speaker of the House,
or respective Secretary of each body, for national officials and employees in either body.
(2) Provincial Governor, for provincial officials
and employees.
(3) City or Municipal Mayor, in case of local
officials to include Barrio Lieutenants and/or
Vice Barrio Lieutenants.
(4) Bureau Head or Chief of Office, for appointive officials and/or employees.
(c) The application shall be supported by a copy
of appointment, if appointive official or employee or
Oath of Office, if elective officials.
(d) Firearm applied for shall be test-fired for
ballistics.
2. Procedure in the Collection of Firearms —
(a) The Bureau Director or Chief of Office shall,
upon separation, resignation, dismissal or retirement
from the service of any appointive official or employee,
cause the permittee to surrender his or her firearm to
the nearest PC unit or Chief of Police as the case may
be, and notify the Constabulary of such separation, resignation, etc., in order that appropriate steps may be
taken to insure collection of the firearm (Executive Order
No. 186, dated February 11, 1939).
(b) Upon expiration of the term of office of the
elective official, the Provincial Commander or Chief of
Police, as the case may be, shall collect all firearms
issued to him or registered in his name while serving
his term.
(c) Ex-officials and/or employees may file application under regular license to possess the firearm if
they so desire, subject to the requirements in Section III
hereof.
(d) All firearms and ammunition taken up from


Philippine Trading Co.
ESTABLISHED 1923
IMPORTERS - EXPORTERS
Dealer in Firearms, Ammunition &r
THEJ
 General Merchandise
Room 207, Luzco Building, 360 David, Manila
tiTzinirab
iban
JOSE S. RODRIGUEZ
G Inioihio
dvam o
Manager
Cable Address
Agencies:
“Philtraco"
Davao City
Telephone: 3-25-62
Butuan City
da
Iligan City
wiogs Jin
Jolo, Sulu
aenamg noigeosang bainaig
Baybay, Leyte


ex-officials and/or employees shall be forwarded to
FEO within a period of sixty (60) days for deposit. If
the firearm or ammunition taken up is a government
property, the name shall be deposited with the Account
able and/or Property Officer of the office concerned.
3. Regular, Retired and/or Reserve Officers of the
AFP may, upon filing of necessary application be issued
Special Permit to possess personally-owned firearms,
provided the following requirements are complied with:
 (a) Applications (PC Form No. 3) shall be
coursed thru and recommended by their respective CO’s,
if applicant is in the active service.
(b) If the applicant is Retired Officer or Reserve
Officer (in-active), the PC Form No. 3 shall be properly accomplished and signed by the applicant, supported by a copy of the Special Order of Retirement if
retired AFP Officer, and by General Orders of Commission and Certificate of RAD that applicant is a member in good standing of the reserve force, AFP, if reserve officer in the inactive status.
(c) Reserve Officers in the inactive status below the rank of Captain, shall in addition to the requirements in paragraph b above, submit proof of their means
of livelihood.
(d) Reserve Officers both in active duty or inactive status, may be authorized to possess under Special
MII
Permit the following firearms:
Mw
(1) One official sidearm, .45 caliber pistol or a
Carbine caliber 30, or both at the discretion of the C,
PC."
(2) Additional firearms of target model only.
noigao
(3) Souvenir firearms, provided that the arms
shall be first demilitarized; and provided further that
any part removed in the process of demilitarization shall
be deposited with the PC.
SECTION V. Certificate of Registration —
1. Certificate of Registration under Section 879
of the Revised Administrative Code are issued for government-owned firearm. There are two kinds of Certificate of Registration of Firearms being issued. They
are:
(a) Certificate of Registration (Long) issued to
Provincial, Municipal and/or City Treasurers, Chiefs of
Police, and government bureaus and offices.
 


Page 48


(b) Certificate of Registration (Short) issued to
individual official or employee upon recommendation of
their respective Bureau Heads or Chiefs of Offices.
 2. Procedures in filing application for Certificate
of Registration are the same as that of Special Permit.
 SECTION VI. Miscellaneous Matters —
91
iol
1. Change of domicile by licensee. — When a person holding a valid license to possess any firearm or
firearms shall change his domicile, he shall, within 10
days thereafter, notify in writing the Chief of Constabulary of such change, or he shall notify the Provincial
Commander of the province in which he takes up his
new residence, or the Chief of Police of the City, as
the case may be, and the said Provincial Commander
or Chief of Police shall transmit such information te
the Chief of Constabulary (Section 890, Revised Administrative Code).
USE
9jng79V
2. Duty of holder to exhibit license. — It shall be
the duty of any person holding a license to possess firearm; or ammunition to exhibit such license whenever
called upon to do so by a Provincial Governor, a Pe
officer, or peace officer, under penalty of having the
license revoked. (Section 898, Revised Administrative
Code)momaton
TILF
 3 Annual inspection of Firearm held under license.
— Every firearin holder is required to present his firearm and license once every calendar year for verification to either the Provincial Commander, Chief of Police
of Manila, Baguio or Quezon City, under whose jurisdiction the licensee is residing (Section 897, Revised Administrative Code).
IOHIIW .5918
1200 10 52
24. When a licensed firearm is lost. —
(a)Any firearm licensee who loses his firearm
or fails to account for it upon proper demand, forfeits his
bond (Section 900-901, Revised Administrative Code).
(b) Holders of firearms under Special Permit or
Certificate of Registration who loses their firearms are
penalized by an administrative fine of P40.00 for each
firearm lost (Executive Order 186, — 1949).
(c) Only upon presentation of satisfactory proof
showing that the firearm was destroyed or lost beyond
reasonable chance of recovery by any person and through
no fault or negligence on the part of the license may
exempt him from forfeiture of his bond or payment of
administrative fine. The holder who loses his firearm may also lose the privilege of possessing another
firearm aside from the forfeiture of his bond or fine
(Section 903. Revised Administrative Code).
5. Duration of a firearm license. — A personal
license shall continue in force until the death or legal
disability of the licensee unless prior thereto, the license
shall be surrendered by him or revoked by authority of
the President (Section 899, Revised Administrative Code).
6. Carrying of firearms outside of residence.
No person, except peace officers, shall carry his licensed
firearm cutside of his residence without first securin.
a "permit to carry firearm” from the Chief of Consta
bulary or his duly authorized representative (Executive
Order No. 290, as amended, series of 1949).


The Police Service
Dog Company
By Captain ALBERTO C. RUIZ
Commanding Officer


The 1st Scout Dog Unit was activated and
assigned to PATC, pursuant to Sec II GO No.
196 as Scout Dog Training Center. Later it
was re-designated as Scout Dog Training Unit
effective 1 July 1951. On the same date it was
placed under the command of CO, RTC, per
Sec III GO No 4 HAFPTC, dtd 1 Aug 51. The
unit was the Pet project and brain child of the
late Pres. Ramon Magsaysay when he was Secretary of National Defense. Inspite of the
unit’s countless accomplishments in all Huk
campaigns during the time, it was deactivated
due to budgetary reasons. During the nonexistence of the unit for almost two years, banditry, criminality and lawlessness became rampant so Senator Eulogio Balao, the then Secretary of National Defense, thought of activating
the unit to help solve and prevent the existing condition.
SffiO:
The new dog unit was activated pursuant
to Sec II GO No. 964 GHO, AFP effective 1
June 1956, with designation as Scout Dog Platoon (Separate). It is constituted as a unit of
the AFP and assigned to PATC. Under its activation order, the Scout Dog Platoon (SDP)
was organized and has an authorized strength
per AFP TO & E 7-167R of two officers and 37
enlisted men. Capt. Alberto C. Ruiz, one of the
organizers and the last commanding officer of
the defunct Scout Dog Unit, because of his experience, qualifications and knowledge as an
expert dog trainer was designated the Commanding Officer and Organizer of the new dog
unit.,
The mission of the unit is to render Scouf
Dog combat support to Infantry units and its
capabilities are to train Scout Dog teams for
sentry, scouting and patrolling, tracking and
(Continued on next page)


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 49


attack duties.
After two months of existence of the newly
organized dog unit, Capt Alberto C Ruiz, and
two EM were sent to the United States and
Canada to study and observe Rural Police Technique, specializing on Dog training on both basic
and specialized Dog training for police work.
They were sent under the ICA-NEC. Capt Ruiz
arrived in the Philippines with 12 selected dogs
from the United States-o bloodhounds, 4 German Shepherds and 2 Doberman Pinschers.
ORGANIZATION
The company is composed of one officer
and thirty four (34) enlisted men. The company is commanded by Capt Ruiz, the only expert war dog trainer in the country today. By
nature, a dog lover and fancier he was called
to active duty in the military service through
the instance of the late President Magsaysay
when he was still the Secretary of National Defense. Capt Ruiz had attended various Police
Service Schools in the United States and Canada. EM personnel are also competent dog
handlers and masters. They were selected from
the former old unit and retrained properly to
keep them proficient in dog handling. There
are at present 14 dogs assigned with the company. They are organized into dog teams. As
per TO & E of this unit, a team is composed of
two dogs, one tracker and one attack dog with
3 EM, two as handlers and the other one as
team leader and assistant dog handlers. Men
and dogs when not on actual duty in the different PC Zones are trained daily in order to
maintain their acquired knowledge of military
duties and police work.
TYPES OF DOGS AND CAPABILITIES.
Presently the unit has three breeds of
trained dogs for both the military and police
work, the Bloodhounds, German Shepherd, and
Doberman Pinscher. The bloodhound which
consists the bigger number of the canine force
is considered the best and more reliable when
it comes to tracking fugitives or criminals. As
a matter of fact the pure breed bloodhound is
the only breed that is accepted and recognized
in most law courts in the States. Although
much is done in these days by the use of scientific mechanical aids to put the PC soldiers in
a position of superiority over the criminal it
would be foolish to ignore the special qualities
of a dog which can provide such powerful and
skilled aid to man. Just the presence of a
bloodhound in a community helps greatly. It
prevents and lessens criminality. This breed is
the first of its kind in the Philippines. In action
you would be surprised to see them almost
plowing up the ground with their square nose
in pursuit of their quarry. On the other hand,
the unit has German Shepherd and Doberman
Pinscher best qualified for sentry, scouting and
attack duties. These breeds are teamed up with
the bloodhound during operations.


SENSE OF SMELL
The nose is perhaps the dog’s most important weapon. A dog sense of smell is more
highly developed than that of human being.
This is one reason why dogs are very much superior than ordinary team of soldiers used in the
field of operations. The dogs could be used for
tracking by the direct scent from human sweat
deposited on the ground from feet or through
footwear, and by scent caused through pressures on the ground of the human foot. A dog
brought to the scene of crime could easily pick
up and follow a ground scent, or can be trained
to search quickly a wide area and will certainly
discover persons hiding in the vicinity by pieking them up thru direct scent even if they are
concealed in dense vegetation, or up in a tree.
An example of this could be seen during the
dramatic capture of escapee Isauro Reverente
by the PC dogs bloodhound Gypsium, Joe, and
Leonie. Reverente, the master-mind and the
most notorious among the 14 escapees who bolted the provincial jail of Nueva Vizcaya, was able
to escape after an encounter with PC soldiers.
It would be impossible for the soldiers to track
him down, as the area is wide, mountainous and
densely vegetated. The dog teams, under Capt
Ruiz, which were then operating in that province
against the escapees at the time, were notified.
The dogs were brought to the scene where the
escapee was last seen. In no less than 15 minutes, the quarry was found by the dogs inside
a cave of a big rock, along the side of a very
thickly vegetated area. Without the use of dogs,
Reverente would have not been captured and
probably would have endangered life and property.
SENSE OF HEARING
Dogs also have an acute sense of hearing,
their ears being attuned to higher and pointed
noise than the human ear. In this case, dog’s
senses of smell and hearing are complementary,
though smell remains the most potent weapon.


6
in aboriefi
to
Captain Ruiz is shown
g members
of the dog team during exe
training at Diliman,
Quezon City.


Page 50


 


INTELLIGENCE
No dogs can be successful at police work
without a lucky intelligence. This could be
revealed or noticed during the course of training, that a good dog will show a keen interest
in its work.
OTHER USES OF DOGS.
PC dogs are used to retrieve buried weapons, stolen properties or articles abandoned by
robbers and thieves. These are used for evidence in courts. They are also used for demonstration for psychological effect.
TRAINING.
The purpose of basic training are as follows:
a. To develop in dog’s behavior what is
basic to more specialized training for specific
functions.
b. To determine the specific military function for which each dog should be trained.
c. To simultaneously teach specially selected enlisted men to train dogs.
The basic training involves training on leash
the following: Hell, Sit, Down, Cover, Stay,
Come, Crawl and Jump.
After the dogs are already proficient on the
aforementioned exercises, they would be taught
of leash on same exercises. The dogs are also
taught on accustoming to muzzles riding on car,
gun-fire, crossing rivers, etc.
The basic training of dogs has no place in
the military program. It serves simply to develop in dogs the behavior essential to efficient
and effective training for military functions.
The dogs that have successfully completed basic
training are disciplined, prepared to absorb instruction of a specialized nature. Their behavior on basic training is an indication of the
type of specialized training for which they may
be best suited. Basic training of enlisted men
serves similar purposes. Under the specialized
training, the PC Dog Unit concentrates its activities more on training the dogs on tracking
and attack, and of course on police works.
The basic training covers eight weeks, and
five weeks for the specialized training. But in
the case of the bloodhounds, their training is
just the reverse of the above procedure. They
are trained to specialized training, first the
tracking and later on the basic.
EMPLOYMENT.
The use of war dogs is not a new practice.
Even in ancient times the Greeks and Romans
started using war dogs.
The German Army
employed no less than 30,000 war dogs during
World War I as sentry and messengers. The
Philippine Constabulary uses these war dogs
in tracking down criminals, such as escaped
convicts, murderers, hold-uppers, cattle rustlers,
Huks and the like. Like the PC, when it was
still under the Philippine Army, which contributed much in the Huk campaign in Central
Luzon, the Police Service Dog Company had


already contributed its worth in the maintenance of peace and order. Late in July 1957,
after completion of training of EM and war
dogs, the company started dispatching dog
teams to different parts of the country. Even
some municipal police forces took advantage
of the use of dog teams in the solution of crimes
in their respective municipalities. Following
are a few important accomplishments of the
Police Service Dog Company.
1. Capture of 14 escapees from the Provincial Jail of Nueva Vizcaya, 20 Apr 58. Capt
Ruiz with three bloodhounds, Gypsium, Leonie
and Joe, were awarded the Military Merit Medal.
2. Capture of Carlos Gocela, alleged killer,
in Cebu City 9 Sept 58.
3. Capture of Narciso Disoso, alleged murderer of Justice of the Peace Federico Gapusan
of Ilocos Sur, 13 Oct 58.
4. Capture of Fernando Racena, alleged
murderer of Gregorio Roder of Ilocos Sur, 13
Oct 58.
5. Recapture of Bureau of Prisons escapees
by leading PC troopers.
6. Early apprehension of Anderson Fil¬-
American Guerrilla (AFAG) leader Pedro Borja
by leading troopers to his hideout, from 1 Jan
to 1 Feb. 59.


GREETINGS To The
PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY
On Its
o2nd Anniversary


Compliments From


KEG'S ENTERPRISES
IMPORTER-MANUFACTURER-REPACKER
AND
DEALER OF STATIONARY, CONSTRUCTION
MATERIALS, GENERAL MDSE.
AND AUTO SPARE PARTS


JOSEPH QUE-SANCHEZ
Manager


229 Haig St., Mandaluyong
Rizal, Philippines
Tel. 6 36-13


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 51


FIREARMS


Questions and Answers


(Printed hereunder are excerpts of a questien and
answer of a radie-television interview of Major Abelardo
L. Galang, deputy and executive officer of the Firearms
and Explosives Office Headquarters Philippine Constabulary, for possible guidance of the Public).
The Revised Administrative Code empowers the President of the Philippines to grant licenses for firearms
to deserving and qualified individual provided they are:
(1) Of legal age (2) With no criminal record (3) Needing firearms for the protection of life and property.
Pursuant to Executive Order No. 8 series of 1919.
the President delegated the power to grant licenses for
firearms to the Chief of Constabulary. Regulations were
to be promulgated by him, subject to the approval of the
President. As a consequence the FEO was organized.
The mission, therefore, of the FEO is the enforcement
of the firearms laws. Its functions are the following:
1. To process applications for firearms, ammunition and explosives, for recommendation to the
Chief Pe2. To issue licenses after the application had been
approved;
3. To intensify the collection of loose firearms;
4. To supervise and control all licensed firearms to
include those held by Watchman and Security
agencies, Firearms dealers, Gun Clubs, Fireworks
manufacturers, Explosives dealers and Manufacturers,
5. To account for all registered firearms in the
country by instituting different and various
control measures.
There are about 400,000 licenses in the Philippines
today and we are receiving between 200 to 250 new applicants daily. To be able to cope ap with this gigantic
task and responsibility, the FEO is organized into five
branches:
1. Administrative branch — it takes care of internal office administration and includes the Records Section, the Message Center and Administrative Section.
'2. Intelligence and Investigation Branch — it takes
care of covert and overt surveillance of loose firearms
and illegal explosives. It also takes care of the annual
verification of firearms. There is a plan also to add the
Prosecution Branch, where search warrants and warrants
of arrest are procured from the Courts of Justice, and
served. Prosecution of cases for illegal possession of
firearms and explosives may also be undertaken.
3. Operative Branch — this is where applications
are received, briefed and processed and sent to chief PC!
for approval. Upon approval, licenses are issued here.
This branch also takes care of the inspection and supervision of Firearms dealers and Manufacturers, Gun
Clubs, Watchman and Security agencies and Fireworks
factories.
4. Supply Branch — this includes the Storage Section, Ballistics Section, In-Storage Maintenance Section
and the Receiving and Shipping Section.
5. Last, but not least, is the Management Branch
which takes care of planning, policy-making in the training of personnel of the FEO."
To supplement this, all Provincial Commanders of
the PC, to include the Chiefs of Police of Manila, Quezon City and Baguio City, assist in the control of firearms and explosives by conducting verification and investigation (in case of application) and they enforce the
firearms laws. Permit to carry firearms outside residence are also issued by Provincial Commanders to de

serving licensee, pursuant to policies of the Chief of the
Philippine Constabulary.
zevoidf bus zieddot
1. What is verification of firearms and what are
the requirements of firearms holders?
Answer: Verification of firearms is the presentation of the license and firearms of a licensee once per
year as required by Sec 897 Revised Administrative
Code to look into whether the licensee is living and still
qualified, whether the firearm still exists and whether
the surety bond premiums and BIR taxes are paid up
to date.
enoiofint
2. What are Permits to Carry Firearms Outside
Residence?
bora gob doso foiriw aol mot
Answer: They are the authority given by the PC
to authorize license holders to carry their firearis outside residence as provided by Executive Order 290 as
amended by Executive Order Nos. 294 and 296.
lol sili
3. During this election ban, who are exempted
from this requirement and who may be authorized to
be issued Permits to Carry? 
(Continued on page 90)
als sin


GREETINGS To The


PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY


On Its


62nd Anniversary


Compliments From


b9ind


 


Page 52


Representative of the Auditor General in the PC Tomas
Sebastian (fifth from left, front row) and office personnel.
As "Watchdog” of government funds and properties. The
Office of the Representative of the Auditor General in the
Philippine Constabulary is charged with the audit of all
accounts, disbursements, properties and other financial


matters by seeing to it that they are legally expended
for legitimate purpose or purposes as prescribed by law
and by maintaining adequate and efficient control of public funds and rendering records thereon for the information of the general public.


MiSs MARIQUIT SOLIMAN
PC Muse 1962-63 AFP Little Olympics


Major Jaime F. Villafuerte, Constabulary Chief of Specia!
Services, presented to Brig. Gen. Dominador F. Garcia,
Chief of Constabulary, the PC Tennis team after cofping the over-all tennis championship in connection with
the recently concluded Philippine-American Tennis Tournament — Sangley Point Naval Station, Cavite.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 53


Greetings ...
to the Philippine Constabulary
on its 62nd Anniversary ...
From:
Estacio s
TAILORING * HABERDASHERY *


“THE CHOICE of MOVIE STARS"


2237 Legarda,
Sampaloc, Manila
Tel. No. 3-11-67


V. G. ESTACIO, President, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FILIPINO TAILORS


Stage - Movie -TV - Radio Section


Juvy Cachola of Sampaguita-VP
Pictures


Eddie Gutierrez and Susan Roces
of Sampaguita-VP Pictures


Bert Le Roy Jr, of SampaguitaVP Pictures


Page 54


 


TIGER


Romen Vasquez enacts on the
screen the true-to-life story of Lt
Fabian Ver of the PC Detachment
IIIth, named Tiger Unit. He leads
a handful ef men in many unsurmountable encounters against the
enemies,


Stella Suarez, as Commander Liwlyway, a rugged and desirable
Huk amazon, in a romantic scene
with Romeo Vasquez, as Lt Fabian
Ver. One of the breathless situations in ZULTANA INTERNATICNAL'S TIGER UNIT
s


Rod Navarro as Joseph Riggets
Jr., and one of the undaunted PC
soldiers who joined the famous
Tiger Unit in many untold battles.
A Zultana International production, directed by Armando Garces.


Page 55


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Isa sa mga nakahihindik na tagpo sa "GABI NG LAGIM"
sa DZRH-TV Channel 11. Hindi lamang iilang kasaysayan ang ginampanan ni Bb. Caridad Pavico sa dulang
Gabi Ng Lagim lalo’t ang papel na gagampanan ay
isang vampina. Mapapanood ang dulang ito, "GABI NG
LAGIM" sa DZRH-TV Channel 11 tuwing Miyerkoles sa
ganap na ika-walo ng gabi. Sinulat at pinamahalaan ni
FROILAN VILLEGAS.


Picture taken during the inter-unit Basketball Tournament held at HQ III PC Zone Basketball court recently.


Greetings To The Philippine Constabulary
on its o2nd Anniversary
Compliments From
AMBASSADOR
Productions, Inc.
Zaldy Zshornack — Perla Bautista — Carlos Salazar
Pugak, Etang Discher, Jose Vergara & Rita Gomez
in Pablo Gomez’s
“CARA CRUZ"
(Serialized in Hiwaga Konuks)
Direction: CHAT GALLARDO
CENTER THEATER — AUGUST 12 — 18
COMING PRODUCTIONS:
DATING PUSAKAL — PITONG TERITORYO
BATANGUENO MEETS WARAY — BUTANGERO


Newly elected officers of the HPC Enlistedmen’s Club for
1963, from left; (seated) MSgt Leva, C — Bus Mgr;
MSgt Ver, F — Bd Mbr: FSgt Clamor, S — Bd Mbr;
MSgt Javier, B — Bd Mbr; MSgt Escasinas, F — Club
President; FSgt Malonzo, T — Vice President; Msg Cunanan, M — Bd Mbr; MSgt Tubiera, B — Secretary; TSgt
Argarin, C — Bd Mbr. Standing from left: SSgt Odono,
G — Sergeant-at-Arms: TSgt Cabigon, M — Bd Mbr;
MSgt Mabanag, M — Bb Mbr; TSgt Ramos, T — Auditor; SSgt Munoz, C — Treasurer; and not in the picture
MSgt Aquino, F — Bd Mbr; MSgt Ibarra, I — Bd Mbr;
and TSgt Berjay, T — Sergeant-at-Arms.


Page 56


 


Look around you...


Yoo con see ond feel the throbbing growth of the country
ond the definite contributions Caltex is moking
in this pattern of growth.
lo the Coltex Refinery (the first in the Philippines)
in the ever-improving quality of its products
in the ever-growing network of Coltex terminals
depots, ond service stations ... all of them
setting the pace for a better way of life.


This is the recognized mork of leodership.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


YOURE AHEAD WTE CALVE


I
e 57


Page 58


E


 


THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY
GENERAL STAFF


Col ANGEL P LEGASPI
Deputy Chief PC
Col LUCAS V CAUTON
Chief of Staff
Col ESMERALDO R LAZARO
AC of S, C1
(top panel, left to right)
-o0o—
Col FRANCISCO M JIMENEZ
AC of S, C2
Col DELFIN E ARGAO
AC of S, C3
Lt Col PEDRO G JAVIER
AC of S, C4
Lt Col ONOFRE T RAMOS
AC of S, C5


(lower panel, left to right)


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 59


Brig Gen ISMAEL D LAPUZ
1 PCZ


ZONE COMMANDERS


Brig Gen FLAVIANO P OLIVARES
II POZ


Col ALFONSO P PALENCIA
III POZ


Brig Gen RIGOBERTO J ATIENZA
IV POZ


Page 60


KHAKI & R


Col JOSE C MARISTELA
Chief, CIS


A
Col QUERUBIN J MABUGAT
Inspector General, PC


SPECIAL STAFF & CO SEPARATE
Col ELADIO G SAMSON
C, SJA


UNITS
Col AVELINO E SAUCO
Commandant, PCS


JULYAUGUST, 1963


ag


Col NOBERTO B MENINA
Chief, Dental Surgeon
Col JOSE D REGALA


Chief, Trafcon


Col ABELARDO C TEANO
Surgeon General


Lt Col JOSE M J ZULUETA
Chief, Finance Officer


Page 62


KHAKI


Lt Col BRUNO G BALANCIO
Sec Const Staff


Lt Col ARMANDO V MEDEL
Chief, CsO


Lt Col DAVID C
NTURADO
Camp Comdr & CO, HHSB & HPC


Lt Col MIGUEL N SISON
Chief, FEO


JULY-AUGUST, 1963


Page 63


Lt Col ENRIQUE S FILART
CO, CSH


Lt Col ALFONSO A CALDERON
Chief, CRO


Lt Col DOMINADOR DE VERA
Chief Chaplain


Lt Col ANGEL M NAIG
Const Chief Ord Officer


Page 64


 


Cel AMADO G ILOMIN
Chairman, PC-SMG


Lt Col PEDRO L DEL ROSARIO
Chief, PCCSP


Lt Col CARLOS R RIOS
Adjutant General


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 65


Col FAUSTO S TADY
Comdt, PC-ROTC, PCCr.


Maj JAIME F VILLAFUERTE
Chief, Special Services


Maj PERFECTO V EUGENIO
Chief, OIA


Maj GALICANO M LACHICA
Chief, Camp Engineer


Page 66


 


Maj MANUEL C RAMOS
Officer-in-charge, Repl Det


Maj CLEMENTE D APUYA
CO, 1105th Dental Dispensary





MI. SEGUNDINO PE BENITO
Chief Accountant, PC


Mr. TOMAS D SEBASTIAN
Chief, RAG PC


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 67


Capt VICENTE L BABAO
Chief, PIO


Maj ANTONIO U BRIONES
Chief, PCCL


Capt EUGENIO K SATURNINO
CC, Const Patrol Co


Capt ALBERTO C RUIZ
O, Police Service Dog Co.


Page 68


 


Capt BERNARDO A LIGANOR
HPC Det Comdr


1s! Lt HONORATO S PEDRO
CO & Conductor, 2nd PC Band


Capt BIENVENIDO G SONGCO
CO, Cavalry Troops, PC


ISt Lt EDGARDO M ABENINA
CO, 145th PC Co.


JULY-AUGUST, 1963


Page 69


CApt THELMO T GARUCHO
Cindt, PC-ROTC Lyceum


Capt ROGELIO C YNSON
CO, HHCO, HSB


Capt


APOLINARIO R DE GUZMAN
Post Finance Officer


Capt DOMINGO Y GARCIA
CO, HSBn Det


ISt Lt AGUSTIN V MATEO
ASO Cp Sup, HHSB & HPC


Capt SERAPION G MAGALLANES
CO, Signal Service Co.


Ist Lt RICARDO M SILVERIO
Adj & S-1 HHSB


From left: 1st Lt S S Umadhay, Dep G Ex-O: Capt
T Garucho, Comdt: Col R V Marinas, PC-ROTC Comdt;
SSgt N G Gojo, m-charge of Intelligence, Training &
Operations.


Ist Lt RODRIGO B GUTANG
Operations Officer, HHSB


Cereral Santos Thanks
Senator Balao


REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES
Camp Murphy


July 2, 1963


Senator Eulogio Balao
Chairman, Committee on
National Defense and Security
Senate of the Philippines
Ma nila
My dear Senator Balao,
The bill which you sponsored on the
floor of the Senate, raising the rank of the
Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines, has just been enacted into a law.
This law which, in effect, has given honor
and prestige not only on whoever is at the
helm of our military organization but on
the country’s armed forces, is indeed an
achievement that you can rightfully be
proud of.
For this effort, besides the many other
laws you authored granting benefits to veterans, retirees and present members of the
armed forces, you truly deserve our warmest congratulations and heartfelt gratitude.
We, your comrade-in-arms, will be forever
grateful for your abiding concern and deep
interest in the welfare of the armed forces
personnel, their dependents and widows.
On my part as the incumbent AFP Chief
of Staff, I feel honored and privileged to
be the recipient of this promotion. It is
with a deep feeling of humility that I express to you and your colleagues my most
sincere gratitude for this rare opportunity
afforded me; and it is with a firm resolve
that I accept the challenge of the respons
ibility imposed on me.
Reiterating my deepest gratitude and my
highest esteem and warmest personal regards, I am as ever,
Very sincerely yours,
(Sgd.) ALFREDO M SANTOS
General,
AFP
yomd
Chief of Staff
erli


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 71


HOW TO MEET
is more of a torture to the guards who are assigned to find booby-traps in them.
While waiting, you might as well start rehearsing what you intend to say to the President. For your benefit, here are some questions most often asked which you may find
applicable to your particular case:
Do you have a gripe against a public official? Did you bring along that application
for loan which has not been acted upon after
filing it up last 19612 What extent of damage
has that flood caused your fields which the
papers reported to have been paid for with the
release of F1 million from the calamity fund of
the President? How many years have you been
squatting on the land which you now want to
own? Why do you think should the President support you this coming November? Why
do you want to turn Liberal?
All at once your heart starts to pound a
little faster than usual, your legs a little shaky
as you rehearse your line. Don’t think aloud.
You may be pulled out of the line to join the
three cranks already mentioned before.
Next ten, Number forty-one to fifty.”
That will be your cue to go up. Remember what you just rehearsed. More eyes will
be on you as you go up — Security men. Now,
since you are already in Malacanang, you might
as well look around and appreciate the huge
paintings, chandeliers and ornate center table
at the Reception Hall, the thickly carpeted
floors and the vie wof Malacanang Park across
the Pasig River. After all, Citizens Day may be
good only for a few years unless there is such
a thing as a reelection. This is your only
chance to enter Malacanang.
Now at last, the President!
What are you suppose to tell him. Don’t
hesitate. Go ahead and shake his hand. You
can even cry for added effects. Now you know
why you’re dressed just about right for the occasion. For before you is somebody in blue


"pag-asa long-sleeved polo shirt and rather
drab, crampled old pair of light gray pants.
After seeing him, take a slip of paper he
will hand you and see the person he tells you
to see. This person, glamorously called Presidential Assistant, will be hanging around. Hand
him the slip and to him, again, pour out your
problems. This time you are asked more questions and you give more answers. There are
about twelve persons to see, depending on the
kind of problem you have. Thus, if you need a
job, there are four assistants ready to draft
you for EEA membership. If you need aid,
there’s the pretty Social Secretary and her staff
to help. If you are a serviceman, there’s the
Military Assistant, and so on.
After meeting the President in his study
room you leave passing through the Ceremonial
Hall where remains of dead presidents have
lain in state and newly accredited ambassadors
to the Philippines are received formally, then
go down to the Social Hall and into the lawn
and out through the Executive Building.
You leave Malacanang feeling somewhat relieved of a grave problem like one coming out
of a confessional box after a long confession.
Then perhaps from out of this refreshed feeling
you may fumble a few thoughts on this visit to
the President.
'It may not matter now whether my problem will be solved or not. The fact that I, Juan
de la Cruz, met the President and let him listen
to what I have to say without having to tag
along a Congressman or a Governor, or to haggle
with the Appointments Secretary — who seems
to know all the reasons for keeping me out anyway — that is already something to be proud
about."
Well, these instructions were given for the
benefit of those who wish to meet a President.
It is quite clear. The leg work is all up to you.


Page 72


 


PC-COMELEC CONFAB — Top officials of the Commission on Elections and the Philippine Constabulary met in
Baguio City recently to thresh out plans to ensure peaceful and orderly elections in November. Photo shows Maj.
Buenaventura Fernandez, of the PC judge advocate office,
standing at right, reading a Malacanang circular declar

Date of release: June 24, 1963
This Calendar supersedes
the Calendar released on
January 10, 1963.
Republic of the Philippines
COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS
Ma nila


CALENDAR
(Revised)
For The
REGULAR ELECTION OF ELECTIVE PROVINCIAL,
CITY AND MUNICIPAL AND MUNICIPAL DISTRICT
OFFICIALS AND OF THE EIGHT SENATORS TO
BE HELD ON NOVEMBER 12, 1963


First Day of Registration


Sept. 28


Registration shall commence at
17:00 A.M. and shall close at 7:00 P.M.
Secs. 101 and 108, R.E.C.)
The board shall accomplish the following on this day:
1. Transfer the names of the voters
appearing in the 1961 list of voters
to the current list, except those ex¡cluded under No. 2, if any;
2. Exclude the following from the
1963 list of voters upon motion of
any member of the board or any elector or watcher;
(a) Those who have applied for
the cancellation of their registration;
(b) Those who died;
(c) Those who did not vote in
1959 and again failed to vote in 1961;


000


ing as illegal the appointments of special, confidential and
secret agents by provincial governors and mayors. The
conferees, headed by Brig. Gen. Dominador F. Garcia, PC
chief, and Comelec Chairman Juan Borra agreed to control the issuance of firearms to said agents as one of the
measures to ensure peaceful and orderly elections.


(d) Those who have been exSeventh
Sept. 28
cluded by court orders;
Saturday
And after summons to the voter before
in case of
election
(e) Those who have become disday.
abled or disqualified; and
(f) Those who do not exist.
Should the board deny the request
or fail to act thereon within three
days, application for cancellation or
exclusion may be filed with the proper court or with the Commission on
Elections. (Sec. 104, R.E.C., as amended by R.A. 867.)
3. Register new voters personally
appearing before the board who have
all the qualifications and none of
the disqualifications of a voter and
lare bona fide residents of the precinct where they are applying. (Sec.!
59, R.E.C., as amended by R.A. 867
and 2242, and Secs. 98 and 99, R.E.C.
Acts Prohibited on This Day
1. Giving or accepting free of
charge transportation, food, or drinks.!
(Sec. 51, R.E.C.)
2. Selling, drinking, or dispensing
intoxicating liquors. (Sec. 52 (a),
R.E.C.)
3. Establishing in any polling place
lor within a radius of 30 meters thereof, booths of any kind for the sale, Seventh
dispensing or display of wares, merSaturday
Sept. 28 chandise or refreshments, whether before
solid or liquid, or for any other pur-lelection
pose. (Sec. 52(b), R.E.C.)
day.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 73


4. Cockfights boxing, horse races
or any other similar show. (Sec. 52
(c), R.E.C.)
5. Carrying deadly weapons in the
Sept. 28 polling place or within a radius of
130 meters thereof. (Sec. 53, R.E.C.)
6. Electioneering in any polling
place or within a radius of 30 meters
thereof. (Sec. 50, R.E.C.)
Last Day of Registration
Registration shall commence at
7:00 A.M. and shall close at 7:00 P.M.
(Secs. 101 and 108, R.E.C.)
Registration of new voters personOct, ¡lally appearing before the board who
are bona fide residents of the precinct shall continue on this day.


Seventh
Saturday
before
election
day.


Sixth
Saturday
before
election
day.


Oct. 5


Nov. 11


Acts Prohibited on this Day
1. Giving or accepting free of
charge transportation, food, or drinks.
(Sec. 51, R.E.C.)
Sixth
2. Selling, drinking, or dispensing Saturday
intoxicating liquors. (Sec. 52 (a), before
R.E.C.)
lection
3. Establishing in any polling place lay.
or within a radius of 30 meters thereof, booths of any kind for the sale,
dispensing or display oof wares, merchandise or refreshments, whether
solid or liquid, or for any other purpose. (Sec. 52(b), R.E.C.)
4. Cockfights, boxing, horse races,
or any other similar show. (Sec. 52
(c) R.E.C.)
5. Carrying deadly weapons in the
polling place or within a radius ofl
30 meters thereof. (Sec. 53, R.E.C.)
6. Electioneering in any polling
place or within a radius of 30 meters
thereof. (Sec. 50, R.E.C.)
Acts Prohibited on this Day
1. Giving or accepting free ofl
charge transportation, food, or drinks.
On the day
(Sec. 51, R.EC.)
2. Selling, drinking, or dispensing preceding
election


Nov. 13


intoxicating liquors. (Sec. 52 (a),
R.E.C.)
Keys and Election Materials
The Provincial Commander shalll
have received all keys of ballot boxes
from his authorized representatives!
by this day. Likewise, city, municipal.
and municipal district treasurers shall
have received all election materials
from boards of election inspectors by
¡this day. (Secs. 70 and 156, R.E.C.)


day.


Day after
the election.


Lt Balmaceda and enlisted men of the 97th
nawan, Agusan.


Makabayan?
Sinulat ni CARLOS F. OREVILLO
Staff Member
TI& EO, HPC


Katanyagan, karangalan at pagkakataong
mag-kamal ng yaman!
Ito ang mga bagay na nakataya sa paningin
ng kasalukuyang litaw ng mga pulitiko. Ang
pagkakataong makapaglingkod ng tapat, lubusan at hindi ang kapakanang pangsarili ang aalagatain, ang matulungan ang mga mamamayan; sapagkat kailangan nila ang tulong, mithiing mapa-unlad ang bayan tungo sa isang mapayapa at mayamang bansa, ito ang mga bagay
na nakataya sa bawat halalan kung ating paniniwalaan ang mga pulitiko. lyan ang kadalasa’y kanilang isinusumpa!
Sa aking paniniwala, ang pulitika ay hindi
pangangalakal, sapagkat sinasabi nilang sila ay
lingkod ng bayan, alila ng bayan, haligi ng
bayan, ama ng bayan at kung anu-ano pa. Kung
ito'y totoo, lubhang napakarami naman ang
maka-bayan dito sa ating bansa. Baka ang
mangyari niya’y mapuno ng bantayog ng mga
maka-bayan ang ating mga liwasang-bayan.
Bakit ang mga pulitiko'y gumagastos ng higit
sa dapat nilang tanggapin sa buong panahon ng
kanilang panunungkulan? Bakit halos pati kaluluwa’y ipinangangako sa panahon ng pangangampanya? Bakit marami ang nagpapatayan,
at kahit na magkahirap-hirap ay nagpipilit lumahok sa pulitika? Bakit? Sapagkat nalalaman
nila na kung magtatagumpay ay hindi lamang
mababawi kungdi bagkus magtutubo pa ang
salaping kanilang nilustay sa panahon ng kandidatura. Tunay na ang pulitika ay siyang pinaka-manigong pangangalakal dito sa ating
bansa.
Ano ang magagawa ng isang mamamayan?
Maaari siyang makatulong sa ilang tao, iyon
lamang. Ngunit ang isang pinuno ng pamahalaan, kung itinuturing niya ang kanyang sarili
na isang mabuting lingkod ng bayan, ay maaaring makatulong sa libo mang mamamayan,
pati ang buong bansa. Ang pangulo ng isang
bansa ay maaring maging kahulugan ng isang
mapayapa, masagana at maunlad o magulo, masama at naghihikahos na bansa.
Ang pulitika ay maaaring maging pinakamabuting panuntunan, maaari din namang maging pinaka-masama. Ang pagiging masama ng
pulitika dito sa ating bayan ay palasak na sa
mga mamamayan, sapagkat karaniwa’y pagsasamantala, pag-iimbot at paninira sa kapuwa
ang naghahari sa kalooban ng mga pulitiko.
Ang gawaing dapat gampanan sa bayan at mamamayan ay di alintana. Kung ikaw ay taong


Page 74


 


tahimik at walang bahid-dungis, paglahok mo
sa pulitika’y lalabas na lahat ang iyong sama
at kapintasan, dudut-dutin pati ang iyong kabuhayan at pinagdaanan, madaramay pati ang
iyong mga kahinlog.
Pagsasamantala at pagiging pabaya sa tungkulin ang isyu noong halalan ng 1946; isyu
noong halalan ng 1947 at 1949, at isyu pa rin
noong 1951 at 1953, hanggang ungkatin ng kasalukuyang administrasyon ng nasabing taon
ang pagdaraya at pananakot na ginawa sa nakaraang halalan. Nang dumating ang halalan
ng taong 1957 at 1959, yaon pa rin ang isyu, at
gayon din noong 1961. Ngayon ay umaalingawngaw naman ang tunog ng halalan, at natitiyak ko na ang magiging pinakamalaking isyu
ay ang kasamaan, pagsasamantala at pagiging
pabaya sa tungkulin ng kasalukuyang administrasyon. Bukod pa rito ang pag-taas ng halaga
ng mga paninda at ang sinasabing pag-hilig sa
pagiging diktador ng ating kasalukuyang
pangulo.
Maging mabuti o masama man ang layunin
ng isang pulitiko, upang magwagi ay kailangan
niyang maakit o mapaniwala ang mga tao upang
siya ay ihalal. Ang pamumuno sa demokrasya
ay hindi sa pamamagitan ng pagsasalin ng kapangyarihan. Ang kapangyarihang pumili at
maglagay ng sino-mang mamumuno sa bayan
ay mamamayan ang nagtatakda, kaya’t sila’y
dapat paki-bagayan, amuin at suyuin. Hindi lamang ito, kailangan pa rin na sila’y pangakuan
at papaniwalain na kung magwawagi ay ang
kabutihan at kapakanan ng bayan at hindi ang
sariling kabutihan ang aalagatain. —Kung ako
lamang ay dalaga, maaaring ang isa sa inyo ang
aking maging kapilas ng puso.
lyan ang
sinabi ng isang babaing kumandidato sa Mindanao, noong siya ay kumakampanya sa kamorohan. Siya ay nanalo. Ang sino-mang maglilingkod sa pamahalaan, maging ito ay mabuti
o mapag-samantala ay kailangan munang ihalng tao. Papaano nilang mananakaw ang salapi
ng mamamayan na ibinabayad sa pamamagitan
ng buwis kung sila ay walang katungkulan at
kapangyarihan? —Bakit pa tayo nagkaroon ng
kapangyarihan? — Ang katanungang ito na
hindi na kailangang sagutin pa ay nangyayari
lamang matapos magwagi ang isang kandidato.
Ang may mabubuting kalooban ay kailangang
papaniwalain ang mamamayan sa katapatan ng
kanilang hangarin. Ang mga magsasamantala
at magpapayaman ay lilinlangin ang mga tao,
o kaya’y babayad ng salapi upang magkamit ng
maraming boto, kung ang mga tao'y papayag na
ipagbili ang kanilang karapatan.
Maging mabuti o masama man, ang isang
kandidato, sa panahon ng pangangampanya, ay
kakaba-kaba ang dibdib, sapagkat naiisip nila
ang pagkaka-bisala tungo sa pagkatalo ng kani

These are the "night fighters” of the 53rd PC Company
under Captain Cesar G. Villarin and 1st Lt. Aniceto S.
Simoy, who helped clean the Ermita District and other
notorious places of Cebu City of bad elements. In a brief
span of time this PC team accounted for the capture of
notorious criminals.


lang kandidatura. Habang sila’y nagtatalumpati, nakikipag-kamay, gumagastos, (sapagkat
lahat ay gumagasta) ay palagi nilang tinatanong
ang kanilang sarili:
—Papaano kung ako’y matalo? .
Ang katalunan sa panig ng isang mabuting
pulitiko ay maaaring maituring na gantimpala.
Ang paglilingkod sa pamahalaan, bilang isang
taong pinagtitiwalaan ay napaka-hirap na gawain. Hindi kailan man yayaman ang isang
nanunungkulan, (liban kung siya'y magpasamantala) tangi sa karanasan, ngunit ito'y sadyang
kabagot-bagot sa tinagal-tagal ng panahon. Samantalang sa panig ng masamang pulitiko, ang
pagkatalo ay mangangahulugan ng pagka-buwag
ng lahat ng kanyang pangarap sa buhay. —F
ilangang mabuhay ako sa pamamagitan ng tulo
ng aking sariling pawis at sa mabuting paraan
- Mayroon pa kayang lulungkot sa gayonkalagayan? At isipin na lang na dati'y nasa
tungkulin, may kapangyarihan at sagana sa
lahat ng bagay.
Ang una’y magpapatuloy na igagalang at
pagtitingnan sa kabila ng kanyang pagkatalo.
Itong huli'y lilibakin, pupulaan pati mga kamag-anak. —lyan ba? Eh kung hindi nagnakaw 'yan noong nasa tungkulin eh di katulad ko ring mahirap pa sa daga.-
Kailan pa kaya magiging hindi maka-bayan
ngunit maglilingkod ng lubos at buong katapatan ang ating mga maka-bayan?


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 75


The Inspector General As A Member Of The Commanding Statf
By MASgt MOBESTO M. CUNANAN


One anonymous army writer once said that
"an IG officer is a man past middle age, spare,
wrinkled, intelligent, cold, passive, noncommittal, with eyes like a codfish, polite in contact
but at the same time unresponsive, calm, and
damnably, composed as a concrete post or a
plaster-of-paris cast; a human petrifaction with
a heart of feldspar and without charm or the
friendly germ; minus bowels, passion, or a sense
of humor. Happily they never reproduce and
all of them finally go to Hell". If at all, this is
a truism, a profuse thinking or half-a-joke fashioned to exalt and to dignify, is of a faint cosequence to alter the personality of the Inspector General who, like any member of the commander’s staff, had his own definite missior
written in the army books.
To the man in the armed service, the office
of the Inspector General is either a much-revered post or an unpopular one. This seems to
be a paradox as one may put it. Equally true,
it can be roughly and loosely described as a
mere cubicle in a military headquarters, another
room next to the other unheard plenty of times.
While other civilian offices may have in their
structures a post that bears similarity in name
and even in functions, the commonplace savino
that in the armed service it is lavishly dubbed
as the "eyes and ears" of the commander is a
thing of note as in the wide, its varied missions
served to recognize and compensate the goos
and could equally be cruel to those seeking to
stain the organization.
To get a nearer and better feel of the role
of the Inspector General in the commander’s
staff, let us touch a bit on army history. The
Inspector General service of the AFP is similar
to that of the Inspector General of the US War
Department, obviously because the present AFP
set up has been substantially lifted from that
of the US War Department.
Army historians write it, that on 26 October 1777 General George Washington assembled
a council of 14 general officers and envisioned
that an office of Inspector General was necessarv. The American Congress on 13 December
1777 created the office of the Inspector General
of the Army and resolved on the wisdom of
its creation as "essential to the promotion of
discipline in the American Army, and to the reformation of the various abuses which prevail
in the different departments, that an appointment be made of inspectors general agreeable
to the practice of the best disciplined European
Armies.” It further resolved that the "appointment of conferred on experienced and vigilant
general officers, who are acquainted with whatever relates to the general economy, maneuvers,
and discipline of a well-regulated army.” In


the prime, the duties of the Inspector General
in those early days were to "muster the troops
monthly, nothing the number and condition of
men, their discipline and drill, state of arms
and equipment, clothing, ration, etc., to reject all
unserviceable recruits and to discharge or transfer to the invalid corps all men disabled in the
service, and to report all abuses, neglect and
deficiencies to the commander and to the Board
of War.”
Subsequent years found the Department
expanded and created to a more permanent
post and during the last war, there were 1,449
inspectors in the US Army. The office of the
POM (Preparation for Overseas Movement) and
OID (Overseas Inspection Divisions) were
created within the Department which duties
were to inspect units prior to departure to
areas of operation to assure that the organization and equipment met all requirements of the
theatre for which they are assigned. Inspectors assigned with the Overseas Inspection
Divisions were scattered to areas and theatres
of operation with the mission of inquiring
into all complaints brought to the attention of
the War Department
Speaking of its local creation, by the act
(CA No 1) of the National Assembly of the
Philippines, approved on 21 Dec. 1935, the I
pector General of the AFP came into existencThe position before the war was only at Headquarters PA and inspectors general of the ten
military districts were known as provost inspectors. After the war, the office was reorganized
on 15 April 1945. Recognizing the wisdom of
maintaining the dignity and import of the office, lately the position of AFP inspector general was elevated to the rank of general with
former IV PC zone commander Brigadier General Valentin D. Velasco appointed to the post.
Just like any other service in a military
outfit, it has its own insignia made of three
distinctive parts; (1) the sword; (2) the fasces;
(3) the wreath. The sword represents military
power and justice. The fasces, which consists
of a military axe enclosed within a bundle, of
birch or elm rods tied together with a strap,
has since the early Roman emperors symbolized
authority. As carried by the lictors, magistrates and guards preceding emperors and
kings in their processionals, the fasces were
emblems of the absolute power which the
rulers possessed over the life and limbs of
their subjects. Roman dictators were usually
preceded by 24 guards each bearing a fasces
over his left shoulder. The wreath is a symbol reckoned since the Pythian games in Greece
about 500 B.C. The laurel wreath has been a


Page 76


 


mark of honor and distinction for winners of
athletics, cultural and academic honors. Today it is more identified as a mark of excellence in academic and intellectual fields. "Droit
Et Avant" an inscription in French language
which literally means "Right and Forward" or
freely "First be right; then take action" has
been adopted as the motto of the IGS and i
is written in blue, the color of the IG service
standing for loyalty, faith and fidelity.
In the present AFP structure, the four
major services have their own inspectors general and operate within their jurisdictional
limit under orders and instructions of their respective commanders.
As lifted from pertinent army books, in
the main today, the mission of the inspector
general is to assist his commander in the administration of his command by inquiring into
and reporting upon all matters affecting its
efficiency and economy. Indeed, its members
by reasons of their primary tasks of inspections
and investigations are virtually confidential
agents of the Secretary of National Defense
the AFP Chief of Staff, and to the commander
in whose staff they serve. Such position find
sustenance even in modern staff organization
where commanders can under their own discretion make the position of inspector general as
member of his personal staff, like in the Philippine Constabulary today.
In the wide, the office of the inspector general is actually committed to the following
functions: (1) conducts inspections and investigations as directed by the commander as prescribed by regulations; (2) inspects all commands, units, systems, transportation, installations, acounts, and non military agencies, as required by the commander; (3) consults all
staff sections prior to making inspection to obtain special items for the attention of inspection personnel and to obtain technical assistance; (4) advises staff sections concerning matters noted during inspections and furnishes
them with copies of extracts of inspection reports of direct interest to the staff sections;
(5) receives, investigates, and reports upon
allegations, complaints and grievances of individuals and agencies; and (6) recommends remedial action to correct deficiencies and delinquencies noted in inspections.
Incident to his task of inspection, one will
find that the range of inquiry of the inspector
general is almost anything as it delves into all
phases of the affairs and activities of the unit.
It inquires into the conduct, discipline, living
conditions, health and nutrition, morale of the
unit and individuals, the condition and state
of command, posts, camps and installations
and of their arms, equipment and other supplies; the economical, efficient and lawful expenditures of funds and property, including
purchase, receipts, storage and issue, and disposition of property and the condition of ac(Continued on next page)


Lt Col Luciano I Gunabe
Ist PC BCT Commander


Ist PC Battalion Combat Team
A highly mobile constabulary striking force
was organized by Camp Crame authorities to
meet all kinds of emergency cases arising anywhere in the Philippines especially in connection with the coming elections.
The force, known as the Ist PC Battalior
Combat Team, is considered the PC’s initial step
to ensure peaceful balloting in the Novembe
polls.
Brig. Gen. Dominador F Garcia, PC Chief,
said the PC BCT is the general combat support
unit that could be deployed in any troubled
spots in the country on short notice.
He added that the new PC unit was en
visioned to have an immense striking power in
quelling riots and other civil disturbances. It
could also be utilized during calamities and
catastrophies.
Tapped as PC BCT commander was Lt. Col
Luciano I. Gunabe, who until recently was chief
of the PC Public Affairs Office (PAO) at Camp
Crame.
Col. Gunabe’s staff are: Si and Adjutant,
Capt. Plenio Atega; $2, Capt. Mariano Dizon;
$3, Maj. Deogracias Paguio; and $4 Maj. Andres
Franco.
(Continued on next page)


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 77


Ist PC...
The BCT is manned by 72 officers and 1,-
445 enlisted men. Serving as the nucleus of the
striking force are the 177th, 144th, 145th, 151st
and 152nd PC companies. The PC Cavalry Unit,
and the PC K-9 (dog) Corps form the Special
Operations Company, and investigation outfits.
The PC BCT’s organization came about amid
reports that the commission on elections was
considering the use of ROTC (Reserve Officers
Training Corps) cadets to police the elections in
November.
Brig. Gen. Nicanor D. Garcia, armed forces
deputy chief of staff, informed the public that
the Comelec plan was still in the exploratory"
stage.
However, he added that if the plan materializes, it would certainly give immense activities for the PC command as far as the maintenance of peace and order is concerned.


THE INSPECTOR
counts pertaining to funds and property.
Deducingly, inspections are conducted to
provide the commander with an evaluation of the
condition of his unit, schemed to improve its
efficiency and economical operation. It shall
be the militant endeavor of inspectors to devote their activities to all matters affecting
the welfare of the command. Its inspectional
efforts are constructive and are not limited
into the confines of seeking or fishing adverse commentaries of the units and/or individual members. Indeed, exemplary activities or deeds meriting commendation, such as
initiative displayed by commanders in solving
their problems, religious implementation of
the commanders policies and directives, mark
excellence in performing assigned missions, are
of equal import in an inspector’s report abreast
with anything it finds derogatory in the command. For sometime, others would still want
to think of inspectors as untouchable snoopers
of the commander.


CARE OF HUMAN
at the outer surface of the right molars perpendicular
to the long axis of the teeth forcing the bristle gently
between them. With a vibratory and rotary motion the
bristle is made to come in contact with the gum thus
producing an ideal massage. This method is efficient in
cleaning the spaces between the teeth. It is suggested
that when the brush is placed back to the same position
the movement should be downward and upward motion.
This is repeated several times with the wrist making the
downward and upward movements only. The brush is
then brought to the bicuspids, cuspids, and incisors and
the same procedure is applied. In this manner all the
surfaces of the teeth on one side are brushed jointly.
The mouth may then be washed several times with mouthful of water, then the same procedure is done on the
other side. To brush the inside surfaces of the upper
molars, bicuspids, cuspids, the brush is brought to bear
on the surfaces of the upper molars on one side with
the bristle pointing, toward the upper gum line, the same
technic is applied with the wrist making the downward
motion. This is repeated until all the teeth in each


jaw are brushed. However, the procedure in brushing the
lower teeth is the same as the upper except that the
movement of the brush should be in an upward motion.
In most mouth the upper third molar can be better
reached with the brush if the mouth is closed due to the
fact that if closed the base of the angle of the mandible
is so near the upper teeth leaving sufficient space for
the brush. It is also advantageous in most mouth if the
jaws are closed while brushing the upper second and
third molars because the muscles of the cheek are relaxed.
To understand the above subject, it is suggested that
the patient should stand infront of a mirror while brushing until the individual has mastered the technic well
enough.
USE OF SILK FLOSS AND TOOTHPICK
When food, like meat, slips in between the teeth,
rendering the patient much annoyance by its presence,
the use of silk floss is usually necessary to remove such
particles, but it would not be advisable for all persons
to use silk floss after each meal, due to the danger of
irritating the gum, causing its recession. However in
using the silk floss it should be held with the finger
close to the teeth on each side thus carefully passing in
between the teeth without injury to the gum.
The toothpick is used to clean the proximal surfaces
of the teeth, and its use is only indicated in cases where
the gum has sufficiently receded in order to give room
for the toothpick to pass between the teeth without pressure to the gum. Due to the fact that few young persons
have much gum recession, the use of toothpick in younger
persons is very much contraindicated.
PYORRHEA ALVEOLARIS
In the field of modern Dentistry, the word pyorrhea
alveolaris has been replaced by the more appropriate
name called periodontoclasia, or in laymen’s word, is
simply pyorrhea. In view of the rather confusing matter which has added to its nomenclature and the exact
nature of treatment, this disease is regarded as an infection which under certain condition may develop in any
mouth. This, however, depends largely on the kind of
oral hygiene of the individual and his physical condition.
CLINICAL SYMPTOMS OF PYORRHEA ARE THE
FOLLOWING:
1. Inflammation of the gum.
2. Bone absorption.
3. Gum recession.
4. Suppuration.
5. Tooth mobility.
With the presence of the above, there follows impaired circulation, pocket formation, and infection, but
the chief distinguishing characteristic of pyorrhea is the
so-called pocket formation.
Many cases of gingivitis (inflammation of the gum)
when scrutinized carefully are found to be pyorrhea. So
that in the diagnosis, it should be kept clearly in mind
that the pocket formation, no matter how slight, is the
chief characteristic of the disease.
If an examination is made on several patients and
the dentist were to make an X-Ray examination, he
would probably be surprised to find out the large amount
of bone absorption which have taken place in some of the
patients, but on casual examination they all appear normal.
We should bear in mind also that pocket formation is a
progressive phenomenon starting as a very inconspicuous
lesion around the gum. It advances horizontally; or
vertically, destroying the bone around the gum margin
of the tooth and making its way toward the tip of the
root. It has been the observation of the author that bone
absorption and pocket formation occur mostly in persons
where calculary deposits and food debris are plentiful.
Also functional in activity, bacterial invasion, and the
unhygienic condition of the mouth are the most important causes in all pyorhea disease, especially those less
cared and under-nourished. The unhygienic condition of
the mouth was mentioned on account of the fact that the
role of bacteria favors the growth and its development
in large number, eventually contributing to the possibilities of infection. Clinical experience indicates that if
these local factors are entirely eliminated with high de

Page 78


 


The Process Of Police Organization Planning
By Major PACIENCIO S, MAGTIBAY
(Continued from last issue)


GROUPING THE JOBS
The next step of the planning process, after establishing the jobs necessary in accomplishing the police broad
objective, is to group the various tasks into logical and
harmonious grouping of functions. This is the basic
step in organization structuring because the various
homogenous groups become the basis of the units to be
created. It also serves as a reliable guide in determining: (1) the amount of responsibilities that shall be
attached to the units to be created; (2) the qualifications of the personnel who shall be selected for carrying
out the activities, functions, or processes, and (3) the
placement of each unit in the organizational set-up (10:40).
In the grouping process, the planner should be guided by the principle that similar activities shall be grouped
together when other considerations permit. Thus, in
police work, repressing criminal activities and regulating
non-criminal conducts, may be grouped together being
similar activities. Likewise, the apprehension of criminals, recovering stolen properties, and the gathering and
processing of evidence for the prosecution of criminals
are directed toward the same purpose and therefore may
be grouped together.
At present, there is yet no precise and scientific
formula for the grouping of jobs. However, there are
guides worked out by some authorities on organization
regarding this matter. One of which is that promulgated
by Luther Gullick in his essay on the theory of organization which still stands today as a classic in this field
(1:1-45). He stated therein that every individual worker
can be characterized by (1) the major purpose he is
serving; (2) the process he is using: (3) the person
or things he serves or deals with; and (4) the place where
he renders his service.
Before applying the guide enumerated above for
the purpose of grouping the jobs, it is first necessary
to divide the various tasks into two broad classifications
namely, the adjective and substantive tasks. The adjective tasks are the so-called indirect types of jobs. They
are intended merely to support the successful accomplishment of the substantive jobs. Some organization writers
call them secondary police jobs, but in common parlance
they are known as staff activities. As previously defined, staff activities refer to those activities which are
advisory in nature and have to do primarily with
specialized intellectual processes (3:127). It may be
sub-divided into general staff, administrative staff, and
service or auxiliary staff.
The substantive tasks, on the other hand, are those
which primarily concern the police. They are oftenly
called the police primary duties or line activities.
After the various jobs are divided into the two broad
classifications, the next step is to group similar jobs
under each classification into logical and harmonious
groupings. This process will produce different unifunctional groupings. Each of the unifunctional group be

gree of mouth hygiene, there would be no fear in having
pyorrhea. It is of paramount importance therefore to
say that clean teeth in a clean mouth cannot be over
estimated.
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF PYORRHEA -
When all conservative measures have failed in the
treatment of pyorrhea, dentists resort to the surgical
method in order to save those teeth that are not within
the bounds of ordinary treatment.
There are three types of operation, but only one type
will be mentioned here as this is the most common in all
dental clinics. The surgical method is called gingivectomy or in simple word gum resection. The gum around
the tooth is excised to the level of the pocket and all
diseased tissues involved are removed. Mixture of ce

comes an organizational unit. This process is illustrated
in the charts below:
Substantive (Operational) Activities


GNANNg
Process


Activities


UHIRIIONE
Group


By
Repressing criminal activit
major purposeRegulating non-criminal
conduct
Surveillance
Inspectional activity
Services to the public


Patrol
y
function


By
Apprehension of criminals
major purposeRecovering stolen properties
Gathering and processing o
evidence for prosecuting
criminals


Police
s Investgiatior
f


By
Patroling streets and highmajor purpose ways to make them safe
for both vehicular and pe
destrian traffic
Investigation of traffic
accidents
Enforcement of traffic laws
and regulations


Traffic
control


By
tontrling llegal viee
major purpose Safeguarding the morals o
the community


Vice
Control
f


By clientile
served or
things dealt
with.


Preventing juvenile tendency
Aiding in correcting antisocial behaviors


Crime
prevention


Adjective (Staff) Activties


GIouping
Process


Unifunctiona
Activities
Group


By clientile
served or
things dealt
with


Preparing over-all plans
Preparing general policies
Personnel administration
Inspection
Procurement and control of
supplies and equipment
Budget control
Public relations
Maintenance of facilities


Administrative staff


Crime laboratory service
Criminal identification


By
process


service
Maintenance and operatio"
of communication system
Statistics operation
Maintenance of police records function
Follow up control
Jail service


Auxiliary
(service)


TConimuga on nen Dago


ment which prevent the sudden exposure of the tooth to
thermal changes is packed around it and left to stay for
about a week. This type of operation however is only
limited in cases where there are extensive bone loss and
to those teeth where reinfection is difficult to control.
This method also makes possible the saving of a large
number of teeth that would otherwise have to be extracted.
It is therefore evident from the gist of my first and
second articles on the Care of the Human Dentition that
the basic problem involved in the conservation of DentoOral Health is largely of education, teaching the masses
to understand the high cost of neglect is vast, and this
becomes the greatest obstacle in the prevention of oral
diseases. *


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 79


The units that may be created based on the unifunctional grouping of tasks may be sub-divided into subunits depending on the necessity of geographical decentralization, extent of the desired specialization, and operational expediency.
Building the Organization Structure.
As stated in the preceding discussion, the heart of
the formal organization structure is the unifunctiona!
units created based from the job-grouping process. In
the organization chart, these units are represented by
rectangular or square boxes, arranged vertically and horizontally, usually assuming the form of a pyramid. The
vertical dimension may be steep, as when there are many
horizontal levels or echelons, or flat when there are few
echelons (3:134). The vertical arrangement, also, takes
the form of a series of steps, each graded according to
the degree of authority and responsibility. They are connected with a solid line, known as the line of authority,
running vertically from top to bottom. Because they
appear to be chained together, the arrangement is sometimes called the scalar chain (6:14).
The echelon at the bottom of the pyramid is composed of line or operating units, and at the top, the management units. In between the two are levels of various
supervisory units.
There are organization planners who favor an optimum number of horizontal levels, their primary reason
is to shorten the chain of command. They contend that
the more intermediate levels there are, the more they
lengthen the flow of communication and the more ther
diminish the executive’s participation in the field operations. On the other hand, there are those who disagree
with the above allegation contending that by minimizing
the number of the horizontal levels, it will increase t
number of units in each echelon and therefore expathe span of control. This contention is premised on the
belief that the number of persons one can efficiently
supervise is limited otherwise the executive or supervisor will consume much of his time in their supervisory
work, thus neglecting their other important responsibilities.
Both allegations may have some merits, but these
are now being challenged by the modern trend toward
decentralization, the growing pattern of leadership evolving from the increasing acceptance of group processes,
and the rapidly growing discoveries in electronics. What
then is the best arrangement? The answer to this may
remain a moot one for a long long time. It may even
remain unresolve forever. Meantime, any one of them
may be adopted depending on which one works out most
effectively.
(To be continued)


ANG PATAKSIL
unang gabing sila’y hatdan ng pagkain ng Makabebe,
ito'y hinikayat nilang magbalik-loob. Matapos makapag-isip-isip, waring napukaw sa puso ng Makabebe ang
pag-ibig sa lupang tinubuan.
Kinabukasan, lihim na ipinagtapat ng Makabebe
kay Aguinaldo na napaayon o nahikayat niya ang kalahati ng kanyang mga kasamahan, nguni't hiniling niyang
yao'y ipakalihim lamang. Pagkaraan ng tatlong araw,
nang anyong mag-uutos na si Aguinaldo sa mga Makabebe na bihagin ang limang Amerikano, saka lumitaw
ang katotohanang hindi nagkakaisa-isa ang mga Makabebe at pati ang mga sang-ayon ay nangatakot nang
kumilos.
Umaga nang magsimulang lumakad ang pangkat
patungong dalampasigan. Samantalang naghihintay ng
mga boteng buhat sa Vicksburg, nagkaumpukumpok ang
ilan sa lilim ng isang malaking punungkahoy. At sa
kanilang pagkukuwentuhan at pagbibiruan ay muntik
nang magkabarilan sina Cadhit at Segismundo. Tinagurian ni Cadhit na sa kanilang ginawang iyon, si
Aguinaldo’y siyang Kristo at si Segismundo nama’y siyang Hudas. Kung hindi naging maagap si Funston,


The Benefit Of Counsel
During Police Investigation
(Reprinted from The Lawyer’s Journal, March, 1963)
By Major BUENAVENTURA B. FERNANDEZ


Police agencies in the Philippines must have experienced complaints of practising attorneys who allegedly
failed to assist their clients whether the latter has been
picked up or just invited for questioning by the police
prior to the filing of a formal complaint. It is claimed
that “the investigator may ask questions which may
tend to mislead or embarrass him, or may even tend
to incriminate him, in which case it is the duty of his
lawyer to render him legal assistance and give legal
advice accordingly” This statement did not specify
whether the person picked up or invited for questioning
is a suspect or a mere witness. It is, however, safe to
conclude that it refers to both.
In a celebrated case it was reported that a ranking
officer oof a government investigative agency
lawyer of a prominent law firm who wanted to be pres

marahil ay tinanghal na bangkay noon din ang isa sa
kanila.
TINANGKANG AGAWIN SI AGUINALDO
Samantalang naghihintay ng mga boteng sasakyan
pabalik sa Vicksburg, nagkakatipun-tipon naman ang
mga kawal ni Komandante Alhambra. Bagama’t may
sugat pa si Alhambra, ipinasiya niyang gawin ang makakaya upang maagaw si Aguinaldo.
Buong pagkakaisang sumang-ayon ang mga tauhan
ni Alhambra:—Agawin ang Presidente! — sigawan nila.
Handa kaming mamatay at lumaban hanggang sa huling sandali!
Noon di'y lumakad ang pangkat. Pagsapit sa kabayanan ay nagpangkat-pangkat sila at saka sabay-sabay
na lumusob sa himpilan at kumbento. Nguni't ni isang
Makabebe ay wala silang dinatnan. Kaya’t noon di'y
nagmamadali silang sumugod sa dalampasigan. Datapwa, huli na ang lahat. Nang sila’y sumapit sa bayhaydagat malayo na ang Vicksburg.
NANUMPA SA BANDILA NG EU SI AGUINALDO
Noong madaling-araw ng Marso 28, 1901, ang Vicksburg ay buong lihim na pumasok sa Look ng Maynila.
Lumipat sa isang lantsa si Funston, kasama ang tatlong bihag, at tuluy-tuloy hanggang sa Palasyo ng Malakanyang — sa magarang tahanan ni Hen. Arthur MacArthur, pangkalahatang puno ng Hukbong Amerilaano
sa Pilipinas.
Noong unang araw ng Abril, matapos mapagkuro
ni Aguinaldo na kung siya’y hindi makikipagkasundo sa
bagong pamahalaan ay mananatili nang walang taning
na panahon sa bilangguan ang libu-libong anak ng bayang nangabihag din, ipinasiya niyang lagdaan sa harap
ng gobernador-heneral na si Hen. MacArthur at ni Cayetano Arellano ang panunumpa ng katapatan sa pamahalaan ng Amerika.
Pagkaraan ng ilang araw, si Aguinaldo ay naglagda ng isang panawagan sa bayang Pilipinas. Nanawagan siya sa kanyang mga kapatid na magsipagsalong
na ng sandata at tumahimik, alang-alang sa ikatitiwasay
ng Inang Bayan.—*


Page 80


 


ent when his client was under investigation that “if a
man is arrested, the lawyer may see the man; but if the
man is oonly under investigation—then no lawyer can
see him” This incident brings us to the question often
asked, to wit: may one under investigation especially a
suspect avail of the services of a counsel during investigation? Corollary to that is the question — what are the
liabilities of the police officer refusing such request?
Unfortunately, the above incident did not reach the
courts notwithstanding the fact that the personalities involved are prominent in government circles. As for as
I know there has been no case yet in the Philippines
wherein these issues are ventilated. In the interest of
law enforcement and in order to safeguard our civil
liberties we shall examine and analyze the pertinent
provisions of law applicable.
What may be invoked by a lawyer to justify his
position that he has the right to be present during the
investigation of his client is perhaps that constitutional
provision which says that "no person shall be deprived
of his life, liberty and property without due process of
law, nor shall any person be denied to equal protection
of the laws.” The above-quoted fundamental rights,
however, are not violated if the person under investigation is not detained beyond the time required by Art.
125 of the Revised Penal Code as amended, unless of
course the investigator inflicts bodily injuries during
the investigation in which case he may be made answerable for physical injuries or commits some other crime
or crimes like rape if the person picked up for questioning is a woman.
Under what circumstances then can a person under
investigation ask the presence of his counsel as a matter
of right?
It is submitted that this right may be availed of
either by a person arrested or by one acting in his
behalf who may be a relative, a counsel or a friend.
This can be gleaned from the following provisions of
law.
Rule 109, Sec. 18. Right of attorney to visit
nerson arrested. — Any attorney entitled to practise in the courts of the Philippines shall, at the
request of the person arrested or of another acting
in his behalf, be permitted to visit and confer
privately with such person, in the jail or any other
place of custody at any hour of the day, or in
urgent cases, of the night.
A similar provision can be found in Rule 108, Sec.
12 in conjunction with Sec. 11 of the same Rule 108.
Sec. 12. Sending for attorney. — At any time
during the proceedings referred to in the preceding
section the defendant, if he so requests, shall be
allowed to have the services of an attorney. For
the purpose, the judge or corresponding officer
may require any peace officer to deliver any
message from the defendant to any attorney requesting the latter’s services.
The proceeding referred to in the above-quoted
Sec. 12 is the second stage of preliminary investigation. It states:
Sec. 11. Rights of defendant after arrest. —
After the arrest of the defendant and his delivery
to the court, he shall be informed of the complaint or information filed against him. He shall
also be informed of the substance of the testimony
JULYAUGUST, 1963


and evidence presented against him, and, if he
desires to testify or to present witneses or evidence in his favor, he may be allowed to do so.
The testimony of the witnesses need not be reduced
to writing but that of the defendant shall be taken
in writing and subscribed by him.
The title of Sec. 18, Rule 109 itself clearly shows
that the right of a lawyer to be present applies to a
client who is under arrest and it starts from the time
of the arrest. Obviously, it does not pertain to the investigative phase conducted by the police as practised in
the Philippines. This interpretation finds support in the
body of the law when it recites "x x x at the request of
the person arrested or of another acting in his behalf
x xx". This is repeated in Republic Act No. 857 which
is the sanction for violation of Sec. 18, Rule 109. Said
Republic Act No. 857 provides:
Any public officer or employee who shall obAl
struct, prohibit or otherwise prevent an attorney
entitled to practice in the courts of the Philippines
from visiting and confering privately with a person
arrested, at any hour of the day or, in urgent cases
in the night, said visit and conference being requested by another acting in his behalf, shall be
punished by arresto mayor.
Note that there is no fine imposed for violation of
this law. Note also that Sec. 18 of Rule 109 and
Republic Act No. 857 are substantially the same. Although
the caption of Sec. 18, Rule 109 speaks of the “right of
attorney” and not the right of the accused, the effect is
the same. It is enough that somebody asked for the
presence of a lawyer after the arrest. Thus there are
two groups who can avail of the presence of a counsel,
namely: the person arrested or another acting in his
behalf who may be a lawyer, a relative or a friend.
Secs. 11 and 12 of Rule 108 refer to the rights of
the defendant after his arrest in the so-called second
stage of preliminary investigation. These sections reinforce the opinion that the benefit of the counsel starts
only from the moment of arrest, not earlier than that.
It is also argued that the right to counsel after
arrest is even restricted in that what Sec. 18 of Rule
109 and Republic Act No. 857 grant to the attorney is
only the right to visit and to confer with the person
arrested. It does not give him the right to participate
in the investigation actively, like objecting to questions
asked the person under investigation. This argument
overlooks the fact that the visitorial conference provided
for by these laws might have attained the evil sought
to the prevented in that a caution by a lawyer to the
accused not to make any statement is enough te stop
the progress of the investigation. This, of course, is a
hindrance to the solution of the crime.
In Crooker v. California, 357 U.S. 433, 78 S. Ct. 1287,
L. Ed. 2d 1448 (1958), the petitioner, under sentence of
death for the murder of his paramour, claims that his
conviction in a California court violates the founteenth
Amendment, United States Constitution, due process of
law because (1) the confession admitted into evidence
over his objection had been coerced from him by state
authorities, and (2) even if his confession was voluntary
it occured while he was without counsel because of the
previous denial of his request. The Supreme Court of
California affirmed the conviction. 47 Cal. 2d 348, 303 P.
2d 753. Certiorari was granted because of the serious


Page 81


due process implications that attend state denial of a
request to employ an attorney. The United States Supreme Court held that no violaion of constitutional right
has occurred. It said:
The bare fact of police “detention and police
examination in private of one in official state custody” does not render involuntary a confession by
the one so detained. Brown V. Allen, 344 U.S. 443,
476 (1953). Neither does an admonition by the
police to tell the truth, Sparf y U.S., 156 U.S. 51,
55-56 (1895), nor the failure of State autherities
to comply with local statutes requiring that an
accused promptly be brought before a magistrate.
Fikes v. State of Alabama, 352 U.S. 191 (1957).
But we have held that confessions made by
indigent defendants prior to State appointment of
counsel are not thereby rendered involuntary even
in prosecutions where conviction without counsel
would violate due process under the Fourteenth
Amendment
The right of an accused for his defense, though
not firmly fixed in our common-law heritage, is of
significant importance to the preservation of liberty
in this country. See 1 Cooley’s Constitutional Limitations (8th ed) 696-700; 2 Story on the Constitution (4th ed.) 1794.
Or as stated by a Committee headed by Prof.
Zachariah Chafee, "A person accused of crime need
a lawyer right after his arrest probably more than
at any other time”
The demands of our civilization expressed in
the Due Process Clause require that the accused
who wants a counsel should have one at any time
after the moment of arrest.
Luckily Sec. 825 of the California Penal Code of
1956 is similar to ours. It provides:
After an arrest, an attorney may at the the
request of the prisoner or any relative of such prisoner, visit the person so arrested. Any officer in
charge of the prisoner who willfully refuses to let
the attorney see the prisoner is guilty of a misdemeanor.
In Cicenia v. La Gay, 357 U.S. 504, 78 S. Ct. 1297,
2 L. ed. 2d 1523 (1958) Cicenia was convicted of murder
following a confession obtained under the following circumstances:
In the evening of March 17, 1947. Charles
Kittuah, the owner of a small dry goods store in
Newark, New Jersey, was shot and killed during
the course of a robbery. The crime remained unsolved until December 17, 1949, when the Newark
police obtained information implicating the petitioner and two others, Armando Corvino and John
DeMasi. Petitioner lived with his parents at
Orange, New Jersey. Apparently acting at the
request of the Newark police, the Orange police
sought to locate petitioner at his home. When
told tnat he was out, the police left word that he
was to report at the Orange police headquarters the
following day. Petitioner sought the advice of
Frank Palmiere, a lawyer, who advised him to
report as requested. Petitioner did so, accompanied
by his father and brother. Upon arrival at the
Orange police station at 9 a.m. on December 18,
Petitioner was separated from the others and taken


by detectives to the Newark police headquarters.
At approximately 2 p.m. the same day petitioner’s
ffather, brother and Mr. Palmiere, the lawyer
arrived at the Newark station. Mr Palmiere immediately asked to see petitioner, but his request
was refused by the police. He repeated his request
at intervals throughout the afternoon and well inte
the evening, but without success. During this
period petitioner who was being questioned intermittently by the police, asked to see his lawyer
These requests were also denied. Lawyer and client
were not permitted to confer until 9:30 p.m. by
which time petitioner had made and signed a writ.
ten confession to the murder of Kittuah.
The United States Supreme Court refused to overturn the conviction. In an opinion by Justice Harlan,
the court said:
The contention that petitioner had a constitu
tional right to confer with counsel is disposed of
by Crooker v. California 356 U.S. 433. There we
held that California’s failure to honor Crooker’s
request during a period of police interrogation to
consult a lawyer, as yet retained did not violate
the Fourteenth Amendent. Because the present
case, in which petitioner was denied an opportunity
to confer with the lawyer whom he had already
retained, sharply points up the constitutional issue
involved some additioned observations are in order.
On the one hand, it is indisputable that the
right to counsel in criminal cases has a high place
in our scheme of procedural safeguards. On the
other hand, it can hardly be denied that adoption
of petitioner’s position would constrict state police
activities in a manner that in many instances
might impair their ability to solve difficult cases.
In contrast, petitioner would have us hold
that any state denial of a defendant’s request to
confer with counsel during police questioning violates due process, irrespective of the particular
circumstances involved. Such a holding, in its ultimate reach, would mean that state police could
not interrogate a suspect before giving him an opportunity to secure counsel. Even in federal prosecutions this Court has refrained from laying
down any such inflexible rule. See MeWebb v.
U.S. 318; Mallory v. U.S., 354 U.S. 449.
In Spano v. New York, 360 U.S. (1960) the
defendant was indicted for murder, consulted counsel, and was surrendered by his counsel to the authorities. Thereafter he was questioned for several
hours despite his attempts to follow the advice of
his lawyer rot to answer questions. He made several requests to consult his lawyer, all of which
were denied. Evenutally he confessed. The Court
found the confession to be involuntary and reversed
on that ground without deciding the defendant’s
contention that he had been deprived of his right
to counsel.
In a concurring opinion of the Court, Justice Douglas joined by Justice Black and Brennan, stated:
While I join the opinion of the Court, I add
what for me is an even important ground of decision.
We have often divided on whether state authorities may question a suspect for hours on end
 


Page 82


when he has no lawyer present and when he has
demanded that he had the benefit of legal advice.
 See Crooker v. State of California, 357 U.S 433 and
cases cited. But here we deal not with a suspect
but with a man who has been formally charged
with a crime. The question is whether after the
indictment and before the trial the Governnient
can interrogate the accused in secret when he asked
for his lawyer and when his request was denied.
This is a capital case and under the rule of Powell
v. State of Alabama 287 U.S. 45, the defendant
was entitled to be represented by counsel. This
representation by counsel is not restricted to the
trial. As stated in Powell v. State of Alabaiia,
supra; p. 57: during perhaps the most critical period of the proceedings against these defendents,
that is to say, from the time of their arraignment until the beginning of their trial, when consultation, thorough-going investigation and preparation were vitally important, the defendants did
not have the aid of counsel in any real sense,
although they were as much entitled to such aid
during the period as at the trial itself.
Depriving a person, formally charged with a
crime, of counsel during the period prior to trial
may be more damaging than denial of counsel during the trial itself.
We do not have here mere suspests who are
being secretly interrogated by the police as in
Crooker v. State of California, supra, nor witnesses
who are being questioned in secret administrative
or judicial proceedings as in In re Grohar, 352 U.S.
330 and Anenymous Nos, 6 6 7 v. Baker 360 U.S.
287. x x x As Professor Chafee once said. "A
person accused of crime needs a lawyer right after
his arrest probably more than at any other time."
Chafee, Documents on Fundamental Human Rights
Pamphlet 2 (1951-1952), p. 541. When he is deprivea of that right after indictment and berore
trial, he may indeed be denied effective representation by counsel at the only stage when legal aid
and advice would help him. This secret inquisitior, by the police when defendant asked for and
was denied counsel was as serious an invasion of
his constitutional rights as the denial of a continuance in order to employ counsel was held to be in
Chandler b. Fretag 348 U.S. 3, 10.
I join with Judges Desmond, Fuld, and Van
Voorhis of the New York Court of Appeals (4 N.Y.
2d 256, 266, 173 N.Y.S. 2d 173, 801, 150 N.E. 2d
226, 232-233), in asking, what use is a defendant’s
right to effective counsel at every stage of a criminal case, if, while he is held awaiting trial, he
can be questioned in the absence of counsel until he
confesses? In that event the secret trial in the
police precincts effectively supplants the public trial
guaranteed by the Bill of Rights.
In a separate concurring opinion, Justice Stewart,
joined by Justices Douglas and Brennan, stated:
Indeed the right to the assistance of counsel
whom the accused himself retained is absolute,
whatever the offense for which he is on trial.
Chandler v. Fretag, supra.
While I concur in the opinion of the Court,
it is my view that the absence of counsel when


this confession was elicited was alone enough to
render it inadmissible under the Fourteenth Amed
ment.
Let it be emphasized at the outset that this is
not a case where the police were questioning a
suspect in the course of investigating an unsolved
crime: See Crooker v. State of California, supra;
S
Cicenia v. Lagay 357 U.S. 504. When the petitioner
surrendered to the New York authorities he was
under indictment for first degree murder. (Underscoring supplied).
The Committee on the Bill of Rights of the American Bar Association in its report to Subcommittee No.
2 of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, United States Congress, declared:
In sum, it seems fair to say that there is unanimity for the proposition that “Strict observance
of some reasonably definite and rather short time
limit for the detention of a prisoner after arrest
without judicial sanction is vital to personal liberty” (Underscoring supplied). But there is a
wide divergence of views concerning how definite
is “reasonably definite” and how short is “rather
short” (Chafee, Documents on Fundaniental Human Rights, Pamphlets 1-3, (1951-1952), p. 480).
The view that the benefit of counsel staris from
the moments of arrest and that it can be availed of by
the person arrested or by his representative finds support also in the official report of the 1958 United Nations
Seminar of the Protection of Human Rights. The delegates of the twenty nations that met in Baguio from
February 17 to March 1, 1958 were generally of the
opinion that the right of a person to the assistance of
counsel “should exist from the time when a person was
either arrested or received a summons to appear in court".
(Philippine International Law Journal, Vol. 1, No. 1,
Jan-March 1962, p. 220).
It would seem therefore that the stand taken by
that ranking government official in that incident mentioned in the preceding pages hereof in refusing to allow
the lawyer of the person undergoing police investigation
to be present during said interrogation is amply supported by our law and the jurisprudence in the United
States from where we copied our criminal procedure.
Now from the point of view of law enforcement this
question may be asked: What benefit may society derive
in denying the presence of counsel during police investigation on persons other than those arrested while under
interregation? In Colombo y Connecticut, 367 U.S. Ct.
1886, 6 L. Ed. 2d — (1961), Justice Frankfurter who
penned the majority opinion that voted for the acquittal
of the accused, recognizing the effect of the presence of
counsel in a police investigation said:
To bring in a lawyer means a real peril to solution of the crime because, under our adversary
system, he deems that his sole duty is to protect his
client — guilty or innocent — and that in such a
capacity he owes no duty to help society solve its
crime problem. Under this conception of criminal
procedure, any lawyer worth his salt will tell the
suspect in no uncertain terms to make no statement
to police under any circumstances. Watts v. State
of Indiana, 338 U.S. 49, 57-59.
In Crooker v. State of California, supra, it was
held that to allow a person to obtain legal advice before


JULY-AUGUST, 1963


Page 83


solution of the crime. (Underscoring supplied).


Major' Zosimo J. Paredes, Provincial Commander of
Bohol, with Lt Primitivo V. Lara, Jr., of 50th PC Company, inspecting implements and other paraphernalia
used in the manufacture of paltik firearms, that were
confiscated from Genaro Ibale of Ubay, Bohol, recently.


talking with the police “would effectively preclude police
questioning”. In Cicenia v. Lagay, Supra, it was also
held that to do so "would constrict police activities in
a manner that in many instances might impair their
ability to solve cases".
Justice Frankfurter continued in the Colombo case:
The critical elements of the problem may be
quickly isolated in light of what has already beel.
said. Its first pole is the recognition that “Quesifoning suspects is indispensable in law enforcement.” As the public interest requires that interrogation, and that at a police station, not completely
be forbidden, so long as it is conducted fairly, within proper limits and with full regard to the rights
of those being questioned. (State v. Smith, 32 N.J.
501, 534, 161, A 2-d, 532). But if it is once admitted
that questioning of suspects is bermissible, what.
ever peasonable means are needed to make the
questioning effective must also be concedea do th
police. Often prolongation of the interrogation period will be essential, so that a suspect’s story can
be checked and if it proves untrue he can be con
fronted with the lie; if true, released without
charge. (Se Coakley, Law and Police Practice;
Restrictions in the Law of Arrest, 52 Nw. U.L
Rev. 2, 8-10 (1957), criticizing as possibly too short
in some cases, the twenty-four maximum pre-hearing detention period provided by all of the Uniform
Act, 28 Va. L. Rev. 315, 343, 347, (1942). Often
the place of questioning will have to be a police interrogation room both because it is important to
assure the proper atmosphere of privacy and nondiscretion if questioning is to be made productive
and because, where a suspect is questioned but not
taken into custody, he and in some cases his associates may take prompt warning and flee the
premises. Legal counsel for the suspect will generally prove a thorough obstruction. Whatevel
fortifies the suspect or seconds him in his capacity
to keep his mouth closed is a potential obstacle to the
Page 84


In a free society like ours, we face a dilenima:
either to take a suspect into custody for questioning
without the benefit of counsel which method is a peril
to individual freedom or to consider the case close and
forget it with the suspect at large.
Prominent police authorities, like Kidd, Police Inter.
rogation (1950); Mulbar, Interrogation (1951); Dienstein,
Technics for the Criminal Investigator (1952), 97-115;
Inbau and Reid, Lie Detection and Criminal Interrogation (1956), 95-126; suggested that in order to curb third
degree methods utilized by the police, a law should be
passed providing for some form of preliminary judicial
interrogation of persons accused of crime, in which pro.
ceeding the privilege against self-incrimination is to be
so far withdrawn as to permit the prosecution, upon
subsequent trial of the accused to comment on his refusal to answer questions in that preliminary judicial
interrogation. It is thus admitted that some form of
interrogation of criminal suspects is necessary to effective
law enforcement,
Lord Justice Sir Patrick Devlin of England also
realized the importance of police interrogation and interview when he wrote in 1958 his book, The Criminal
Prosecution in England. In part he said:
The least criticism of police methods of interrogation deserves to be carefully weighed because
the evidence which such interrogation produces is
often decisive; the high degree of proof which the
English law requires — proof beyond reasonable
doubt — often could not be achieved by the prosecution without the accused’s own statement.
This problem of crime detection therefore needs
serious study because in cases of unwitnessed crimes,
often there is little else the police can do than interrogate suspects as experience shows that this phase is an
indispensable part of criminal investigation.
In a Philippine case, People v. Carlos, 78 Phil.
535, it was held that the detention of a prisoner for a
period fixed by the law pending investigation or trial
(Continued on page 87)


 


ndtionidl BiSbipano
Speech of Congressman GERARDO ROXAS in Cebu City


Four hundred forty-two years ago last
week, a great Spaniard in the pursuit of knowledge and glory for his country, set foot on
Mactan Island, a part of this great province,
Cebu. It was a most fortunate day for him,
but to the natives of this province his presence
was an intrusion in their lives and a threat to
their liberty. Nurtured as they were in the
concept of independence, liberty and freedom,
the natives of this province rose up in arms and
led by Lapu-Lapu, slew the intruder.
My friends, just as Lapu-Lapu, the illustrious son of this province, was the first Filipino hero, our history also reveals that, interspersed in the development of our country as
we know it today, there were other illustrious
sons of this great province who played major
roles in our development as a people and as a
country. In every field of human endeavor —
in the arts, in the sciences, in literature, in education, in the evolvement of our legal system,
in the struggle for political independence
there was always an illustrious son of this great
province.
It is, therefore, with distinct honor and
pleasure that I address you, the graduates, who,
I know, will continue the great tradition of the
illustrious sons of Cebu in the fulfillment of
our people, in the development of our country,
and in our continuing fight for sustenance, enlightenment, and liberty.
I would like to take this opportunity then
of talking to you on a subject which I personally feel would be of great value to each
and everyone of you and to our people. And
this subject is the great need for national discipline.
What is national discipline? I do not
mean by national discipline the restraint of
personal motives. Neither do I mean the sacrifice and surrender of individual freedom, for
the welfare of a nation cannot and must not
require the limitation of the liberties of its
citizens. I do not mean this negative aspect
of national discipline at all, for it is suggestive
of the discipline of an abject and miserable
people. The greatest and most absolute discipline is to be found in the cemetery; there order
rules and discipline reigns, but the cemetery is
a community of citizens that is incapable of
ever achieving anything.
By national discipline, therefore, I mean a
code of individual and social behavior that releases the energies of the people for constructive national pursuits and goals; a social outlook, an ethics of incentive that encourages
national achievement. This is what I mean by


national discipline and, certainly, not the exaggeration of the common connotation of "discipline” which would mean the stifling and
stultification of individual initiative.
One of the greatest philosophers that this
world has produced had said that nothing has
been as yet devised that can serve as a greater
stimulant to economic and social progress than
the desire of every man to seek his self-improvement in an atmosphere of civil and political liberty. This thought he expressed is as
true today as when he enunciated it.
But what is liberty? Picture a man, the
lone survivor of a shipwreck, marooned on a
small and uninhabited island. There no laws
command him, no rules of decency curb and
check his desires, and he is responsible and
answerable to no man. He needs no traffic
signs, observes no city ordinances, he can
throw his garbage anywhere, and he is indebted
to no one. Yet, to this man, justice and morality and freedom can have neither meaning
nor value.
Liberty, therefore, is meaningful only
when men live in society. And all the magnificent achievements that men have attained as
expressions of their freedom have been possible only because men had fundamental and
common purposes in society.
It is, therefore, in the wise and judicious
exercise of this liberty, by discipline, that gives
purpose to individual and social life and opens
the doors of opportunity to individual and national achievement.
I have spoken of national discipline as a
code of behavior and as a social outlook that
encourages the achievement of constructive national goals and purposes. What is the relevance of national discipline to our contemporary
situation? We might examine first of all the
role of national discipline in the history of other
nations.
England has a long and colorful history.
And yet, from Alfred the Great to Richard the
Lion Hearted, to Queen Elizabeth, to Winston
Churchill, England has never been able to feed
herself from her own resources. For which
reason, in cognizance of her own incapacity in
this respect, she had resorted to manufacturing
in order to finance her food requirements.
Knowing that it was in the export trade where
the solution lay, the English adapted themselves
to the situation and displayed a national discipline most admirably in at least three ways.
First, they competed with foreign goods abroad by pricing their products for export cheaper than the selling price for the same items


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 85


at home. The difference, which is about 30%
for medium-priced automobiles, is paid by the
British citizen as a purchase tax; and yet, the
British joke about this high tax and call it the
"patriotic tax . Second, for about three years
immediately after the war, the British government announced, and the nation accepted, that
all wage and salary incomes would be frozen;
this was to prevent increases in cost of production and was relaxed only last year. And
thirdly, these adverse conditions did not impel
labor to riot, but rather, the situation only
served as a stimulus to improved efficiency in
May 23, 1963
Capt. William N. Chavez
Camp Crame, Quezon City
Dear Capt. Chavez:
In November 1957, you helped me win a seat in the Philpine Senate. Five and a half years have passed since
then, but because I never had the opportunity to apprise
you of what I have done in the Senate, 1 am taking
this opportunity to send you herewith attached a list of
bills which 1 authored or co-authored in the Philippine
Senate which were designed to benefit the officers and
men of the AFP, the veterans of our Country and/or
their heirs.
ANMR
Mrs. Balao joins me in wishing you and your loved ones
the best of health and happiness always. 1 am,
Sincerely yours,
(Sgd.) EULOGIO BALAO
BILLS AUTHORED, CO-AUTHORED AND/OR
SPONSORED BY SENATOR EULOGIO BALAO
WHICH BECAME LAWS
RA No. 3460: Increasing the monthly base pay of EM
of the AFP.
RA No. 3056: Increasing share of widows and heirs or
deceased officers to receive 75% of monthly pension.
RA No. 2608: Providing that Colonels, Brigadier Generals, 1st sergeants and Master Sergeants be raised
one grade higher upon retirement.
RA No. 2449: Payment of Back Longevity Pay to the
officer of the AFP.
RA No. 2331: Allowing officers and enlisted men who
received gratuity in lump sum to receive monthly
pensions
RA No. 2310: Providing that pensions shall not be subject to attachments, levy, execution or any tax whatsoever.
RA No. 2071: Providing for efficent dental care for the
personnel of the AFP.
RA No. 3015: Granting retired officers and enlisted
men of the PC privileges under RA 340 before
World War II.
RA No. 2664: Creating the “Philippine Veterans Administration."
RA No. 2645: Granting medical officers of the AFP incentive pay of P100.00 a month.
RA No. 3092: Granting dental officers of the AFP incentive pay of P100.00 a month.
RA No. 2241: Recognizing the Veterans of World War I.
RA No. 2640. Incorporating the “Veterans Federation
of the Phil.”
RA No. 3022: Proclaiming April 9th as Bataan Day
ana declaring it as a legal holiday.
RA No. 2630: Providing for repatriation of Filipinos
who accepted commission in the US Armed Forces.
BILLS AUTHORED CO-AUTHORED AND/OR
SPONSORED BY SENATOR EULOGIO BALAO
WHICH ARE NOW PENDING CONSIDERATION
SB No. 95: Amending RA 2334, rotation of Reserve Officers.
SB No. 124: Providing for successional rights to pensions of officers and enlisted men.
SB No. 148: Creating Selection Board to pass on pro

production. It was this same national discipline which enabled the English to withstand
the privations of war and to eventually win the
war.
As in politics, so in economic activities.
National discipline means the fruitful, gainful
and judicious development of our natural resources. National discipline in production
means the fruitful partnership of management
and labor in the manufacture of goods and the
extension of services that enrich the lives of all.
A continuing effort towards efficiency in manu(Continued on page 87)
motions to the rank of Colonel.
SB No. 173: To establish a National Heroes Comniission.
SB No. 241: Extending conditional civil service eligibility to officers and enlisted men of the AFP.
SB No. 277: Incorporating the Reserve Officers Legion
of the Phil.
SB No. 284: Enacting new Firearms Law.
SB No. 298: To carry out an in-service training progran, for specially qualified personnel of the Bureau
of Customs and the Bureau of Internal Revenue in
el. Philippine Military Academy.
SB No. 329: Creating the Philippine Veterans Bank.
SB No. 330: Amending Uniform Retirement System in
the AFP
SB No. 351. Increasing longevity pay of EM of the
AFP.
SB No. 348: Revamping the Military Training Progiam
of the AFP
SB No. 403: Granting free hospitalization and free medicine to veterans of World War I.
SB No. 414: Establishing the Women’s Auxilliary Corps.
SB No. 417: Increasing the per diems for officers, and
employees of the National Government.
SB No. 424: Amending Articles of war on Court-Martial
jurisdiction.
SB No. 431: Amending Purpose Six of Sec. 97 of the
National Defense Act.
SB No. 437: Authorizing redemption of backpay certificates within a period of 10 years of officers and
enlisted men who have been in the service from
December 9 up to December 31, 1941,
SB No. 442: Authorizing incentive of P100.00 for every
JAGS officer on active duty.
SB No. 443: Granting a period of 5 years from approval
within which backpay claims may be, filed under
R.A. 897.
SB No. 446: Increasing sea duty pay of enlisted men
from 10% to 25% of their base pay.
SB No. 449: Authorizing the PVA to continue processing and adjudicating Veterans' Claims under RA
1889.
SB No. 450: Extending the period for filing pension
claims by Veterans of past Philippine Revolution
or Wars.
SB No. 453: Enacting the Flag and Burial Benefits Law
for Veterans.
SB No. 460: Increasing and adjusting the montuly Base
Pay of Commissioned Officers of the AFP.
P. S.R. No. 41: Requesting the Congress of the US to
heip in having the Memorial conceived by it and for
which the Corregidor-Bataan Memorial Commission
was created, built in Corregidor Island and notin
any other place in the Philippines.
S. Jt. R. No. 2: Creating a temporary commission to
be established by the government of the US to study
the Veterans program of the United States in the
Philippines.
S. Ct. R. No. 3: Defining the Policy of the Republic of
the Phil. with respect to the just and complete settlement of the Philippine Commonwealth Veterans and
related military claims of the Republic of the Philppines.


Page 86


 


  
Editor & Gen. Mgr. ..... .Maj. Constante Ma. Cruz
Managing Editor . . ...... .Jose N. Halili
Bus. Mgr. & Art Director .Capt. Jose S. Luna
Staff Artist . . . . . . . . . . . . .Jose M. Eusebio, Jr.
Advertising Manager .....Conde Ubaldo
Editorial Assistant . . .. . . .Carlos F. Orevillo
Subscription Rates
In The Philippines:
One Year ....................... .. .. ....... ₱10.00
6.00
Six Months ...................
3.00
Three Months .....................
In The United States of America 8 AbroadOne Year ...................................₱40.00
24.00
Six Months ................ . . . . . . . . . . .
Three Months .
12.00
Entered As Second Class Mail At Post Office, Manila.
On November 6, 1926.
Single Copy: ₱1 00
Vol. XXXVI, Headquarters, Philippine Constabulary,
Camp Crame, Quezon City Philippines
Tels. 71011 or 66611 thru 66620, local 4-74-83


NATIONAL DISCIPLINE
facture will generate public confidence in the
integrity of local production. Sincere compliance with the values of manufactured goods as
advertised will eventually convince our peoplo
that anything manufactured here in our country
is as good as anything manufactured abroad.
For the individual, national discipline means
respect for authority; compliance with law, justice, charity, patience, perseverance, tenacity,
diligence and determination. It means the
gainful use of our time; it means the fruitful
exercise of our liberty; it means the development of our talents; and it means the maximum
utilization of these talents. It means honesty
integrity and dedication.
How can we foster national discipline? We
must, of course, orient our youth in the schools
along this direction. Our schools alone, however, cannot bring this about for society itself
is the greater teacher of values and the molder
of morals.


BENEFIT
(Continued from page 84)
is not a punishment but a necessary extension of the
well-reorganized power to hold the criminal suspected
for investigation. The ruling in this case is of far
reaching effect in so far as police investigation or law
enforcement is concerned. It is hoped that this ruling
will blaze the trails for a better procedure in police
investigation without however, sacrificing individual liberties. As it is, in democratic countries such as ours
the suspect or accused enjoys several advantages over
the State in many respects. First, is the presumption
of innocence in his favor, second, is that his guilt should
be established beyond reasonable doubt, third, he may
obtain compulsary process to compel the attendance oi
his witnesses, and lastly, if convicted, he can appeal but
the prosecution cannot without doing violence to the
doctrine of double jeopardy. In some countries the
right of confrontation is a constitutional right. In


GREETINGS To The


PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY
On Its


62nd Anniversary


Compliments From —


Far East Distributor,


Inc.


the face of these advantages, the State should be equipped with sufficient weapons to match if not eliminate
criminality. We should therefore stick to the present
day practice of denying to lawyers their presence during police investigation. Anyway, the person under
investigation, be he a suspect or a mere witness, is
reminded of his constitutional right to remain silent or
even refuse to answer any question put to him especially
those that may incriminate him at the start of the
inquiry. In effect that was what Justices Douglas and
Black said in their concurring opinion in the Colembe
case supra. After quoting the Croocker, the Cicomnia
and the Watts cases, they said:
In other words an attorney is likely to inform
his client, clearly and unequivocally, that “NO person x x x shall be compelled in any criminal case
to be a witness against himself,” as provided in the
Fiftn Amendment. This is the “evil” to be feared
from contact between a police suspect and his lawyer.
While I advocate the continuance of our present
practice I endorse the idea of injecting some safeguards
in order to prevent police abuses. In se doing, however, we should reconcile society’s need for police interrogation with society’s need for protection from undue
infringement of our civil liberties.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


Page 87


COCKFIGHTING
(Continued from page 37)
cockfighting shall be held and the frequency thereof.
"In short, we are of the opinion that the City
ordinances relied upon by petitioner herein, authorizing cockfighting on Thursday, are invalid.
“WHEREFORE, the decision appealed from is
hereby affirmed, without special pronouncement as
to costs."
PROBLEMS OF LAW ENFORCERS. — The foregoing decision of our Supreme Court clearly shows that
cockfighting may be held only in a licensed cockpit and
only on days authorized by law, to wit: (a) On Sundays and legal holidays, except on the 4th of July, 30th
of December, Maundy Thursday, and Good Friday; and,
(b) during the celebration of the local fiesta or in lieu
thereof during the holding of an exposition, carnival, or
fair but not exceeding three (3) days in a year. This
decision of the Supreme Court, however, failed to put
a stop to the holding of cockfights on days other than
those authorized by law. Many city and municipal
councils still insist on enacting ordinances authorizing
cockfighting in total disregard of law and jurisprudence
on the matter. Thus, the first problem encountered by
law enforcers, the Constabulary in particular, is the
adamant attitude of local officials regarding this matter.
Under the circumstances, the Constabulary has no
other alternative but to enforce the law, particulerly Article 199 of the Revised Penal Code, quoted hereunder:
“Article 199. Illegal cockfighting. -- The penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200
pesos, or both, in the discretion of the court, shall
be imposed upon:
“1. Any person who directly or indirectly
participates in cockfights, by betting money or other
valuable things, or who organizes cockfights at
which bets are made, on a day other than those permitted by law.
“2. Any person who directly or indirectly
participates in cockfights, by betting money or other
valuable things, or organizes such cockfights, at a
place other than a licensed cockpit."
THE ATTITUDE OF THE COURTS. — Notwithstanding the doctrine laid down by the Supreme Court
in the foregoing case of Quimsing vs. Lachica, many
Courts of First Instance, are inclined to issue either a
restraining order or writ of preliminary injunction enjoining the Constabulary to desist from raiding cockpits
where cockfighting is illegally being held until after
the question of the validity of the city or municipal
ordinance authorizing the holding of such cockfighting
is resolved. One can imagine the frustration which such
a judicial attitude brings in the current PC campaign
against illegal cockfighting. There is even an instance
of a case being resurrected. The glaring example of this
resurrection was an action for Damages with Preliminary
Injunction filed against the Chief of Constabulary, et
al, before a CFI on June 9, 1962. After the issues had
been joined and arguments heard, the presiding judge
dismissed the case for lack of merit. A few months
later, the same plaintiff filed an action for the issuance
of injunction before the same CFI, but for unknown
reasons, the case landed in another branch. Promptly
and ex parte at that, the judge issued a restraining
order enjoining the PC, et al, not to molest or raid the


illegal cockfighting being held every Wednesday in tn
cockpit of the plaintiff. It is rather strange to find j
this jurisdiction such an instance of a resurrection e
a case that had already been dismissed.
COCKFIGHTING FOR CHARITY. — One of the
strongest arguments of cockpit operators which argument finds sympathy among local officials, is that the
holding of cockfighting, whether illegal or otherwise, will
bring about revenue to the local governments and is a
sure source of funds for charity. Here is a case of an
evil act sought to be justified with a noble purpose.
Charity is the magic word that cleanses the gamblers
money stained with the roosters’ blood.
It is plainly evident that the evils of cockfighting
have penetrated the very core of Philippine social life.
It would now seem that in the face oof surmounting
difficulties, accelerated by a growing perversion in the
sense of social values amongst the masses, any attempt
to put a stop to this illegal cockfighting would entail an
undertaking, that would be tougher than the Holy
Crusade led by King Richard of England. Moral regeneration of the people seems to be among the hardest
tasks. It seems that the good laws of the land have failed
to change the attitude of the masses towards this widespread vice. The picture described by the late vernacular poet, Jose Corazon de Jesus, popularly known as
Jose Batute, in his immortal poem, entitled "ANG MANOK KONG BULIK", has remained the same.
Sa Umagang pagkagising
Ang manok kong bulik ay hihimasin,
Bago ang bigas na pang-saing,
Patuka muna sa manok kong sasabungin. *


HAPS
Battery Supply and
Electrical Service
WILFREDO HEREZ
Gen. Manager


675-G E. Delos Santos Ave.
Cubao,
Tel. 7.04-22
Quezon City


Page 88


 


MiSSing
N
A
E
4
Pag
e/s
Cover-4


MISSING
)
PAGEJS
COVER2


CONTENTS


Cdilonial...


Page
He Did It For Us....... 4
By MASgt Juanito E. Conol
“Tather, forgive them; for
they know not what they do.” 5
By Carlos F. Orevillo
The Presidential Guard
Battalion .. 6
By 1st Lt Dionisio S. TanGatue, Jr.
A Perspective Of The PC From
A Legal Point Of View..... 8
By Col Eladio G. Samson
Juvenile Delinquency, Disposition And Law Enforcement 9
By Capt Clemente A. Racela
The Office Of The Representative Of The Auditor General,


PC ..................... 10
By Dr. Nicolas P. Cabaya
sow aw
Duty, Honor, Country ....... 11


Address by General MacArthur
Care Of The Human Dentition 12
By Capt Romeo C. Castro
The Medico-Legal Responsibility
Of AFP Medical Officers .. 13
By Major Miguel G. Zarraga,
MC (PC)
Professionalism Is The Answer
To Our Police Problems ... 16
By Capt Arcadio S. Lozada
The Process Of Police Organization Planning ........... 18
By Major Paciencio S. Magtibay
Biographical Sketch Of
Col Jose C. Maristela ....... 21
By Aurel R .Perlas
 
Qua Pp Ngo


More Training For Local Policeman


Late last year 3o police officers from all over the country graduated from the Philippine Constabulary School after finishing a
short course in police administration and operation. The first of
its kind at HPC level the course is designed "to equip the municipal
police officer with modern knowledge in police managerial and
operational functions."
Speaker Cornelio T. Villareal, in addressing the graduates.
stated: “The problems of our Republic are many. Not the least
important of these is peace and order. In fact, peace and order
ranks high in the national priorities. That is why police budgets
are increasing every year. Law enforcement organizations have to
be strengthened and enlarged."
Not too long ago, sparked by a series of ugly stories of police
involvement in crimes, police inefficiency, and naked criminal activities of policemen, the need for training was again brought to
the fore. Some articles even clamored for screening the police
ranks for policemen with criminal records. If, as pronounced by
an administration stalwart, peace and order ranks high in the national priorities and that police budgets are increasing every year,
then something, a lot of things, must be done and now. And we
do not even refer to the “politics" of the situation. We make
pointed reference to the training of the rank and file in the traditions of police service. The national government cannot continue
to look away from the deplorable state of its more than one thousand municipal and fifty odd chartered city police forces.
After the desired degree of professional training has been
achieved, then probably, the local police officer might come to "recognize the badge of his office as a symbol of public faith, and
accept it as a public trust to be held so long as he is true to the
ethics of the public service; constantly striving to achieve these objectives and ideals, dedicating himself before God to his chosen
profession — law enforcement."


  


Editor and General Manager ......... Maj. CONSTANTE MA. CRUZ
Managing Editor ..................... JOSE N. HALILI
Business Manager and Art Director ... Capt. JOSE S. LUNA
Staff Artist ............ .............. JOSE M. EUSEBIO JR.


Subscription Rates


e
In The Philippines:
One Year ............................. .. . . .... .......................... ₱10.00
6.00
Six Monthg
3.00
MPhree MOnthS
In The United States of America 8 Abroad:
aaw M
ori
One Year ......P40.00
Six Months . 24.00
‘Threg Months..... 12.00


Entered As Second Class Mail At Post Office, Manila, On November 6, 1926.
Single Copy: ₱1.00
Vol. XXXV, Headquarters, Philippine Constabulary, Camp Crame
Quezon City, Philippines
na
Tels. 71011 or 66611 thru 66620, local 4-74-83


Page 3


HE DID IT FOR US
By MASgt JUANITO E CONOL
Chief Clerk, Spl Sves PC


Jesus, bleeding on the face, stood before the
governor in the judgment Hall. His whole body
was weak; face, pale like death.
The Sanhedrin, the body that had sentenced
Him to death during the mock trial in the night,
was present but did not enter the Judgment Hall
for fear of defilement, as according to their law,
contact with a Gentile or to enter his house
would make the members unclean for the whole
day. Hence, they just waited outside, hoping
that Pilate would order their condemned prisoner to dea h without inquiry. But Pilate went
out to them and demanded for charges. Having
the inscrutable desire to secure His judicial murder by the foulest means, they accused Jesus of
seeking to make himself king of the Jews. At
first they had condemned Jesus of blasphemy
but now made a political charge. This charge
caused Pilate to ask Jesus: "Art thou the king
of the Jews?” Jesus answered: “Thou savest.
Jesus was King, not of the Jews only, but
of all men and He admitted the charge. He was
King, however, in a spiritual sense, as He explained to Pilate, saying: "My Kingdom is not
of this world; if my Kingdom were of this world,
then would my servants fight, that I should not
be delivered to the Jews."
Doubtlessly, Jesus’ explanation did not make
any sense to Pilate. The governor would have
been puzzled and could not come to the idea of
a kingdom not of this world. A kingdom of
which the subjects did not fight with material
weapons to defend its king, or to extend its border, was certainly beyond his human understanding. But such a Kingdom was Christ’s. It was
not pattern after the concept of man, did not
spring from this world, was heavenly in origin
and maintained by spiritual and moral means.
The Chief Priest and the Elders, aware of
Pilate’s subtle show of indifference to them.
again charged the Lord of stirring up sedition
to influence the governor into making a decision
in their favor. Jesus could have easily defended
Himself but to do so was not in keeping with
the Father’s will. He had to lay down His life
in order to fulfill His Messianic Rule of saving
the repentant sinners of this world. Therefore,
He made no defense for Himself just as he had
done before Caiaphas. And His impressive silence moved Pilate deeply.
At this time the Passover, the feast of the
Jews, which was a memorial to the passing over
of the plagues in Egypt when the first-born of
the Egyptians were slain and Israel was delivered from their bondage, was at hand. And it
was their custom of releasing a prisoner at this
occasion. Pilate wanted to take advantage of
this occasion to free the innocent Prisoner. But
Page 4


his heart shuddered with fear when he thought
of it, for he knew he could not openly do it without arousing trouble that might end in a bloody
revolt against his administration. So instead of
taking upon himself to order the release of
Christ, Pilate stood before the angry multitude
and inquired unto them: "Whom will ye that
I release unto you? Barabas or Jesus which is
Christ?”
While he sat on the judgment seat, waiting
for the decision of the people, his wife came to
him, saying:
have nothing to do with that
just man, for I have suffered many things this
day in a dream because of Him.
On this day, the small voice of Pilate’s wife,
a Gentile woman, was the only one that interceded for Christ. Her having been able to de
scribe Jesus as righteous man showed that shwas familiar of the Prisoner’s life, was probably
already deeply interested in Him, and knew that
He was to be seized in the night. That she suffered many things in a dream indicated that her
waking thoughts were reflected in her sleen.
Meanwhile, the Chief Priest and the Elders
busied themselves persuading the multitude to
cry out for the destruction of Jesus and to call
for the release of Barabas, a notorious prisoner,
leader in an insurrection in which he had committed murder. Therefore, when the governor
asked again which of the two would be released,
they shouted, "Barabas.
Pilate’s artifice had failed miserably. The
Jewish nation had not only rejected its Messiah,
but chosen a criminal instead. Pilate said, "What
shall I do then with Jesus?” All cried: "Away
with Him, away with Him, crucify Him!” This
was the decision of the Jewish people. Jesus
should suffer and die. He was not their King
but rather an irresistible menace to their religion.
Pilate’s struggle was pitiable. He was hanging between what he wanted and did not want
to happen—between his desire to be just and to
please a body demanding a crime at his hands.
He repeated the question, "Why, what evil hath
He done?” three times and offered to appease
their rage by chastising the innocent. He, had,
however, lost his fight when the mob, utterly unreasonable, only demanded the more vehemently
that Jesus be crucified.
This was how the Man from eternity suffered for us. Yes, He did all these things because of His undying love and mercy for us;
He did them that, by believing, we, the fallen
creatures, may be freed from the power of darkness and that we may live in the light of His
righteousness and may have life eternal in His
name. But what have we done for Him?
MARCH-APRIL, 1963


It is written in the Bible that Jesus spent
his life preaching the words of God. He did
not select any particular congregation but
spoke to all of them: farmers, fishermen, carpenters, laborers, lawyers and ministers; rich
and poor alike. He spoke in public places, by
the seashores, on the hills, on the mountains,
in the temple courts and most painfully when
pinioned on the cross. Jesus had often spoken
of forgiveness. "Don’t despise your enemies,
he said; "but rather love them. And if they
have sinned against you, forgive them not only
seven times but seventy times seven.
Let us turn the pages of the scripture and
follow the event of Jesus’ crucifixion. It all
began, as the gospel says, on the day nearing
the passover when Jesus was in the house of
Simon the leper. One of his disciples, Judas
Iscariot went to Caiaphas, the high priest, and
told him that if he will be rewarded he will
betray Jesus to them. He was promised upon
deliverance thirty pieces of silver.
Accompanied by his eleven disciples on a
place called Gethsemane, Jesus was to offer his
prayer to God on the eve of that day when
Judas came together with a great multitude
with swords and staves from the high priest


due to the weight of his burden. When they
reached Golgotha, (a place of skull or Mount
Calvary as it is commonly known) they gave
him vinegar to drink mixed with gall. The centurion tore his garment and gambled with it.
They set up a written accusation over his head:
THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS'
Then with dexterity, the cross is raised and
Jesus our Lord is crucified.
Still not satisfied with what they had done,
the high priest dared him to come down from
the cross if he is really the Son of God. "You
have saved others, he said, and yet you cannot
save yourself.”
And then there was darkness all over the
land from the sixth hour to the ninth hour.
About the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud
voice, savying, “Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?”
The earth quaked, rocks were rent, temple
crushed and graves were opened. Witnessing
what had happened, they feared greatly and
they believed. Truly, this was the Son of God.
All the LAMB OF GOD could do for man
had been endured; and now the end of his
agony and the completion of his great redemp
tion work are announced by the utterance, 'It
is finished’, and yielding his soul to God, he


4
"Father, forgive them; for they know not what
By CARLOS F. OREVILLO
TI& EO, HPC


they do.
Luke 23:34


and elders of the people. He goes directly to
Jesus and kissed him; the sign of the betrayal.
Jesus was led to Caiaphas, who with his council sought false witnesses against him, but in
vain.
The next morning they delivered him to
Pontius Pilate, who was then the governor, and
incidentally having a prisoner by the name of
Barabbas. When the multitude was asked whom
of the two he shall release, they shouted to spare
Barabbas and Jesus be crucified. Seeing that he
could prevail nothing, he washes his hands with
water and said, "I am innocent of the blood of
this just man.
The governor has spoken and Jesus was ta
ken by the soldiers, was stripped of his clothes
and given a scarlet robe. His head was platted
by a crown of thorns and a reed in his right
hand. They beat, spit and smote him on the
head. Not contented with it, they mocked him,
saying, "HAIL, KING OF THE JEWS!"
After this merciless treatment, they took
the robe off him and was given back his own
raiment, then he was led away to be crucified.
On the way they saw Simon and compelled
him to bear his cross, as Jesus was exhausted


exclaims, "Father, into thy hand I commend
1)
my spirit, and dropping his head on his
breast, he expired.
He bore the agony of death in meekness
and silence. He died as has been predicted by
Isaiah, and thus between two malefactors. The
just for the unjust.
The time of crucifixion was at the third
hour, which was 9 o’clock a.m., the time when
the morning sacrifice was being offered. The
time of death was in the ninth hour which was
3 o’clock p.m., the time when the evening sacrifice was done.
We may now ask this question to ourselves.
What did he say? How did he act? Why is it
that inspite of their cruelties he found reason:
to pray and beg his father to forgive them for
they know not what they do?
From the greatness of this prayer we can
learn something by contrast. Nature does not
forgive. Ask the saber-toothed tiger to give up
its quivering prey, ask the avalanche to spar
the lives of miners trapped inside a tunnel.
If there are those who may wrong us, we can
straightforwardly say, without hesitation,
"FATHER, FORGIVE THEM; FOR THEY
KNOW NOT WHAT THEY DO."
Dqelie


 


Page 5


the Presidentiol
Guard Battalion
By Ist Lt DIONISIO S. TAN-GATUE, JR.
ExO “C” CO, PGB


People who come to Malacanang invariably
notice tall and rather fairly handsome palace
guards in well-pressed khaki uniforms, white
leather cross straps and leggings strategically
posted in the clean six-hectare Malacanang compound. For such seemingly petty breach of rules
as crossing the lawn, parking in a busy corner
or walking in the wrong direction, one easily
gets a mean caution.
We don’t take these rules for granted,” Lt.
Col. Benjamin G. Tolentino, Commanding Officer
of the Presidential Guard Battalion, says when
complaints about such strict enforcement of pa(O
lace rules by his guards reach him. They may
seem petty to most but nevertheless they make
up a big portion of the whole scheme of protecting the President and his family in his residence. The whole place is pretty well sewed up.
We cannot afford to be lenient. The slightest
failure to enforce a regulation may result in the
most serious consequences."


When on post, the guards have specific instructions to "look for the unusual and suspicious.” For instance, one quickly attracts notice
carrying around an overstuffed briefcase, loitering in the premises for no apparent reason, or
showing a lump in one’s shirt or pants. Passing
a guard on his post, one is immediately subjectea
to a thorough "once over” with the visitor least
suspecting it. Not a day passes without frank

sters, mental invalids or cranks wanting to see
the President on some "very important matters.
Fortunately, alert guards talk them into seeing
someone else, usually a policeman in a mobile
patrol car. Once a Bureau of Prisons official
to show his four companions how close he is to
Malacanang demanded without the benefit of an
appointment to see the President who was entertaining then a British ambassador. When he was
politely refused entry to the Reception Hall and
instead referred to the Appointments Secretary,
he flared up and shouted at the Sergeant of the
Guards. Prepared for such a situation, the Sergeant simply blocked the doorway, smiled, and
called for the Officer of the Day. It could have
been easier to throw out that person but he held
on to his temper.
'In this business, one has to be prepared for
anything. One has to be a policeman, a public
relations expert, a psychiatrist, and a Rock Hudson altogether, says an oldster in the PGB,
'you don t know what to expect next."
To be a President’s guard, one need not appear as rugged and tough-looking as a mobster
in Al Capone’s time. Rather, all that is required
is that one must be young and debonaire, one
who can conduct himself with ease both amidst
an unwashed crowd of job seekers and the more
sophisticated "upper” set of callers frequenting
Malacanang. He must, above all, know his judo
as much as he knows his firearm.
Three companies of 120 officers and men alternate in a 24-hour duty cycle guarding Malacanang proper and the sprawling Malacanang
park across the Pasig River. When one company is on guard, another company is on "reserve” ready to reinforce the former in case of
an emergency. In the meantime that it is no
committed, it goes on training to "keep trim,
starting with an early morning roadwork followed by military drill. Training covers police
work and military subjects and a continuous rehearsal of SOPs to protect the President when
the latter is in Malacanang or when he goes out
to the provinces in his now popular "regionalize
Malacanang” trips. The "reserve company relieves the company on guard at 1600H. The third
company which was relieved the day previous, is
on "general reserve” at the park. This company
provides security to the President the moment
he rides out through Gate 2 up to the time he
returns. The system is not generally known but
when the Commander-in-Chief leaves the palace,
aside from the close-in personal security pr
vided by the Presidential Security Service, he is
provided an "invisible cover" of mobile PGB
teams ready to move in on the President’s party


Page 6


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


in case of trouble. At any one time, the Presidential party is never out of reach and its location is accurately relayed by radio to a main
control station at the PGB headquarters in Malacanang park. The control station, in turn, informs the units in the field its exact position.
The "mobile teams" move along as unobtrusively
as security permits. If the PGB tags along with
the Presidential Party, armed to the teeth, in
noisy military vehicles, it may look ridiculous
and a crude way of securing a President in a
sophisticated metropolis as Manila and its
fashionable suburban districts. Besides, it will
seem hard for the populace to reconcile the idea
why a predominantly military guard should be
trailing the President of a staunchly democratic
country as the Philippines, Even Presidents of
the United States whose assassination will not
only bring national but more serious international complications are seldom escorted by military guards brandishing high-powered automatic
weapons on their trips within the U.S.
Most Filipino Presidents express mild resentment at too many uniformed guards moving
around them. President Garcia, sometimes annoyed, ignored them. The late President Magsaysay usually sneaks away, while the present
occupant of Malacanang frowns at the whole
idea. But all of them recognize their guards as
a necessary evil. After all, nobody can tell what
may happen as in the case of the assassination
attempt on President Roxas by Julio Guillen in
1947.
The PGB started as a company-sized unit
of the Philippine Constabulary on May 28, 1938
with Col. Lamberto T. Javalera as its first commander. It was organized on orders of President
Quezon following an advice of General MacArthur. When war broke out, the unit was pulled
out of Malacanang and designated "D” Company,
4th Infantry, 2nd Regular Division for war service in Bataan.
Oal
When the late Senator Jose P. Laurel served
as President during the Japanese occupation,
there were also presidential guards under then
Maj. Jesus Vargas who later teamed up with the
underground, thus saving Malacanang from destruction by the liberating Fil-American forces.
After the war, the first active elements of the
Presidential Guards that reported for duty at
Malacanang were members of "A” Company, 1st
Infantry who were pulled out from Calasiao,
Pangasinan. This company was joined later by
"P
 Company, also from Calasiao. Together,
they constituted the first members of the battalion when it was formally activated on August
15 1945 under Lt. Col. Amado M. Dumlao. “C”
Company was only added on January 16, 1946.
The battalion was completed to its present
organization when on February 15, 1947, a band,
a medical detachment, a dental unit and a chapplain were added.


Then an Army unit, the PGB was finally designated a separate unit under the PC after a
series of changes in TOE on August 3, 1950 and
has remained in that major service ever since.
Past PGB commanders include Lt. Col. Manuel Turingan, Lt. Col. Benigno Alejandre, Lt. Col.
Jose Tando, Lt. Col. Salvador Babista, Lt. Col.
Romeo Honasan, Col. Napoleon D. Valeriano, Lt.
Col. Paterno Oppus and until recently, Col. Gaudencio S. Gaddi.
The duties of the PGB increased after 24
vears of existence. Aside from protecting the
life of the First Family and preserving peace at
Malacanang and Mansion House in Baguio, it
also renders military honors and ceremonies at
state functions. Last year, the PGB honored
some ten ambassadors who came to the palace
to present their credentials, a Mexican President,
a Japanese royal couple, a Dutch Princess, one
foreign minister, as well as a few local VIPs.
The PGB officers assisted in the reception of
guests of the President and the First Lady on
two state functions and the traditional New
Year’s call on the President by government officials and the private sector.
The PGB is at present headed by Lt. Col.
Benjamin G. Tolentino of Lubao, Pampanga.
The tall “Cabalen has set a high standard for
officers and enlisted men in the unit.
‘No sad sacks in this outfit,” is his constant
reminder.


Compliments of


Insular Life


FGU Insurance Group


 


Page 7


A Perspective of the PC from
a Legal Point of View
By Colonel ELADIO G. SAMSON
Constabulary Staff Judge Advocate


This study is designed to enable the Chief
of Constabulary and every Constable, for that
matter, to have an accurate grasp of the exact
nature of their responsibilities as prescribed by
law and the President of the Philippines.
a. Commonwealth Act No. 343 abolished
the State Police Force and authorized the Pres
ident to reorganize the PC into a NATIONAL
POLICE FORCE. By Executive Order No. 153 and
Executive Order No. 175, s. 38, the PC was reorganized and constituted into a national police
force, By these Executive Orders, the Chief PC
was made responsible to the President for the
execution of all police duties, responsibilities and
functions appertaining to the Constabulary, including those specifically assigned to him by the
President. After the Department of the Interior
was recreated in 1946, the organization came
under the supervision and control of the Sec
retary of this Department until 1950 when it
became one of the major services of the AFp
pursuant to Executive Order No. 389 with the
abolition also in 1950 by Executive Order 383
of the Department of the Interior. Executive
Order No. 389 reorganized the AFP and constituted the PC as one of the major services thereof but its status as a national police force was
not touched. Is also declared in force certain
sections of the Revised Administrative Code governing members of the PC in the exercise of
their authority and duties as peace officers and
in their relation with the provincial and municipal law enforcement agencies and officials.
These charged the Chief PC, through the mem

bers of his command for the maintenance of
law and order throughout the Philippines, with
the duty of suppressing insurrection, riots,
brigandage, unlawful assemblies and breaches
of the peace and see to it that the perpetrators
of such offenses are brought to justice. It also
imposed on all members of the PC stationed in
any province the duty of cooperating in every
way possible with the governor in the maintenance of law and order, in the suppresion of
brigandage, lawless violence and crime. It also
imposed on all Provincial Commanders the function of undertaking inspection of various bodies
of local police within his province and to make
due report to Chief PC as to their equipment
and efficiency and generally as to the condition
of the province as regards peace and observance
of law and order. It also charged the Provincial Commander the duty to see that any police force placed under PC control by authority
of the President or by the provincial governor
with the approval of the President, are properly
uniformed, drilled and disciplined and that all
lawful orders of the President, governor and mayor and others in authority are executed as well
as all proper arrest are made for violations of
law or municipal ordinances. It made it the
duty of the PC to assist any body of local police
force, upon the request of a municipal mayor
in the maintenance or restoration of peace and
order in which case the Provincial Commander
may even take command of and direct operations of said local police force in conjunction
with the PC therein until peaceful conditions
are restored.
b. On the whole, the PC as a national
police force is recognized as the agency through
which the President of the Philippines may insure the preservation of public order and enforce the law as well as the efficient organization and discipline of all local police bodies the
operation of which shall be under the supervisory direction of the governor of the province
and the mayor of the city or municipality, as
the case may be. It is because of its responsibilities in this regard and in the performance
of duties imposed on it by statute that the
Philippine Constabulary gets entangled with a
labyrinth of legal complexes too numerous and
varied to foresee, much less enumerate. Among
the most sensitive of these, however, may be
mentioned and they are the perplexing sphere
of partisan politics, both local and national, the
whole field of criminal law and procedure, numerous aspects of administrative and political
law, remedial law, Constitutional Law (particularly those dealing with civil liberties, proprietary rights and personal freedoms) and to a limited extent, international law. Of course, the PC
being also a military organization and its members being all possessed with military status, it
is also involved, as are the other major services,
with the usual problems arising from the application of military law and administration.


Page 8


MARCHAPRIL, 1963


A Commentary


luvenile Delinquency, Disposition
And Law Enforcement
By Capt CLEMENTE A RACELA


THERE are serious cases on juvenile misbehavior that demand particular attention. Some
cases in mind that need special consideration
were reported in the Manila Times issue of December 15, 1962.
One case is exemplified by a group of
youngsters beheading a 21-year-old girl after
she was abused, and the other, a 14-year-old
boy abusing a o-year-old girl.
In the first case, the victim, Rosita Balino
of Sarrat, Ilocos Norte was found headless by
an aunt on a hill where the former was dragged
from her house. In the second case, the boy
in question was set free by Judge Eloy Bello of
the Lingayen Court of First Instance because
the boy “committed the crime without discernment".
Crime and the Individual
In spite of the preponderance of doubts on
the nature of the crime or delinquent act, and
on the cause underlying its commission as gleaned from the report as "noting some peculiarities in the boy’s behavior” the judge seemed to
have committed the boy back to his parents
without any intention of committing him, at
any later time, to an agency or institution.
Some of the juvenile laws affecting children in our country could be excellent bases for
disposition of similar cases. For instance, Commonwealth Act 99 points out that "after hearing the evidence in proper proceedings, instead
of pronouncing judgment of conviction, (the
judge) shall suspend all further proceedings and
shall commit such to the custody or care of a
institution, established
public or private
under the law for the care, correction or education.
of delinquent children, place subject
to the visitation and supervision by the Director
of Public Welfare (now the Social Welfare Administrator) or any of his agents or representatives if there be any".
However, since the prosecution in the same
case failed to established that the rapist "acted
with discernment" the court, perhaps under the
spirit of Art. 12 of the Revised Penal Code, found
the boy criminally liable, and thereby, there
seemed to be no easier way of making a disposition than to convict him to the care and custody of his parents. Yet what is paramount is the
fact that a serious delinquent act had been manifested and that such act needs special attention. So also of the boy who was found under
such adverse social or individual conditions
which evidently led to the commission of a
crime.


On the other hand, assaulting and beheading a girl are acts certainly condemnable.
It is ardently hoped that the perpetrators are
no longer at large. Unfortunately, however, no
follow-up report on either case has been made
public by those concerned. Society would still
be at the mercy of these anti-social offendersmurderers and rapists.
The Community and Juvenile Delinquency
Law enforcement, admittedly, is not the
whole solution to the problem posed by the
members of delinquent gangs; neither will it be
capable of instituting means of totally preventing similar acts by the same or similar group of
youths. The community has as much a responsibility to perform in helping apprehend the
killers and protect itself as do the combined ef
forts of law enforcement and other agencies,
public or private. Increased community involvement adds up to effective juvenile delinquency
control. Enforcement of laws relative to children and to adults responsible for the welfare of
the youth, must necessarily be the concern of
every member of all law enforcement agencies.
The Juvenile Worker
Let us consider the case of the 14-year-old
delinquent. No juvenile worker was ever assigned before and after the trial to look into the
whole personality and background of the boy,
which should have been the most proper thing
(Continued on page 24)


PC SEMP PROJECT. The Camarines Norte PC recently
launched a socio-economic military project involving the
raising of poultry and piggery projects. These projects
are geared toward attaining self-sufficiency. Photo shows
Maj. Federico Baldovino, Camarines Norte PC commander, supervising the care of a horticulture garden in
the grounds of the PC provincial headquarters in Daet.


 


Page 9


The Office Of The
Representative Of The
Auditor General, PC
By DR. NICOLAS P. CABAYA
Examiner II


It was a luminous page in the history of
our Philippine Republic when the bright moonlight of Democracy was again beaming in our
midst and the twinkling stars of peace and rest
were dancing gloriously in the meadow of freedom and equality. The sound of guns and
bombs had sunk beyond the horizon of disorder, war.
The Office of the Representative of the
Auditor General in Camp Crame, Quezon City,
was conceived and it came to life in the early
part of the year Nineteen Hundred and Forty
Eight. The Auditing force of the Philippine
Constabulary was originally formed by nine (9)
promising, vigorous men. These were Messrs.
Jose Amoyo, Vicente Abella, Pedro Bigasin, Luis
Natividad, Arsenio San Pedro, Guillermo Ringor, Fausto Aguinaldo, Monillas and Yacapin
Then, Mr. Pedro Mejica and Mrs. Pelayo got
in. This small group of auditors made a good
start and handled the work efficiently.
In the month of March of the following
year, 1949, the poor and humble writer was
included in the list and afterwards followed by
Mr. Apolinario O. Orillo our brilliant Assistant
Auditor for more than five years now. Before
the close of that same year, there were more
than thirty members of this unit. Not long
after and because of our constant cry for help,
Mr. Guillermo Matienzo who was flanked by
Mr. Carlos Ramirez and Mr. Rene Estrella came
to assist us.
Many appointees of the Philippine Constabulary Command followed us and among these
are the ever sweet living memories of Mr. Benicio Deacosta, Mrs. Juanita F. Garcia, Mrs.
Corazon O. delas Llagas, Miss Jovita Rubio,
Mrs. Esperanza Madridejo, Messrs, Isaias Leonidas, Eliseo S. Reyes, Sotero R. Macalalad,
Mrs. Felicidad Estrella, Mrs. Miguela P. Azcarate, Mrs. Araceli O. Simbulan, Mrs. Lilia S.
Espeno, Mr. Gaudencio O. San Gil and Mr. Romeo L. Santos. Last, but not the least, is no
other than the person of Mr. Felicisimo B. Villanueva, an Examiner I, who is in-charge of the
post-audit section. He is a big-hearted man,
kind and generous to the poor and a true
friend of all.
With the expansion of work and responsibility there was also augmentation in our personnel. Services, in varied forms, were extended
with utmost courtesy to all whether of low or
high degree.
In the army, men come and go and likewise, employees of this Office join and then


move out. Those, who could not endure the
scorching heat of hardship and misfortune and
thought they could no longer survive with us,
sought transfer or rather resigned.
As watchdogs of our government, the public servants of this force question, approve and
disapprove payments of claims according to
their knowledge and honest beliefs. They do
the inspection of deliveries of supplies, materials and equipments. They perform the delicate task of examining the cash and accounts
of accountable officers. They also limit the
amounts of cash of officers authorized to hold
government money. Besides these, they do
other odd jobs,
About two months ago the scythe of separation suddenly torn from us Mr. Sostenes M.
Babasa, a gallant young man of honesty and
patriotic ideas and ideals. He was succeeded
by Mr. Tomas Sebastian, a man of high respect and regard.
With new appointments every now and
then, our number has soared to 47, our actual
strength. All the members of the RAG PC,
including Atty. Bienvenido R. Villanueva and
Mr. Jose de Chavez are concientious workers,
loyal to the Office they belong and to their
Chief, Mr. Tomas Sebastian. It is prayed that
they remain so until they take their sweetest
repose in the verdant sleep of the everlasting
rest.


Page 10


MARCH-APRIL, 19


No human being could fail to be deeply
moved by such a tribute as this (Thayer Award).
Coming from a profession I have served so long
and a people I have loved so well, it fills me
with an emotion I cannot express. But this
award is not intended primarily to honor a personality, but to symbolize a great moral codea code of conduct and chivalry of those who
guard this beloved land of culture and ancient
descent. For all hours and for all time, it is an
expression of the ethics of the American soldier,. That I should be integrated in this way with
so noble an ideal arouses a sense of pride, and
yet of humility, which will be with me always.
Duty, honor, country: Those three hallowed
words reverently dictate what you ought to be,
what you can be, what you will be. They are
your rallying point to build courage when courage seems to fail, to regain faith when there
seems to be little cause for faith, to create hope
when hope becomes forlorn.
Unhappily, I possess neither that eloquence
of diction, that poetry of imagination, nor that
brilliance of metaphor to tell you all that they
mean.


They give you a temperate will, a quality
of the imagination, a vigor of the emotions, a
freshness of the deep springs of life, a temperamental predominance of courage over timidity,
of an appetite for adventure over love of ease.
They create in your heart the sense of wonder, the unfailing hope of what next, and the
joy and inspiration of life. They teach you in
this way to be an officer and a gentleman.
And what sort of soldiers are those you are
to lead? Are they reliable? Are they brave? Are
they capable of victory?
Their story is known to all of you. It is
the story of the American man-at-arms. My estimate of him was formed on the battlefield
many, many years ago, and has never changed.
I regarded him then, as I regard him now, as
one of the world’s noblest figures; not only as
one of the finest military characters, but also
as one of the most stainless.
His name and fame are the birthright of
every American citizen. In his youth and strength,
his love and loyalty, he gave all that mortality
can give. He needs no eulogy from me, or from
any other man. He has written his own history


Country
Duty, Honor
Address by GENERAL MACARTHUR at the
US Military Academy, 12 May 1962


The unbelievers will say they are but words,
but a slogan, but flamboyant phrase. Every pedant, every demagogue, every cynic, every hypocrite, every troublemaker, and, I am sorry to
say, some others of an entirely different character, will try to downgrade them even to the
extent of mockery and ridicule.
But these are some of the things they do.
They build your basic character. They mold you
for your future roles as the custodians of the
Nation’s defense. They make you strong enough
to know when you are weak, and brave enough
to face yourself when you are afraid.
WHAT THE WORDS TEACH
They teach you to be proud and unbending
in honest failure, but humble and gentle in success; not to substitute words for actions, not to
seek the path of comfort, but to face the stress
and spur of difficulty and challenge; to learn to
stand up in the storm, but to have compassion
on those who fail; to master yourself before you
seek to master others; to have a heart that is
clean, a goal that is high; to learn to laugh, yet
never forget how to weep; to reach into the future, yet never neglect the past; to be serious,
yet never to take yourself too seriously; to be
modest so that you will remember the simplicity of true greatness, the open mind of true wisdom, the meekness of true strength.


and written it in red on his enemy’s breast.
But when I think of his patience in adversity, of his courage under fire and of his modesty
in victory, I am filled with an emotion of admiration I cannot put into words. He belongs to
history as furnishing one of the greatest examples of successful patriotism. He belongs to
posterity as the instructor of future generations
in the principles of liberty and freedom. He
belongs to the present, to us, by his virtues and
by his achievements,
WITNESS TO THE FORTITUDE
In 20 campaigns, on a hundred battlefields,
around a thousand camp fires, I have witnessed
that enduring fortitude, that patriotic selfabnegation, and that invincible determination
which have carved his statue in the hearts of his
people.
From one end of the world to the other, he
has drained deep the chalice of courage. As I
listened to those songs (of the glee club), in memory’s eye I could see those staggering columns
of the first World War, bending under soggy
packs on many a weary march, from dripping
dusk to drizzling dawn, slogging ankle-deep
through the mire of shell-pocked roads; to form
grimly for the attack, blue-lipped, covered with
sludge and mud, chilled by the wind and rain,
driving home to their objective, and for many,
(Continued on page 29)


 


Page 11


Care Of The Human Dentition
By Capt ROMEO C. CASTRO DS (PC)
1105th PC Dental Dispensary, HPC


Author’s Note: This is the first of a series which
will serve as a guide for future
reference.
Due to the tremendous increase in population, the world today is confronted with vast
and intriguing problems. Scientists from different parts of the globe have made steady progress in eradicating a considerable number of
the most devastating ones, making civilization
relatively contented. Life, our most treasured
gift from above, can now be prolonged with the
advent and discovery of wonder drugs.
In the field of Dentistry, however, records
are now available of the success attained in the
conservation of the human apparatus (teeth)
so much so that more and more are now seeking dental treatment.
Before we go any further let us first discuss in brief the normal human dentition, in order to understand well the matters to be considered. The deciduous or milk teeth are twenty
in number and the permanent are thirty two.
These are divided according to shape and position in the dental arch into incisors, cuspids
(canines) bicuspides (premolars) and molars.
Below are the data for a normal eruption
of the deciduous and permanent dentitions.


CHRONOLOGY OF THE HUMAN DENTITION
By LOGAN and KRONFELD


Eruption


Central incisor


6- 8 mos


Lateral incisor


8-10 mos


Cuspid
Deciduous or


16-20 mos


First molar


12-16 mos


Milk Teeth
Second molar


20-30 mos


Central incisor
Permanent


7- 8 Yrs.


Teeth
Lateral incisor


7- 8 Yrs.


Cuspid


9-10 Yrs.


First bicuspid


10-12 Yrs.


Second bicuspid


11-12 Yrs.


First molar


6- 7 Yrs.


Second molar


11-13 Yrs.


Third molar


1721 Yrs,


There are considerable individual variations
in the time of eruption of both deciduous and
permanent teeth on account of the fact that
these are affected by:
1. Geographical Location
2. Social condition
3. Race
4. Sex
S. Habits
Other variations in eruption of teeth are
premature eruption and delayed eruption. Premature eruption of permanent teeth occurs be

cause of early extraction or loss of the temporary ones. Delayed eruption of one or two teeth
may affect the entire dentition. This may be
due to developmental disturbances, or delayed
loss of the deciduous teeth (milk teeth).
W
Role of diet on the teeth.
Kronfeld in his book, stated that only
growing teeth can be influenced by dietary
means. When the tooth structure, like the enamel, is being formed, a well balanced diet rich
in minerals and vitamin D is necessary to insure
proper calcium supply to the body and to the
developing teeth. A nutritionally sound diet is
of course desirable and necessary throughout
life to give all body structures and tissues all
their needs. Severe illness during life, such as
measles, whooping cough, scarlet fever, bronchitis, pneumonia, severe gastrointestinal disturbances, and general debility may disturb the
calcium metabolism enough to cause gross defects in the teeth. Kronfeld stated further that
importance in the treatment of the structural
defects in teeth is prevention. Careful and systematic health supervision, proper treatment of
all diseases during infancy, correction of nutritional deficiencies, therapeutic and prophylactic administration of phosphorous, vitamin D,
plenty of sunshine and fresh air contribute a lot
in the prevention. Lately, however, the incorporation of sodium flouride in the drinking water can eliminate structural defects in the teeth.
 Since the calcification of the permanent
teeth takes place entirely after birth the responsibility for prevention of dental caries rests in
the hands of the pediatrician. Mothers are, therefore, advised to refer this matter to their family
doctor to get the maximum benefit.
An important advice to parents is to keep
their children throughout the childhood period
without loss of the permanent teeth, except for
some unavoidable circumstances like accidents,
for this has a vital bearing on the development
of the jaws. Mothers should at all times keep
the mouth of children in the best condition inorder that home care may be most effective, as
it is during childhood where susceptibility to
dental caries is greatest. Mothers, therefore,
should be given supplementary roles in home
care of the baby’s teeth. Home care should
start as soon as the baby has a tooth and the
cleaning should be done at least 3 times a day.
At the age of 3 the child should be taught to
do brushing alone under careful supervision
until such time when the child has acquired the
necessary skill and later on forming the habit
of regular tooth brushing. If the child has formed the habit, time will come when the child will
appreciate the beauty and he will not forget the
habit of cleaning, but under no circumstance
should home care be entrusted to the child to
his 3rd birthday.
Sometimes mothers are compelled to ask
question as to when their child should visit a
(Continued on page 24)


Page 12


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


The Medico-Legal Responsibility
Of AFP Medical Officers
By Major MIGUEL G ZARRAGA MC (PC)
Chief, Medico Legal Branch,
PC Central Laboratory


The Medical Officer has manifold obligations
and responsibilities, many of which practically
everybody is familiar with. But there is one
neglected phase which I would wish to lay emphasis on — The Medico-Legal responsibility.
Sec. 2, Art. III of the Code of Medical Ethics
as sanctioned by paragraph 12, Sec. 24 of the
Medical Act of 1959 (RA) 2382 reads thus:
“It is the duty of every physician, when
called upon by the judicial authorities to assist
in the administration on matters which are medico-legal in character.
Doctors should therefore be ever aware and
conscious of their medico-legal responsibility.
Specially so is this duty important to medical
officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.
A lawyer came to me one day and said: "You
know, doctor, I have just discredited an expert
medical witness, a lady doctor, who I cross-examined in a physical injury case.


“How were you able to do that?” I inquired.
Well, she examined the case and reported
that the victim had incurred bruises in different
parts of the body. So I asked her what bruises
are and she replied that they are abrasions. She
did not know what she was talking about. I asked the honorable court for permission for her
to refer to the definition of "bruise’ in the medical dictionary which I handed to her. The definition is not abrasion but rather contusion. She
turned the pages forward and looked up the definition of contusion. She was nervous by this
time. She lost her equanimity when she saw the
definition of contusion — it is a bruise."
That lady doctor should not have lost her
balance under such questioning. In the first
place, she was the one who actually examined
the victim. She could have easily explained that
what she saw were abrasions, generally abrasions
are accompanied by some degree of contusion,
especially the impact type. In the second place,
she must have actually found abraded contusions and so state, and these definitely are bruises
to laymen. Even the definition in the complete
unabridged Webster’s International Dictionary
admits of this.
No wonder some doctors hesitate to handle
medico-legal cases and testify as medical expert
witnesses. They feel as if they are being put to
an ordeal. Often, the reason one gives is that too
much of his time and effort is wasted whether or
not he is a busy practitioner, but the real reason
is that he is in constant... and sometimes in
mortal fear of the cross-examiner, not realizing
that the cross-examiner is, and should have more
reason to be, in fear of the medical expert witness. Many do entertain this attitude because of
some feeling of inadequacy in their knowledge of
the medico-legal aspects of cases.
However, much of this fear and apprehension can be overcome if the doctor will not shirk
his responsibility, and should try to continue to
learn some basic knowledge about the forensic
aspects of the cases he handles in his practice.
But before we proceed further, the first
query to answer is: Why is there a need for general practitioners to have at least a working
knowledge of forensic medicine?
The reason is: “It is the duty of every physician when called upon by the judicial authorities to assist in the administration of justice on
matters which are medico-legal in character.
(Sec. 2, Art. III of the Code of Medical Ethics of
the Medical Profession in the Philippines as
sanctioned by par. 12, Sec. 24 of the Medical Act
of 1959 (RA 2382).
And not only that, it is the obligation of
every physician to "keep abreast of the advancement of medical science and contribute to its
progress.” He should be "upright, diligent,
sober, modest and well versed in both the science
and the art of his profession. (Secs. 22 & 23,
Art. IV, Code of Medical Ethics) And forensic
medicine is part of that science.


 


Page 13


The importance of the role of the physician
in medico-legal cases may be underscored by the
following story which I have heard related in
one symposium. There was once a man who had
a pending court suit seeking damages by reason
of a vehicular accident. A friend asked him:
"Say, can you already walk. He answered:
“Well, I really don’t know what to tell you! My
physician says I can already walk, but my lawyer
insists that I cannot as yet!” Faced with such
conflicting positions, how can the judge be able
to make a correct appraisal and adjudication of
cases involving medical aspects without the assistance of the doctor.
Let us now consider some fundamental and
practical points which may serve as guide for
the general practitioner on the subject of forensic medicine.
First point: While his role is to expedite in
every practical way the ends of justice, he should
never hastily jump at conclusions without considering first all available facts and circumstances.
A victim of shooting in the Calamba Sugar
Estate in Canlubang which we handled upon re
quest of the Rural Health Physician one Sunday
afternoon illustrates the necessity of possessing
some fundamental medico-legal knowledge and
of avoiding hasty conclusions, especially on the
part of government doctors. When we arrived,
the victim was about to. be interred, and the
Chief of Police who was investigating the case
informed us that another Army Major had already examined the body and had made out the
death certificate. He concluded that the different wounds on the body were produced by more
than one kind of firearm and that some slugs
did not pass out of the body. When we requested
him to show us the recovered slugs, we were
surprised to learn that the doctor never opened
up the body. We prevailed upon the Chief of
Police and the immediate members of the family
to defer the burial for about an hour to recover
any retained slug as reported, so as to obviate
any future necessity for exhumation should the
Court order the recovery of this material evidence. As expected, there was only one kind of
firearm involved, a high-powered one which produced small entrances and very large exits, almost the size of the palm, and no slugs were recovered from the body.
I am reminded of a worried husband who
called his doctor at 3:00 A.M. "Would you rush
over, my wife has appendicitis.” "Impossible,"
said the doctor reassuringly, "just give her carbonated soda and she will go back to sleep.
'‘But, Doctor, I tell you this is serious. Please
‘Now look — three years ago, I
come over.
operated on your wife and removed her appendix. Ever heard of anyone having a second appendix?” And the man replied: "Doctor, have
you ever heard of anyone taking a second wife?”
The lesson: Avoid hastily jumping at conclusions.
One particularly interesting and unusual


case is a death by strangulation of a middleaged matron, whose body was recovered from
the attic of her own house. The initial and immediate reaction of the investigation upon discovering the body was that she was murdered.
They were properly cautioned against making
such hasty conclusion without first considering
all discoverable facts and circumstances. After
considering all the findings and circumstances
of the case, such as absence of signs of struggle
in the surroundings and on her body, the material used in the construction of the ceiling
which was of asbestos cardboard, the statements
of the companions in the house, observations of
the victim’s behavior prior to her disappearance,
and others, and correlating these with the autopsy findings and the kind of knot employed
around her neck, the firm conclusion that the
case was a suicide was inescapable.
In the leading case of People ys. Palalon
(49 Phil. 177), the CFI conviction of the accused
was based upon the testimony of the doctor that
the cause of death was pulmonary congestion
which was directly attributed to the slapping incident barely two and a half days earlier as evidenced by the presence of ecchymosis on the
shoulders and back. This decision was reversed
by the Supreme Court which gave no order to
that conclusions of the young doctor who based
his opinion mainly upon the history given by the
immediate members of the family. The conclusions were considered mere guesses since the reported ecchymosis could have been the so-called
death spots" or "post-mortem suggillations, a
normal process observed after death, as the examination was done more than 24 hours later.
The Supreme Court warned: “It should be the
duty of the examining physician to exercise utmost care in the post-mortem examination (of
deaths under suspicious circumstances) and not
just draw an unwarranted conclusion from ex

THE PC IN FIRE PREVENTION. A plan to effect
maximum cooperation and coordination between the Camarines Norte PC, Daet police force and the Daet fire
department was adopted recently as a positive measure
in preventing and minimizing the occurence of fires in
the province’s capital. Photo shows PC men, local policemen and firemen doing a dry run in Daet.


Page 14


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


ternal appearances susceptible of different interpretations.
Second point: Keep in mind that medicolegal evidence should be as comprehensive as
possible without exaggeration. In the interest of
justice, one should at all times endeavor to make
a careful, painstaking, and detailed examination
of medico-legal cases.
A young attractive girl from Makati, Rizal,
incurred some injuries on her thigh, knees and
elbows as she stumbled while running away
from her assailant who struck her with a G.I.
pipe causing a hematoma on the thigh. Taken
to a government hospital, she was treated and a
certificate was issued by the attending resident
surgeon indicating that she incurred a hematoma on the left thigh. He estimated the healing period at 2 to 4 days but failed to take note
of the abrasions on both knees and elbows.
When she was taken to us for evaluation on the
third day, she was limping. Seen were a large
purplish swelling of the thigh which was tender
and warm to the touch, and the grased abrasions on both knees and elbows. The resident
surgeon made an unpardonable mistake. The
mistake was neither his failure to note the injuries on both knees and elbows, nor the erroneous estimate of duration of healing time,
but in locating the hematoma on the left thigh
when it was incurred on the right. Had the
error not been timely corrected, it could have
resulted in rank injustice, for the record of the
case would not conform with the actual facts,
and the court may give more credence to the
permanent hospital record than to the statements of the aggrieved party.
In another case, it was actually the medicolegal officer who failed. The attending government hospital surgeon disclosed that the victim
incurred stab wounds on the chest and freshly
abraded and cut areas on both hands. The vic
tim died two days later but the medico-legal
necropsy report failed to include those injuries
on both hands, signs of which could not have
mysteriously disappeared in two days time. The
autopsy surgeon was remiss in his duty as this
finding was very material to the defense of the
case, and could have defeated the cause of justice, had it not been for the hospital record of
the case.
One of the most frequent flaws in the conduct of a medico-legal examination is performing an incomplete autopsy. A PARTIAL AUTOPSY IS ALWAYS A MISTAKE IN A MEDICO-LEGAL CASE. We should therefore always
endeavor to make the examination as complete
as possible.
Often times, the finding of a coronary condition of sufficient extent to account for the
death is the reason for the premature termination of a medico-legal autopsy. No matter how
extensive a coronary disease is, it would be obvious that the possibility of death from injury
or poisoning is not thereby excluded.


There is the case of a victim of shooting in
a Western Visayan province which was autopsied in the provincial hospital where the pathologist made estimates of the diameter of the entry gunshot wounds. The reported measurements were so large they could approximate
holes produced by 105 mm projectiles. Actually
the gun used in the killing was a .22 caliber pistol. The other victim in this shooting incident
survived and was operated on at one of our private hosiptals from whose body .22 caliber slugs
were recovered; furthermore, the exact measurement of the diameter of the entrance holes corresponded to the caliber of the slugs recovered.
In a case presently confined in one of our
hospitals, the attending doctor of a shooting victim with a shattered femur officially replied that
he could not help the investigator in establishing what caliber bullet produced the thigh
wound. He could easily have given assistance
had he not failed to measure the diameter of the
wounds. This is particularly important in this
case because at the time the wound was incurred, two enlisted men fired shots at the suspected pilferer; one was armed with a 445 caliber
pistol and the other with a .30 caliber carbine.
(Continued on page 25)


 


Page 15


Polaris. Gy
conctante
en el. pra


taforma de is sa
como "aa.


cana
actuagda cohete eata listo a
salir disparado instantancamenic.
BE


En caso de un ataque sof
que pasaria a bordo del (
Supongamos
A
ta en viaje norr
tiemplo a cien


Iurquia. Comd
s sumergido,
encuentra, exceR
de la Marina y.)
uas amagas, ningy
o de rocimicnN
a podiocalizarlong
ipo elecel mel
marino
ible. I
e mas
ideri
ciosaaccid
potaend


persons lacking in requirements for age, education, moral and physical fitness, and civil service
eligibility. About 752% of the 16,000 members
of our city and municipal police forces throughout the country today do not possess civil serv
ice eligibility of any kind. The principle of
“Who-you-know” rather than the standard of fitness is the criterion for appointment. The usual
process designed to determine qualities of leadership such as evaluation and testing for physical, emotional, ethical and mental qualities are
almost non-existent.
The responsibility of conducting qualifying
examinations at regular intervals for police aplicants who meet the requirements for age, education, moral and physical fitness is lodged in
the Civil Service Commission. As to why police
qualifying examinations have not been regularly
conducted for the past few years, the people are
entitled to know. Normally, lists of eligibles are
regularly furnished to the mayors as basis for
appointing police personnel. The local civil authorities may not be blamed for appointing noneligibles in the absence of eligibility lists, however, the age, education, moral and physical fit

Professionalism ls The Answer
To Our Police Problems


By Capt. ARCADIO S. LOZADA
Instructor, Philippine Constabulary School


Inefficient organization, lack of training,
lack of protection of tenure, political meddling,
inadequate compensation, obsolete equipment
and methods, among others, characterize the
problems and deficiencies of our local police departments in the country today. With few exceptions, the administration of the city and municipal police forces in the Philippines leavemuch to be desired by any recognized standard.
While there is no panacea for police problems and deficiencies, yet, definite steps can be
undertaken to improve and strengthen the police
service in the country in the light of changes taking place in the technology of police work. One
such bold step is to professionalize the manag
ment of the police through proper methods of
selection, scientific training, protection of tenure, adequate compensation, and the firm and
impartial enforcement of the laws of the land
against those who would violate them regardless
of secial, economic or political standing.
The first yardstick of measuring professionalism in the police service is the existence of a
standard selection procedure strictly adhered to.
While the national law requires that police personnel be employed from civil service lists, this
law is flagrantly violated by a great number of
our local authorities who continue to employ


ness qualifications of applicants should be considered before they are finally appointed. There
standard selection procedure if professionalism
is to be achieved in the police service.
The second yardstick of measuring professionalism in the police service is a high standard of training possessed by the members. Once
the proper individual has been chosen and appointed it becomes necessary to train him in the
execution of his duties. It is a sad fact that a
great majority of our police personnel at different levels have very little or no training at all.
It is not amiss to state that because of political
interference, many police personnel who received training from the Philippine Constabulary, NBI and local training schools were separated from the service faster than their replacements could be trained, thus resulting in
the unsatisfactory service to the public. Great
deficiencies are found in the following phases of
training in majority of local police forces:
(a) Inadequate training for newly recruited personnel. Some police departments do not have
any training program for the recruits whatsoever; (b) No form of practical training program
is maintained, like roll call training and the practical field training geared to a formal preplanned
program; (c) Virtually unknown is advanced in

Page 16


MARCHAPRIL, 1963


service and specialized training, where needed,
of detectives, juvenile officers, traffic personnel,
and the like; (d) Sadly neglected is refresher
is a compelling need for adhering strictly to the
training for serving police personnel at regular
intervals during their police careers; (e) Found
wanting is the training of administrators, superier officers, and police instructors; and (f) Little
or no provision has been made for the building
of police libraries for group subscription of professional police publications, and for financially
supporting and administratively encouraging the
attendance of police officers at the meeting of
professional societies.
To standardize the training of the police recruits and other police personnel throughout the
country, it is well to establish regional training
schools where police experts from the PC, NBI,
and the local police departments can join efforts
in giving scientific instructions. What is needed
is necessary legislation appropriating funds for
the purpose and defining the administrative direction of these regional training schools by
proper police agencies.
England has a unique way of providing
standard training for her policemen. Training
centers for police recruits are operated in eight
districts of the country, and the law requires a
successful completion of a three-month course
before an individual is appointed as probationary constable. Continuation courses are usually
given during the two years’ probationary service.
There is also a Police College offering six months
junior courses for Sergeants and Junior Inspectors, and also courses lasting three months for
Inspectors and Chief Inspectors. Short courses
for Superintendent and Chief Superintendents
are also arranged in the Police College. It is well
recognized by both the police and public administrators that satisfactory service to the public
cannot be rendered by untrained police officers,
hence, the necessity of establishing regional training centers and a National Police College to
achieve this training objective in a continuing
basis.
The third yardstick of police professionalisn
is the adequacy of protection of tenure. Lack of
career opportunities and inadequate protection
of tenure are stumbling blocks to securing the
best possible men for jobs in the police department. As previously stated, political interference
only hampers the proper selection of qualified
police personnel, but in the case of promotion,
political meddling is more pronounced. This
may be attributed to the absence of a preplanned
promotional procedure. There have been no civil
service examinations specifically designed for
grades higher than that of patrolman. Promotions in many local police departments are often
rewards for political servitude. This practice is
an utter disregard for the police personnel, the
police department, and the welfare of the community. Cases in point are several cities and
municipalities with chiefs of police whose ten

ure of office is dependent upon the whims and
fancies of the appointing authorities. One city
in the south has 16 chiefs of police in 1o years.
This anomalous situation can be remedied by the
Civil Service Commission with the giving of promotional examinations at regular intervals to
deserving and qualified personnel of all ranks
including the chiefs of police. In this way, the
protection of tenure can be assured.
The fourth yardstick of measuring police
professionalism is the adequacy of compensation
given to the police personnel. Our policemen are
about the lowest paid group of employees in the
Philippine government today. Where can you
find a government employee whose salary scale
ranges from P1.00 to P9.00 monthly. It is only
in the police department. Unbelievable yet it is
true. In a certain town in Samar in 1957, the
chief of police was ridiculously paid P1.25 per
month while his policemen received P0.83. The
overall average salary for the 16,000 local police,
is approximately P50.00 per month. There is
only one salary figure for each grade regardless
of ability or length of service. The so-called minimum wage law is just a misnomer as far as
the police are concerned, except for some big
cities and municipalities. This rather pitiful situation of our policemen deserves serious consideration by our national and local authorities.
Standardizing their salary according to the
classes of cities and municipalities with financial
grant from the national government is an ideal
plan. England has the most practical salary
plan for her police forces. The national government extends financial grants to the local police
forces as much as 5090 for police operations and
salaries on the condition that the police force
is certified as efficient by the Inspectors of Constabulary who are sent out regularly to inspect
the police forces. This salary plan if applied in
the Philippines will undoubtedly provide incentive and thereby improve the morale of our law
enforcement officers.
Another yardstick of measuring professionalism in the police service is the firmness and
impartiality exercised by the police in the enforcement of the laws. This yardstick is rather
dependent upon the other yardsticks mentioned
above. In the cities and municipalities where
the policemen are properly selected according to
standard selection procedure; where the policemen are scientifically trained as to their duties
and responsibilities; where the policemen are
given adequate protection of tenure without political interference; and where the policemen are
adequately paid, the citizen can expect an efficient
and economical enforcement of their laws, and
the resultant security in their well-being, lives,
liberties and properties. The people should pay
for the price of professionalism in the police
service for it is the answer to our perennial police problems and deficiencies.
On the other hand, police professionaliza(Continued on page 22)


 


Pag


The Process Of Police Organization Planning
By Major PACIENCIO S. MAGTIBAY


Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION
1. A WELL PLANNED ORGANIZATION — A KEY
TO EFFICIENCY
Organization is as old as society itself. It started
even before the dawn of history when man began to
seek the company of people of his choosing, either for
some social purposes or for his own self-preservation. He
believed that he, standing alone, had little chance of
surviving the numerous battles in life in the face of his
rapidly changing world. From this modest association
started what is known today as organization.
But as the pattern of human endeavors grew more
and more complicated, the need for a more and more
stable and well-coordinated organizational way of life became vividly felt. It became a necessity in the general
scheme of life. This is not only true in social groups,
but also in any political, cultural, economic, and religious
organization.
PHi
The process of organization, however, is not a simple straight-forward process. There are numerous variable factors which tend to complicate it. One of them
is the rapidly changing cultural behavior of people who
compose the organization, as they become more and more
educated. These varied behaviors produce numerous interactions within the organization which tend to undermine its efficiency and economy in operations. To stabilize the situation, organization managements started
to improve their systems procedures. They even supplemented these with intensive in-service trainings and
rigid personnel selection programs. While it is true that
they contribute to a large degree, in enhancing the efficiency and economy in operations, it should be considered, however, that it is the organization structure that
provides the framework upon which the administration
and operational activities of any agency is built. If this
framework is weak, the resulting systems and procedures
will also be weak. A good organization structure may
not guarantee a good system, but definitely a poor organizational pattern will not produce any effective and
desirable result (1:13). In other words, a good organizational framework holds the key to efficiency and economy.
This statement concerns more police agencies wherein the administrative and operational activities are becoming more and more complicated and highly sensitive.
Perhaps no other arm of the government is more subjected to critical attacks from various segments of society than this agency, because of the nature of its responsibilities. In most instances, such criticisms were
true. In many areas, the police is still considered as the
weakest member in the governmental family. It still
lags other public services in standard of efficiency and
performance (2:5). It is still struggling today to be at
par with them both in efficiency and public confidence.
In this struggle, a good organization planning will greatly play an important role in paving the way toward the
attainment of that end. How well the police agency is


organized, coupled with the extent to which its performances meet the need of the people it serves, are matters
of paramount importance.
II ORGANIZATION PROBLEMS
Before the inception of the Industrial Revolution,
tradition time and methods study had avoided problemsolving tasks and dealing with the aspects of human behavior (4:14). The management people contended that
the work was separable from man. The task was more
important since labor was in surplus and therefore it was
the duty of the worker to adjust himself to the job (3:47).
Workers were given less motivation, little appreciation
in solving intra-organizational conflicts of interest, limited participation in the information-suggesting processes, and limited role in decision-making (4:33). In
short, man was merely being used as an instrument of
production (5:1).
But the advent of the machine age tremendously
revolutionize the human way of life. Its impact brought
about drastic changes in the cultural, social, and economic bearing of the people. Workers started to demand
for more and more recognitions of their rights, and greater respect for human values (3:8). This change, in turn,
produced a chain reaction in organizations of all forms
because people spend much of their time in them. Some
deviations from the old traditional concept of organization became inevitable to meet the pressing demand.
This compelled, therefore, organization management to
search for an ideal organization pattern that will be in
harmony with the changing cultural and social values
of the people. The efforts led to some new ideas which
when applied minimized many organizational conflicts.
However, no pattern has yet been devised that can solve
the numerous and varied pathological organization problems.
While many organizations and entities of the government are rapidly assimilating the new organizational
ideas, the progress in the police field is lamentably slow.
A great majority of them still continue to function according to the patterns laid down several decades ago.
Many police executives still cling to the so-called oneway authoritarian relations and still look down upon the
members of their forces as human machines. One reason for this is that they believe that these new ideas
may not apply to police service because the latter were
originally postulated for industrial enterprises. Secondly,
since the preservation of discipline in the police organization is of paramount importance, they feel that if
they totally absorb the same, it may adversely affect
the effectiveness of the force. And lastly, many of them
simply close their eyes to realism, believing that the best
method is always the tried method. These presumptions
are baseless and mere products of imagination.
III PURPOSE
The purpose of this work is intended not to totally
disregard the classical theory of organization. Organizational development is still in the infant state and researches in this field is still in progress. No scientific


Page 18


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


arrangement has yet been evolved that can satisfy the
numerous and variable organizational problems in all
situations. Besides there are still many of the traditional practices that are too useful in the police service
to be totally discarded.
Fundamentally, organizations are formed when a
group of people, no matter how few their numbers are,
associate with each other for the attainment of a common objective. From this statement, it can be deduced
that there are two processes involved: first, the use of
the organization as a process by its members, and secondly, the manner by which they perform their tasks to
attain the common objective. This work is concerned
primarily with the organization as a process, that is the
study of its internal structures. Obviously, this will involve considerations of people and tasks.
The succeeding discussions will still follow the features of the organization as an hierarchy. However, attempts will be made to rationalize some of the new organizational ideas which may be of value in the police
service. It will also attempt to discuss the step-by-step
process of organization structuring to facilitate easy
understanding of its mechanics. The presentation of the
process is made as simple as possible because this material is intended to be used as a guide by the local police forces in the Philippines where steps are now being
taken to improve their efficiency.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Norman N. Barish, Systems Analysis For Eftec

tive Administration . New York; Funk & Wagnalls Co.,
1951
2. V.A. Leonard, Police Organization and Management . Brooklyn : The Foundation Press, Inc., 1951
3. John N. Pfiffner and Frank P. Sherwood, Administrative Organization . Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1960
4. James G. March and Herbert A. Simon, Organizations . New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1958.
5. John N. Pfiffner, Organization — The Study of
Hierarchy. Los Angeles: University of Southern California Bookstore, 1957.
6. James D. Mooney, The Principles of Organization . New York: Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1947.
Chapter II
POLICE ORGANIZATION PLANNING
I. THE PURPOSE OF ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE
Since man differ in nature, capacity and skill, and
gain greatly in dexterity by specialization; because man
cannot be at two places at the same time; because one
man cannot do two things at the same time; and since
the range of knowledge and skill is so great that a man
cannot, with his life span, know more than a small fraction of it (1:3-6), therefore, it becomes necessary to
work out an arrangement to resolve these problems involving time, motion and distance. This arranging process is, in effect, organization. This may be accomplished by dividing the work, allocating them to those
working together as a group, and developing singleness


Induction of NAGPROP Officers and Directors recently by Secretary of National Defense, Macario Peralta
Jr. Left to right: Navy Lt. Fernando Edralin - Auditor,
Mrs. Helen del Rosario - Treasurer, Lt. Col. Luciano I.
Gunabe - President, Ramon Romero - Director, Jose Giron
-Director, Jose Pascual - Director, Zosimo Falcis - Direc

tor, Pedro Tuazon . Executive Secretary, Federico Azcarate - Directior, Efrain Carlos - Director. Not shown
in picture: Esmeraldo de Leon - Vice-President, Benjamin Alcantara - Director, Regino Giagonia - PRO,
Antonio Clemente -Liaison Officer, Casimiro Aviso -
Director.


 


Page 19


of purpose in their minds so that each will fit his task
into the whole with skill and enthusiasm (I:3-6). In
pther words, it is fitting together individuals and their
tasks as productively as possible (2:246). Without this
arrangement, there will result chaos and confusions. It
will not only lead to inefficiency, but also lower morale,
and propagate human dissatisfaction.
Organization differs from management in that the
latter is a function concerned in the execution of policies
within the limits set up by the administration and the
employment of the organization for the particular object set before it. Likewise, it differs from administration in the sense that the latter is a function in an
enterprise concerned in the determination of policies, coordination of the productive efforts, structural organization, and the ultimate control by the executive. This
means that organization planning is merely a portion of
the administrative function.
II MEANING OF TERMS
Organization. It is the pattern of ways in which
large number of people, too many to have intimate faceto-face contact with all others, and engaged in a conscious, systematic establishment and accomplishment of
mutually agreed purpose (3:30).
Organization Structure. This is the overall plan of
relationships of jobs, people to people, and things to
things. The relationship between jobs is ordinarily pictured on the organization chart by means of lines. If
these lines are black and unbroken, they indicate superior-subordinate or “command" relationship. If the
lines are broken, the relationship is of a different nature:
perhaps functional; perhaps staff; or perhaps merely informational (4:12). This structure is sometimes called
the formal organization or the official structure.
Social Structure. This is a set of relationships between the people as distinct from the jobs which supplement the formal structure. It is also called the informal
organization (4:12-13).
Hierarchy. This is essentially the structural concept in which jobs, positions, processes, and procedures
are arranged in levels of status. It is concerned with
operations and things as distinguished from people. It
is established on the basis of duties, activities and tasks.
There are various types, namely: (1) job-task hierarchy;
(2) rank hierarchy; (3) skill hierarchy; and (4) pay
hierarchy (3:66).
Line Functions. These are the functions that an
agency is primarily called upon to perform. They are
sometimes called the primary or operational duties. In
police work these functions include: (1) patrol; (2)
crime investigation (3) traffic control; (4) vice control;
and (5) juvenile-crime control (5:22).
Administrative Functions. These embrace the tasks
of management which facilitate and make possible the
effective accomplishment of the line and auxiliary functions. It may be divided into operational administrative
duties and managerial duties (5:24-25).
Staff Functions. These functions embrace only
those duties performed by a staff officer who, in contrast to a line officer, exercises no direct authority over
operating or line personnel (5:26). The staff is merely
informative, advisory and supervisory body.
Auxiliary Functions. These are services to the operating or line personnel that aid them in the performance of their duties. It is sometimes called secondary


or service functions (5:23-24).
Coordination. This is the orderly arrangement of
group efforts in order to achieve unity of action in pursuing a common purpose (6:5).
Line of Authority. This is the black line on the
organization chart which represents the official will of
the organization. It indicates the channel through which
the authority delegated by the executive flow down to
the lowest level. It is, also, the channel through which
the communication normally flow.
Span of Control. This represents the number of
persons that a person supervises.
Chain of Command. This is a series of levels of
authority connected by a chain of unbroken line.
III GUIDING PRINCIPLES IN ORGANIZATION
STRUCTURING
Organizations of all kinds, ancient and modern, are
described by many historians, but little effort has ever
been made to compare and trace from them a common
pattern (6:2). This is because organizations are composed of people, not things, and therefore it is difficult to generalize and isolate principles that are applicable to all organizations at all times. However, examinations of the past and present organizations of industrial
and commercial interprises, the armed forces, and public
offices reveal some common practices that have been
proven to be workable (7:65). Some of these guiding
principles are:
1. Every function of the organization should be
assigned to a unit of that organization.
2. The responsibilities assigned to each unit should
be clear cut.
3. Responsibility for a function should be matched
by the authority necessary to perform that function.
4. The authority and responsibility for action
should, to the greatest extent possible, be decentralized
to those actually performing the operation.
5. Unnecessary duplication and overlapping should
be avoided.
6. The number of personnel reporting to a supervisor should not be more than what can be effectively
coordinated and directed.
7. Throughout the organization, each member
should know to whom he reports and who reports to
him.
8. No member of the organization should be responsible, administratively, to more than one supervisor.
9. The organization should never be so elaborate as
to hinder work accomplishment.
10. The number of levels of authority should be
kept to a minimum.
11. In deciding whether to centralize or decentralize, the performance of service and planning functions,
the economy of mass specialized operations and the elimination of duplication of functions must be compared
with the reduction of communication and paper work
costs, the reduction in time cycles, the increased flexibility, and the greater unity of control and responsibility
possible under decentralized operations (8:2).
12. Uniform methods, policies and procedures, in
clear, simple and understandable manner, should be installed.
(Continued on page 23)


Page 20


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


Biographical Sketch of
COLONEL JOSE C. MARISTELA
Chief, CIS, HPC
By AUREL R. PERLAS
ASst PRO, CIS
WON
“I shall restore to the CIS its pre-war prestige and pledge to make it a well-organized
crime-fighting machine dedicated to the people’s welfare .
These were the first words of Col. Jose C.
Maristela when he assumed command of the CIS
on January 10, 1962. The same words found
meaning six months later as Colonel Maristela,
true to his pledge, has during that brief span
of time, virtually restored the CIS to its pre-war
prestige.
How did Colonel Maristela do this? The
answer lies in his dynamic and commanding personality and unquestionable character worthy
of emulation. First, he saw to it that the organization is rid of all undesirables, and then instituted reforms, many of them never before implemented by previous CIS chiefs.
A bemedalled officer, having received more
than 18 awards and decorations, Colonel Maristela graduated from the Philippine Military
Academy and commissioned third lieutenant
on March 15, 1941. His first assignment was as
junior officer of the Combat Company of the
Ist Infantry, 1st Regular Division. He was promoted to second lieutenant on September 28,
1941 while he was student officer at the Philippine Army Infantry School in Camp Murphy.
After his graduation two days later, he was assigned with the office of the District Commander, 2nd Military District, Camp Ord, Tarlac.
He was commanding officer of the Headquar

ters and Headquarters Company, Headquarters
2nd Military District, in Camp Ord at the out
break of the war. After the fall of Bataan in
April 1942, he joined Barker’s Guerrillas as intelligence officer and later as executive officer
of the San Juan unit of the same organization,
which position he held up to December 1942.
The following month he joined Straughn’s Guerrillas as intelligence officer, which position he
held up to July 1943.
In August 1943, he was directed to organize
10
a guerrilla unit in Central Luzon, particularly
in the province of Tarlac and its vicinity and
was appointed the regimental commander of
said unit known as the 1st Tarlac Regiment,
which position he held up to May 25, 1946. His
unit was later recognized by the U.S. Army with
a recognized rank of colonel.
As regimental commander of the Ist Tarlac
Regiment, Colonel Maristela, then sporting the
guerrilla rank of colonel, participated in the liberation of Pangasinan, Tarlac, Nueva Ecija and
Lubang Island in Mindoro. He also secured the
supply lines and routes of the U.S. oth Army
in Northern and Central Luzon.
Colonel Maristela’s guerrilla promotions
were meteoric. He was promoted 1st lieutenant in June 1942, captain in January 1943, major
in June 1943, lieutenant colonel in July 1943
and a U.S. recognized rank of colonel in March
1945.
On May 26, 1946, he returned to military
control and reported for duty at the 2nd Replacement Battalion in Camp Murphy, Quezon
City. On July 18, 1946, he was placed on duty
with the Headquarters 22nd Infantry, Philippine
Army, and later transferred to the Ist Battalion,
63rd Infantry, in Bukidnon. He returned to
the Headquarters 22nd Infantry on September
8, 1946. On October 1, 1946, he was designated
adjutant and personnel officer of the Ist Battalion, 22nd Infantry and later as regimental intelligence officer of the same unit.
On July 15, 1947, he was sent to the United
States to study at the Infantry School in Fort
Benning, Georgia. Upon his return on January
21, 1948, he was designated instructor at the
Philippine Ground Force School in Floridablanca, Pampanga. He became acting battalion
commander of the Ist Battalion, Infantry Training Group, Philippine Ground Force, on July
16, 1949.
On September 1, 1949, he was designated
chief of the Information Branch, Military Intelligence Service, AFP, which position he held up
to August 16, 1950 when he was placed on duty
with the AFP operations division in Camp Murphy.
Colonel Maristela’s guerrilla rank of colonel was gradually reduced to captain upon his
return to the regular army on August 31, 1946.
His promotion which was only temporary was
made permanent on October 7, 1947. He was
promoted to temporary major on February 12,


 


Page 21


1951; made permanent major on July 3, 1951;
temporary lieutenant colonel on November 25,
1955; made permanent in 1956, and full-fledged
colonel on December 22, 1960, which was confirmed by the Commission on Appointments on
May 17, 1961.
Colonel Maristela was designated operations
officer of the 20th BCT on September 14, 1950;
was transferred to the operations division of the
Philippine Army Training Command in Ft. Wm.
MCKinley, Rizal, on July 10, 1951; commanding
officer of the Infantry Training Unit, PATC, on
January 1, 1952; executive officer of the PC operations division in Camp Crame on February 1,
1953; commanding officer of the 6th BCT on
January 4, 1954; commandant of the Philippine
Constabulary School in Camp Crame on March
1, 1957; provincial commander of Mountain Province on June 1, 1957; provincial commander of
Rizal on September 1, 1957; commanding officer
of the 20th BCT on December 9, 1957, and student officer of the Command and General Staff
School in Fort MCKinley, Rizal on July, 1958.
Upon his graduation from the CGSS on December 20, 1958, he was designated personnel
chief of the Philippine Army and later as head of
Research and Evaluation at the CGSS.
In 1959, he was also sent to Australia to
observe personnel and administration procedures of the Royal Australian Army. The following year, he was sent as a government pensionado to the United States where he took up
courses in personnel management and man-po
wer control at Indianapolis, Indiana. Upon his
return, he was named head of the Department
of Infantry Division before he was named by


Maj. Gen. Ralph Butcher, (right) United States Army
Provost Marshal General, was given a fill-in on the organizational set-up, missions and accomplishments of the PC
criminal investigation service during his courtesy call
recently at the CIS in Camp Crame.
The foreign provost marshal general, who is currently on inspection tours of all provost marshal offices
of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, was also briefed
on the CIS fruitful campaigns against smuggling, carnapping, vices and lawless elements by Lt, Col. Vicente
Alhambra, CIS deputy and executive officer, in behalf
of Col. Jose C. Maristela, CIS chief.
Gen. Butcher was accompanied during his call at the
CIS by Lt. Col. A. Leliman of JUSMAG; and Col. Jose
Regala, chief of the PC traffic control group.


Brig. Gen. Nicanor D. Garcia, AFP deputy chief
(then acting PC chief), as CIS chief on January
10, 1962.
On August 14, 1962, Colonel Maristela was
sent to Bangkok, Thailand, as a member of the
Philippine Delegation to the 16th Meeting of
the SEATO Committee of Security Experts
(CSE). He returned on August 29 of the same
year.
Colonel Maristela is happily married to the
former Matilde Co with whom he is blessed with
four children. The family resides at No. 17 Capitol Drive, Pasig, Rizal.


PROFESSIONALISM (Continued from page 17)
tion cannot be achieved without the necessary
administrative and legislative sanctions of the
government, both national and local. There ia need for the Civil Service Commission to discharge its functions of giving qualitying exaninations regularly for police applicants so as to
maintain a pool of engible ali throughout the
country, ana also to establish a preplanned promotional procedure for career development in
order to give adequate protection of tenure for
the police personnel. The local authorities
shouid cooperate with the Civil Service Commission in these regards. To insure the efficient
organization, administration and discipline of all
local police forces, there is a great need for the
promulgation of new police rules and regulations. The State Police Regulation of 1938 is,
in most cases, inapplicable and obsolete in the
light of social changes and new inventions which
brought about new police problems, whose solutions require new methods, techniques and procedures. The law (CA 343 implemented by Executive Order No. 175 in 1938) authorizes the
Chief of Constabulary to prescribe rules and regulations governing administration and supervision of local police forces with the approval of
the President, therefore, the news that the draft
of the police rules and regulations will soon be
out, is most welcomed by all concerned. Legislations are indeed necessary to implement plans
to standardize the training and salary of our police forces.
A professional approach by the police, assistance and guidance from the appropriate public agencies, enactment of necessary police legislations, and a continuing intelligent public interest in the support of the police, will, within a relatively short period, raise the standards of our
local police forces. No real progress in law enforcement can be made until such time as the
general public and the government insist upon
professional management of their police agencies
through proper methods of selection, scientific
training, protection of tenure, adequate compensation, and the firm and impartial enforcement
of the laws of the land. Professionalism is indeed the real answer to the police problems and
deficiencies in the Philippines.


Page 22


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


The Process of Police .
(Continued from page 20)
III. PLANNING THE ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE
The Police Goal.
Social groups are not merely aggregates of persons,
but groups of people who live and work together as
social units. Each member, in his actions, takes into
account what he considers to be the expectation of others,
and he, in turn, expects others to act toward him in the
most desirable way. These mutual expectations define
the so-called social pole which establish social relationships. In such relationships, each member has a definite
reciprocal rights and duties which are regulated through
social norms, sometimes referred to as standard way of
acting (9:4-7).
However, since social groups consist of individuals
possessing varying personality and attitude patterns, the
standardization of the social norms become an onerous
process. Some of these diverse personalities and attitudes find disapproval because they tend to disrupt the
functional relationships of the people. This problem is
further magnified by: (1) the diversification of culture
in society as a result of rapid urbanization; (2) the introduction of various forms of vice; and (3) the economic
maladjustment brought about by the technological developments which are rapidly outpacing the economic and
social changes. The most undesirable by-product of these


social maladjustments is criminality.
Society, therefore, formulated various norms of social conduct, in the forms of laws, and created systems
of social control, to safeguard its welfare, stability and
progressive existence. Among the numerous public services created, the police agency plays the most dynamic
role. It is this entity that enforces the law and maintains peace and order in society. This is its broad objective.
ESTABLISHING THE JOBS NECESSARY
TO ACHIEVE THE POLICE GOAL
With the police goal already determined, the next
step in the planning is to determine the jobs necessary
to accomplish this goal. In this process, all conceivable
tasks should be mapped out. It shall include, among
others, tasks designed for: (1) the protection of life
and property; (2) preservation of peace and order; (3)
protection of the members of society against harmful
acts, both willful and inadvertent, of criminal as well as
the non-criminal class; (4) enforcement of the various
laws, ordinances and regulations; (5) protection of the
citizens against immoral conducts (5:2); and (6) services
to the community and other government agencies. In
addition to this wide field of subjective activities, a detailed outline of the different administrative and service
tasks necessary to facilitate the execution of the abovementioned responsibilities must be worked out. These
latter tasks are called adjective tasks. They include:


THE DRIVE-WHEEL TIRE GED DESIENED FDR


MILEALE


AMOTONBAAES
ORIGINAL TREAD OUTIEARS A REGULAR PLUS A RECAP


FLATTER, THICKER TREAD
COOL-RUNNING TREAD
COMPRESSED TREAD
TREAD DESIGN


NYION SHOCK SHIELD


B.EGcodrich Philippines, Inc.
P. O. 8o1 ₱19. Manito


 


Page 23


(1) personnel administration; (2) planning; (3) policymaking; (4) inspectional supervision; (5) budgetary control; (6) operation and maintenance of facilities and
equipment; (7) public relations; (8) jail administration;
(9) operation and maintenance of police records; (10)
criminal identification service; (11) police laboratory
service; (12) communication service; and (13) such other
services that may be necessary to enable the operating
units to accomplish their tasks successfully.
The manner and extent of determining the jobs necessary to accomplish the police goal are important because they influence not only the type of organization
structure to be planned, but also the extent of specialization to be prescribed.
(To be Continued)


Care Of The Human Dentition.
(Continued from page 12)
dentist. In the opinion of the author a child
should have his first visit at the age 3, for this is
the most logical time for a child to have his
first dental appointment. The average visit of
4 times a year is necessary until the child reaches
the age of o thence 3 times during childhood
period, after which 2 times a year is sufficient
The frequency of visit to the dentist should
not be overlooked for this will help in the further management of the child, thus making cooperation between patient and dentist a better
one.


Compliments of


G. Afable Storage Battery


207 A. Bonifacio St., Quezon City


MANUFACTURER:
QUALITY PHILBAT
BATTERIES
For Trucks-Cars-Marine
Tel. 2-22-65


Another factor which we dentists wish to
impress to both children and parents is the
importance of conserving the temporary teeth.
This matter is very important in order to avoid
irregularities in the eruption of the permanent
ones. If the temporary teeth are neglected the
symmetry of the face of the child is in danger
and may bring about a serious defect in the
facial expression of the child.


Juvenile Delinquency
(Continued from page 9)
to do. In the absence of a probation agent, a
social worker, or a "visiting teacher", if the boy
was a student, an experienced police officer
could have provided the probation services. Reports of investigation with corresponding judicious recommendations by competent juvenile
workers are excellent bases for court action. It
would have been ideal if a pre-sentence investigation was provided prior to any court action.
The importance of an investigation which
generally includes a thorough study of the juvenile—his physical, mental and emotional development—cannot be overemphasized. Appropriately, the investigation should also include a
study of the delinquent’s environment, including his familv, home conditions, and associates.
A Basic Problem?
Another problem on juvenile delinquency
prevention and control may be typified by the
following: In a police administration course
conducted by the Philippine Constabulary
School for chiefs of police and other lower-ranking police officers from various police departments of the country, a police chief frankly revealed that he had the misfortune of not being
able to get the cooperation of his mayor, the
judge, and worst of all, the parents of a boy
who has been apprehended several times for
having repeatedly committed vandalism, petty
thefts, robbery, and other misdeeds. The father
of the boy in question belongs to the top hierarchy of the municipal government and of the
ruling party of the town. The police chief was
prevailed upon by the powers-that-be not to
make a referral at all.
In this particular case, the most proper disposition would have been a referral to the court
since any petition could be well supported to
warrant such action. Further, a pattern of delinquent acts has been established by the experienced police officer. But the delinquent
boy was an "untouchable , and he could not be
referred to anyone including his parents.
Causes of Juvenile Delinquency?
The foregoing is ample evidence to prove
that some causal factors of delinquent behavior
of juveniles can be attributed to the failure of
parents to (1) build the character of their children beginning at pre-school age, (2) supervise
and guide them whenever possible, and (3)
make them feel wanted. Juvenile investigators,


Page 24


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


however, should not be attached to the oversimplification of the whole problem. There is
never a single explanation acceptable as to why
or how a juvenile becomes a delinquent or criminal. Nevertheless, dedicated and specialized
investigators can provide more convincing answers. In the field of causation, haphazaro
guessing should never be indulged in. Because
of varied individual experiences, even the experts become attached to their own particular
study and declare that they have hit the jackpot and the means of crime prevention so
thought of is advocated as the only panacea.
Disposition and Services
It is highly imperative that a wiser disposition of the two aforementioned cases be done
inasmuch as the individuals involved are no
longer in their state of latent delinquency, Predispositions to their misbehavior have become
manifested and most likely their misdeeds could
be repeated because some conditioning factors
seemed to have evidently played a great influence in their lives. The outlet of their instabilities could be the same. Above all, such factors as their personalities, their homes, schools,
and communities need thorough investigation.
At least these areas of involvement must be protected from these individuals. One way of
achieving this end is to subject the serious
youthful offenders to treatment and undergo
re-education in appropriate institutions for the
purpose of completely altering their personalities in order to become worthy members of
society again.
Role of the PC in Juvenile Delinquency
As the national law enforcement agency of
the Philippines, the Constabulary occupies a
vantage position in the prevention and control
of juvenile delinquency. In law enforcement,
the individual and crime are central. If we
deal with the individual—since crime is always
associated with the individual—what better
place to start crime prevention than with the
juveniles, the children who first begin to manifest the tendency to commit crime in their formative years, for it is the concensus that most
juvenile delinquents become the hardened adult
criminals.
The Constabulary has taken some determined steps to prevent juvenile delinquency.
However, no expert guidance has been provided
to Constabulary personnel involved in this
technical field on account of inadequate preparation and facilities to meet the demands of
the problem. If there has been an arrangement whereby a section at Headquarters Philippine Constabulary had assumed the responsibility of responding to the demands calling for
the solution of the juvenile malady, the move
along this line could hardly be considered suffficient to cope with the complexities and intricacies generated by the problem. A separate
technical office or section adequately prepared
to tackle such a continuing nationwide problem would come in handy. It is imperative that
 


instead of complacently relying on one certain
section with multifarious duties, one distinct
unit should devote its full time to so technical
a field of endeavor as juvenile delinquency prevention and control. A separate Juvenile Control Office on a special staff section level in
HPC is evidently the pressing need of the day.
Such an important office would more adequately satiate the needs attendant to the important role the Constabulary must undertake
in the nationwide effort to prevent and control juvenile delinquency.
Functions of the Juvenile Control Office
Activities such as the folowing are appropriate to be undertaken by the Juvenile Control Office: (1) Expert advice to the Chief of
Constabulary on all matters pertaining to juvenile delinquency, (2) formulation of plans and
policies governing the activities and operations
of the Philippine Constabulary to curb juvenile
delinquency, (3) staff supervision of all activities and operations of the Philippine Constabulary to prevent and control juvenile delinquency, (4) conduct of special studies, research
and surveys relating to the prevention of juvenile delinquency and youth crime, (5) preparation and conduct of orientation and in-service
training courses for all assigned and prospective juvenile officers of police departments in
the Philippines, (6) coordination and liaison
with all public and private agencies involved in
the prevention and control of juvenile delinquency, (7) collation and maintenance of nation-wide records of arrests of minors and compilation of reports, case studies, crimes—their
extent and nature—of juvenile delinquents, waywardness of minors and offenses by minors
together with their disposition, (8) assistance
in the establishment and operation of juvenile
units of local police departments, juvenile halls,
detention homes, and youth camps, and (9)
study of juvenile laws and their implementation and drafting of proposed legislation to
bolster the nationwide effort to prevent and
control juvenile delinquency.


The Medico-Legal
(Continued from page 15)
When referred to us for evaluation, we simply
measured the wounds and computed their diameter and found that the diameter of the entrance wound was too small to have been produced by a 445 caliber bullet, leaving the probability on the carbine shot. The simple knowledge of what “caliber” is the firearm will generally enable one easily to be of assistance, in
cases of this nature, to criminal investigators.
(Discuss caliber" at this point.)
Third point: Be ever aware of the objective of the medico-legal examination.
For example, in conducting medico-legal autopsies, one should keep in mind that it can furPage 25


nish information that may be essential in establishing the identity of the dead person, the time
of death, the circumstances in which the fatal
injury was incurred, the type of weapon or
agent employed, factors which may have predisposed the victim to injury, the identity of the
person or persons responsible for the same, the
relative position between the victim and the assailant, and whether or not a recovered weapon
was planted. A case in point is a Novaliches
case, a victim of hanging whose body was recovered 10 days after his reported disappearance
during which time it had been exposed to the
elements and roaming animals, identity was positively established only through the fingerprints.
Recovery of any slug which may have been
retained in the body is most important to establish identity of firearm from which fired.
GUBRAZAL case, Pampanga.
There is that case we exhumed in an Iloilo
town a few months ago. The report of the Chief
of Police indicated that the victim was drunk
and must have accidentally fallen off the railroad bridge into the murky waters below. And
yet, the medico-legal report of the hospital pathologist who performed the autopsy disclosed
various injuries on the face and extremities
with a finding that cause of death was drowning, but no mention was made of the nature of
the stomach contents nor any indication as to
the state of sobriety of the victim which could
have cleared up the drinking angle. Later developments in the investigation tend to show that
the victim was not drunk and was mauled by
four men before the body was thrown over the
bridge.
Fourth point: We can not overemphasize
the fact that while we maybe presented as prosecution or defense witnesses, we are neither
witnesses in favor of the prosecution over the
defense. We are primarily witnesses in the interest of science and of truth. As such we should
REMAIN NEUTRAL AND UNBIASED IN OUR
OPINIONS AND GIVE THE SAME ONLY AFTER A CAREFUL CONSIDERATION OF ALL
GATHERABLE FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES.
The important concern of the physician
whose assistance is sought in the administration of justice is not so much in being instrumental in the placing of the guilty behind bars
as in the setting free of the innocent. We have
often heard it said that it would be much preferrable to allow ten (10) guilty men to remain
free, than to send one (1) innocent man behind
bars. In one case, a person was arrested and
charged with killing another by means of stabbing with a knife. Two witnesses pointed to
him as the assailant. The rural health officer,
who autopsied the case, placed as cause of
death: "Severe hemorrhage due to a stab wound
on the chest.” Grapevine information reached
the ears of the Provincial Commander that the
victim died from a gunshot wound. He lost no


time in wiring us to exhume the body from
which we recovered a bullet in the left thorax
which pierced through the right arm, and into
the chest, fractured a rib and grazed a thoracic
vertebra. In this case, a careful study of the
holes produced on the clothing of this victim
could have easily indicated to the doctor the
impossibility of their having been produced by
a knife.
Needless to say, the incarcerated suspect
was set free, and the culprit who turned out to
be policeman was properly charged. It was also
established by ballistics examination that the
recovered slug was fired from the gun of the
policeman. But the case did not end there. Iunderstand that there are many complications that
have set in this particular case, which may involve the doctor.
Fifth point: One should avoid all pretensions of knowledge or learning but instead
should continuously try to learn and acquire
added knowledge, for in the words of Dr. E.
Grey Dimond, the former President of the American College of Cardiology, a good physician is
the "result of his continuing lifetime education
.. and a medical education lasts forty years,...
not four.” This standard applies to all aspects
of medical practice.
Before he gives out an opinion, if asked by
the court, he should be certain that he knows
the subject matter under inquiry, and that the
information he is giving is scientifically sound.
A CFI judge called a reputed forensic chemist
for assistance in an immigration case wherein
another expert opined that the result of the
blood paternity test done in the case does not
exclude the child as a possible offspring of the
couple. I can not help but observe that the reputed expert being consulted was ignorant of
the subject matter when he erroneously informed the judge that it is easy to determine whether
a child is excluded as a possible offspring...
just determine the blood types of the parents
and the child... if his blood type is not that of
either the parents, then he is excluded as a possible offspring. This, of course, is definitely
false and misleading.
(Discuss blood paternity test)
Sixth point: Never be unduly influenced by
the history given by either the complainant, relative, or others. This is specially true in chastity cases.
A lo-year-old girl, accompanied by her
mother, alleged that she was forcibly abused
sexually 8 days before, by a nephew of a suburban mayor. Upon arrival of her mother from
the province, she was brought to us for examination. There were several bruises in various
parts of her body and legs. After the detailed
medical examination, we requested the mother
to stay some distance away while we re-interviewed the girl. We confronted the girl with
our findings that her injuries could not have


Page 26


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


been incurred 8 days earlier as they were freshly inflicted, and she readily admitted that they
were inflicted by her own mother upon learning
about what happened to her. She was actually
seduced, not raped.
There was that Balic-Balic case of a 23-year
old widow, who allegedly was raped the night
before by a 17-year old "canto boy” under threat
of death with a knife. According to her, she
was sound asleep when she felt someone beside,
threatening to kill her if she should resist his
advances. After accomplishing his lewd design,
he left via the window through which he ap
parently gained entrance. Very early the next
morning, the boy returned offering her a bottle
of fresh milk and a piece of ham sandwich
which, in her anger, she threw to the ground.
She submitted the bottle of spilled milk and the
sandwich which was soiled with earth as evidence.
After completing the medical examination
of the girl, we re-interviewed her and told her
she was not telling the truth. She readily admitted that she mistook the intruder for her boy
friend, and did not offer utmost resistance for
fear her brother might wake up and harm him;
she became doubtful about the identity of the
man when the boy, upon departing, did not get
up the stairs of their neighbor where her boy
friend resides. Her suspicion was confirmed
when this boy came offering the milk and sandwich early that morning.


In the genital examination of alleged victim
of crimes against chastity, utmost care must be
exercised. A six-year-old girl claimed that she
was sexually abused by a middle-aged man in a
San Juan theater. On examination of the girl,
we found her to be so undeveloped physically
and virginal in state that it is incredible to believe her allegation that the man had actually
consummated the act. On the other hand, there
are some cases of women who have retained the
physical state of virginity after repeated sexual
experience.
One last advice in cases of examinations for
rape: In making out a report, one should confine himself to his actual findings in the report
and should not make any conclusion as to
whether or not rape was committed. That is
what the investigators will try to determine and
will much depend on circumstances and evidence taken altogether.
There are numerous other cases of interest
wherein the medico-legal findings gave the investigators the true lead as to the manner of
perpetration of the crime. In two cases, both
from Bulacan, witnesses claimed that the vic
tims were shot. On autopsy, one was verified
as a victim of depressed skull fracture with an
almost perfect piggy-bank hole produced by a
chisel, and the other by a heavy-bladed weapon
(a hatchet) inflicted from in front downward
and to the right, producing a complete oblique
fracture of the frontal, parietal and temporal
portions of the skull.
Seventh point: The employment of ELEMENTARY COMMON SENSE IS VERY IMPORTANT IN THE CONDUCT OF MEDICOLEGAL EXAMINATIONS. In a Pangasinan case,
which was initially autopsied by the rural health
officer, the doctor reported a gunshot wound on
the lower angle of the right jaw with an exit
on the front of the left jaw. He was inquiring
about how the bullet missed the mandible. Actually the presence of a depressed fracture or
hole in the mandible was very easily verified by
the introduction of a probe through it and following the tract produced by the bullet. He also
reported a gunshot wound of entrance on the
anterior aspect of the left arm with its point of
exit at its postero-lateral part. The reported
exit turned out to be an impact abrasion with
no opening and was very similar to another
mark on the left upper chest which was produced by a thrust with a butt of a rifle. A greatly deformed slug and three small pieces of bone
fragments were recovered from the deltoid. As
there was no involvement of the humerus, we remarked to the doctor that the jaw wound must
have been incurred with the head tilted to the
left and the left arm upraised, whereupon, the
investigator volunteered the information that the
victim was found lying on his left side with the
head resting upon the upraised arm. Then too
he reported a traumatic wound at the occiput
producing an oval-shaped hole in the skull, be

 


Page 27


cause he failed to establish any exit nor to recover any bullet. All we did was to see if there
was any crack on any part of the skull and immediately saw one at the base just left of the
foramen magnum, in which a greatly deformed
lead slug was tightly imbedded. And he also did
wrong when he made his incisions on the body
pass through the bullet holes making it most difficult to reconstruct their measurements.
We do not want to appear over-critical in
this case but only wish to emphasize the many
errors committed in a single case which could
have been avoided by the simple expedient of
employing elementary common sense.
One observation is pertinent to point out
in connection with gunshot wounds involving
the skull. We can not anticipate how the bullet will act when it strikes the skull. A little tilting of the head may result in widely diverse effects. We had one case of a 445 caliber bullet
through the right ear, shot from a distance of a
few inches away, which passed through the mastoid, into the base of the skull and recochetting
around the base, the occiput and into the parietal area and lodging in between the cerebral hemispheres of the brain at the falx cerebri.
(Discuss distinctions between GSW entrance


and exist — De Guzman case, Amuck case, San
Fernando case)
Eighth point: On the matter of medical certificates, we should be very careful against makind false certificates as these are actionable
not only administratively but also criminally,
constituting as it does the crime of "Issuance of
False Medical Certificate punishable under Article 174 of the Revised Penal Code. The elements of this crime are: (1) issuance of a false
medical certificate; (2) such issuance is in connection with his practice; and (3) the physician
had knowledge of the falsity of the statements
contained therein at the time of its execution.
(U.S. vs. Remigio, 37 Phil. 599)
Exhumation of a case revealed a depressed
skull fracture which yielded an imbedded, greatly deformed lead slug in the victim who was
certified by the rural health physician in a town
in Quezon province to have died from coronary
thrombosis. It was established in this case that
the victim died three days after he was shot
accidentally by a nephew-in-law while hunting,
and that the doctor was requested to place
food poisoning" but instead entered “coronary
thrombosis" as the cause of death in the certificate.


Atty. Casimiro Caluag, Chairman of the committee which
framed the anti-smuggling primer, presenting to the Presidential Committee On Efficiency Performance (PRECEP) Chairman Eleuterio Adevoso the final draft of the
primer. From left: Atty. Eugenio Cruz, Asst. Chief, Legal Div. PRECEP; Atty. Maximino Allanigue. Chief Le

gal Div. PRECEP; Atty. Casimiro Caluag, Chief, Legal
Div., Bureau of Customs; Pres. Executive Asst. Eleuterio
Aldevoso: Atty. Jose Agcaoili, Dept, of Justice; Atty.
Victor Arches, Asst. Chief, PRECEP; Atty. Gaudioso
Abesamis, Legal Div. Bureau of Internal Revenue and
Major Buenaventura B. Fernandez, PC Representative.


Page 28


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


The issuance knowingly of any false medical certificate is also specifically cited in the
Medical Law (Par. 9, Sec. 24, RA 2382) as one
of the grounds for reprimand, suspension, or
revocation of the certificate of registration.
It is sad to observe that many medical practitioners take this criminal offense lightly. It
does affect the esteem, trust, and confidence of
the public in the profession as a whole. How
many of us have been approached and have issued medical certificates even without seeing the
examinee in connection with applications for
driver’s license? How many of us have issued
medical certificate for non-existing conditions to
support a sick leave or to justify failure to appear in court?
An accused in a criminal case out on bail
did not appear on the date of hearing before
the CFI in Quezon City and instead sent through
an emissary a medical certificate of a local doctor in Morong, Rizal, attesting to his failure to
appear on account of sickness. The judge ordered us to proceed immediately to the town
to verify and we found that the accused just
left that morning purportedly to attend the
hearing, without even informing the members
of the household about his alibi. Consequently,
he was held in contempt of court, and the doctor admonished.
Even if one escapes criminal liability since
proof beyond reasonable doubt is required in
such cases, still a physician may be administratively charged and found liable under the law,
because an administrative case requires only
preponderance of evidence to prove.
Before I bring this to a close, I would wish
to point out that among the manifold duties and
obligations of a doctor, the medico-legal responsibility requires some serious consideration.
Its growing importance and recognition is very
gradually being recognized not by the medical
but by the legal profession as well.
It is therefore essential that each and every
physician be conscious of his role in the solution
and elucidation of cases which involve medical
knowledge. He should be ever aware of the objectives of his medico-legal examinations. He
should not jump hastily at conclusions without
considering first all available facts and circumstances. Neither should he be unduly influenced
by allegations of witnesses or of the complainant
or his relatives.
Medico-legal evidence should be as comprehensive as possible. A partial autopsy is always
wrong in a medico-legal case. The use of elementary common sense is essential in the study and
analysis of medico-legal cases.
Most important to bear in mind, however,
if I may be permitted to quote Broardel, is that
“If the law had made you a witness, remain a
man of science. You have no victim to avenge,
no guilty or innocent person to ruin or save.
You must bear witness within the limits of
science.
 


COMPLIMENTS
OF


HAP'S BATTERY SUPPLY
And
ELECTRICAL SERVICE
INSIST ON:
ECONOMICAL-DEPENDABLEHAP'S BATTERIES
FULLY GURANTEED
HEAVY DUTY.
Government Supplier
ALL OVER THE
PHILIPPINES.
WILFREDO J. HEREZ
General Manager
647 P. Herrera St.
Tondo, Manila


Duty, Honor, Country
(Continued from page 11)
to the judgment seat of God.
I do not know the dignity of their birth,
but I do know the glory of their death. They
died, unquestioning, uncomplaining, with faith
in their hearts, and on their lips the hope that
we would go on to victory.
Always for them: Duty, honor, country. Always their blood, and sweat, and tears, as we
sought the way and the light and the truth.
And 20 years after, on the other side of the globe,
again the filth of murky foxholes, the stench of
ghostly trenches, the slime of dripping dugouts,
those boiling suns of relentless heat, those torrential rains of devastating storms, the loneliness
and utter desolation of jungle trails, the bitter
ness of long separation from those they loved
and cherished, the deadly pestilence of tropical
disease, the horror of stricken areas of war.
SWIFT AND SURE ATTACK
Their resolute and determined defense, their
swift and sure attack, their indomitable purpose,
their complete and decisive victory—always victory, always through the bloody haze of their
last reverberating shot, the vision of gaunt, ghastly men, reverently following your password of
Page 29


duty, honor, country.
The code which those words perpetuate embraces the highest moral law and will stand the
test of any ethics or philosophies ever promulgated for the uplift of mankind. Its requirements are for the things that are right and its
restraints are from the things that are wrong.
The soldier, above all other men, is required to
practice the greatest act of religious training
sacrifice. In battle, and in the face of danger
and death, he discloses those divine attributes
which his Maker gave when He created man in
His own image. No physical courage and no
greater strength can take the place of the divine
help which alone can sustain him. However,
hard the incidents of war may be, the soldier
who is called upon to offer and to give his life
for his country is the noblest development of
mankind.
You now face a new world, a world of
change. The thrust into outer space of the satellite, spheres, and missiles marks a beginning
of another epoch in the long story of mankind.
In the five or more billions of years the scientists
tell us it has taken to form the earth, in the
three or more billion years of development of
the human race, there has never been a more
abrupt or staggering evolution.
We deal now not with things of this world
alone, but with the illimitable distances and as
yet unfathomed mysteries of the universe. We
are reaching out for a new and boundless frontier. We speak in strange terms of harnessing
the cosmic energy, of making winds and tides
work for us, of creating unheard of synthetic
materials to supplement or even replace our old
standard basics; to purify sea water for our
drink; of mining ocean floors for new fields of
wealth and food; of disease preventatives to expand life into the hundred of years; of controlling the weather for a more equitable distribution of heat and cold, of rain and shine; of spaceships to the moon; of the primary target in war,
no longer limited to the armed forces of an enemy, but instead to include his civil populations;
of ultimate conflict between a united human
race and the sinister forces of some other planetary galaxy; of such dreams and fantasies as
to make life the most exciting of all times.
And through all this welter of change and
development your mission remains fixed, determined, inviolable. It is to win our wars. Everything else in your professional career is but corollary to this vital dedication. All other public
purposes, all other public projects, all other public needs, great or small, will find others for
their accomplishment; but you are the ones who
are trained to fight.
THE PROFESSION OF ARMS
Yours is the profession of arms, the will to
win, the sure knowledge that in war there is no
substitute for victory, that if you lose, the Nation will be destroyed, that the very obsession of


your public service must be duty, honor, country.
Others will debate the controversial issues,
national and international, which divide men’s
minds. But serene, calm, aloof, you stand as
the Nation’s war guardian, as its lifeguard from
the raging tides of international conflict, as its
gladiator in the arena of battle. For a century
and a half you have defended, guarded, and protected its hallowed traditions of liberty and freedom, of right and justice.
Let civilian voices argue the merits or demerits of our processes of government: Whether our strength is being sapped by deficit financing indulged in too long, by Federal paternalism grown too mighty, by power groups
grown too arrogant, by politics grown too corrupt, by crime grown too rampant, by morals
grown too low, by taxes grown too high, by extremists grown too violent; whether our personal liberties are as thorough and complete as
they should be.
These great national problems are not for
your professional participation or military solution. Your guidepost stands out like a tenfold
beacon in the night: Duty, honor, country.
You are the leaven which binds together
the entire fabric of our national system of defense. From your ranks come the great captains
who hold the Nation’s destiny in their hands the
moment the war tocsin sounds.
The long, gray line has never failed us.
Were you to do so, a million ghosts in olive
drab in brown khaki, in blue and gray, would
rise from their white crosses, thundering those
magic words: Duty, honor and country.
PRAYS FOR PEACE
This does not mean that you are warmongers. On the contrary, the soldier above all other
people prays for peace, for he must suffer and
bear the deepest wounds and scars of war. But
always in our ears ring the ominous words of
Plato, that wisest of all philosophers: “Only the
dead have seen the end of war."
The shadows are lengthening for me. The
twilight is here. My days of old have vanished
tone and tint. They have gone glimmering
through the dreams of things that were. Their
memory is one of wondrous beauty, watered by
tears and coaxed and caressed by the smiles of
yesterday. I listen vainly, but with thirsty ear,
for the witching melody of faint bugles blowing
reveille, of far drums beating the long roll.
In my dreams I hear again the crash of guns,
the rattle of musketry, the strange, mournful
mutter of the battlefield. But in the evening of
my memory always I come back to West Point.
Always there echoes and re-echoes: Duty, honor,
O7
country.
Today marks my final roll call with you.
But I want you to know that when I cross the
river, my last conscious thoughts will be of the
corps, and the corps, and the corps.
I bid you farewell.


Page 30


MARCH-APRIL, 1963


LETTER TO THE EDITOR:


Department of Public Works and Communication
BUREAU OF POSTS
Manila


A


Lt. Col. Wm. C. Silliman
President
Col. Alejandro Suarez
2nd Vice President


Lt. Col. J. L. Cochrun
1st Vice President
Lt. Col. H. H. Elarth
Secretary-Treasurer


PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY
Officers Association
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
P.O. BOX 4116
Norton Air Force Base
California, USA
April 2, 1963
Editor and General ManagerKhaki And Red (Educational Office)
Hda Philippine Constabulary
Camp Crame, Quezon City
PHILIPPINES


Dear Sir:
Please find enclosed my check in the
amount of $17.50 US currency in payment
of one year subscription to the publication
“Khaki And Red" plus air mail postage.
In the event said amount is insufficient
for the air mail postage please advise me
accordingly.
We the original officers of the Philippine Constabulary continue our interest in
the most unique military organization in
the history of our two Countries.
Yours truly,
(Sgd.) Wm C Silliman
WCS: as
President


Compliments of:


SWORN STATEMENT
(Required by Act 2580)
The undersigned MAJOR CONSTANTE MA. CRUZ editor of the
   published bi-monthly in English at Headquarters,
Philippine Constabulary after having been duly sworn in accordance
with law, hereby submits the following statement of ownership, management, circulation, etc., which is required by Act 2580, as amended
by Commonwealth Act No. 201:
Name
Address
Editor: Maj. Constante Ma. Cruz, TI g EO, HPC, Camp Crame,
Quezon City
Bus. Mgr. 8 Art Director: Capt. Jose S. Luna, PCCSP, HPC, Camp
Crame, Quezon City
Owner: Hdatrs. Phil. Constabulary, Camp Crame, Quezon City
Publisher Hdatrs. Phil. Constabulary, Camp Crame, Quezon City
Printers: Ricsons Enterprises,
349 10th Ave., Grace Park,
Caloocan City
Office of Publication: Hdatrs. PC, Camp Crame, Quezon City
If publication is owned by a corporation, stockholders owning
one percent or more of the total amount of stock:
Not Applicable
Bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders owning one
percent or more of total amount of security;
Not Applicable
In case of daily publication, average number of copies printed
and circulated in each issue during the preceding month of September
1962;
49
1. Sent to paid subscribers ..............
2. Sent to others than paid subscribers .... 2234


T ot a I


105


(Sgd.) CONSTANTE MA. CRUZ
Editor g General Manager
TI e EO, HPG
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this 26th day of March
1963 at Camp Crame, Quezon City, the affiant exhibiting his residence Certificate No. A-4142016 issued at Quezon City 6 February 1963.
(Sgd.) WILLIAM CHAVEZ
Captain, INF (PO)
Adm. O, TI g EO, HPC
NOTE: This form is exempt from the payment of documentary
stamp tax.
ACT 2580 REQUIRES THAT THIS SWORN STATEMENT BE FILED
WITH THE BUREAU OF POSTS ON APRIL 1 AND OCTOBER 1
OF EACH YEAR


Alpha Mutual Life Insurance Co.
Aloha Insurance & Surety Co., Inc


Tiaoqui Bldg.
Plaza Sta. Cruz
Manila


Connectin


ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES


1. EDICATE YOUR SERVICE TO GOD AND COUNTRY. Be inspired to render faithful
and selfless service secured in the belief that with Him the righteousness of the
country’s cause can be sustained.
H. A CKNOWLEDGE THE SUPREMACY OF CIVIL AUTHORITY. Imbue yourself with
the time-honored tradition that in a true democracy civil authority prevails over the
military.
III. AIVE WITH HONOR. Exercise your right of citizenship and discharge your burden of
government with honesty, integrity, and fidelity.
IV. ENOW YOUR PROFESSION. Seek self-improvement as there is no substitute for competence.
v. 100 RIGHT BY YOUR DUTY. Measure up to its requirements which bind you to your
official oath and which give substance and meaning to your uniform.


VI. 1 EAD. Set by precept and example the standard of correct decisive action. Have
the readiness to accept the responsibilities of leadership.
VH. 15 E STRONG IN THE FACE OF CONFLICT; HAVE THE COURAGE OF YOUR CONVICTIONS. Let this exacting demand steel you in the traditional stand of thel
Filipino soldier even when faced with overwhelming odds.
VIII.
S TAND FIRM AS AN EXPONENT OF DISCIPLINE. Endeavor to attain its highest!
state and instill it among your comrades in-arms.
IX. ENDER JUSTICE TO EVERY MAN. Be quick to praise and reward; be equally swifd
to censure and punish; but seek to understand the nature of human actions.
X.RACTICE TEMPERANCE. Conduct yourself with modesty and frugality, and observe moderation in your every act and desire.
XI. OSTER MUTUAL TRUST AND CONFIDENCE AMONG ONE ANOTHER. Remember
that the objective can be achieved only through unity and fraternity of spirit and
action.


2


EAR IN MIND AT ALL TIMES THATYOU ARE A FILIPINO. Do not betray youl


untry’s trust.


Printed by: RICSONS PRSS
E Ca
oth Ave., G. Pa
349


fice of the President
nf the Philippines


7


essage


I take pleasure in extending my greetings to the officers and enlisted
men of the Philippine Constabulary on the occasion of its olnd anniversary.
As it reaches its 6lnd year of existence, the PC can look back with
pride at its accomplishments. During the last six decades, it has proven
itself a reliable factor in promoting the peace and security of our nation.
As Commander-in-Chief, I take personal pride in the brillant record of
servico of its fighting men.
 On this occasion, I call upon the officers and enlisted men to uphold
the noble traditions of the Philippine Constabulary in order that they will
be able to bequeath to those who are to come after them the, same untarnished record of soldiery left behind by their predecessors. I also commend them for their achievements and look to the future with heightened
confidence in their ability to preserve peace in our land and to promote
the progress of our people.


JULYAUGUST, 1963


OFFICIAL JOURNAL
AND
GENERAL MAGAZINE
OF THE
PHILIPPINE
CONSTABULARY


WE BACK


THE S-YEAR SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROGRAM
OF
PRESIDENT MACAPAGAL


ILOCOS SUR TOBACCO INDUSTRIES
CORPORATION
BANTAY, ILOCOS SUR


DR. JAIME V. BAUTISTA
MANAGER


QUMBON


MbMoHer


THE EVENING NEWS O SATURD.
Che Euening Newa
Publlthed br the FAR EAST PUBLISHING CORPORATION
. FELIX B BAUTISTA, editor M JUAN C. TUVERA. Mtociate editor
ConreegRe.
MEMBERI PHILIPPINES BUREAU OF AUDITED CIRCULATION
E
a kalalakaa r 3s
aang ar oiha
Enaririats Waaatos san a,  an
uga dan a a an
a ng *
Edito
ond
a sa
   v1 2
NEETAI ENRN EI TACIMANEISANEMANILANE IRANEMAALANTRIGON
A newspaper may be forgiven for lack of knowladge
but never for lack of courage.
MEMADN


THE


RED


LN A
NI


toria
ED
Salute To A Brave Man
THE ANNALS of the Philipsoldier. They cannot begin to


pine Constabulary are aglow convey the appreciation that all
with the names of heroic men God-fearing, law-abiding citizens
doing heroic tasks. But there is feel for a man who risked his
no name more lustrous, more life so courageously so that the
deserving of acclalm, than that forces of evil and lawlessness
of Captain Diamongan Mangon. may be routed.


dato.
The captain led his gallant


band of PC soldiers in mortal
hand-to-hand combat against a
With gun and bayonet, the capIt was in recognition of his


heroism that Mangondato the
other day received the supreme
accolade. From no less than his
commander-in.c hief President
Macapagal, he was decorated
with the Gold Cross and the
Wounded Personnel Medal.
The medals, however, car


do not fully reflect the dedica.
band of fierce Muslim outlaws,, are heady words, but they alsc
tain and his men wiped out the tion to duty and the zeal than 
outlaws, killing fourteen of them, he and his men showed in the
gueble of batue.
All his life, Captain Diamon. Batg


" sepenbar l5
ana kanauana s
apt. Mangondato and his puny bang
men ordered to keep an outlaw band of
Muslim desperadoes out of the sitio faced their moment of truth. There Capt. Mangondato and his
men, attacked by the killer band armed with assorted weapons, covered themselves with glory,
standing up to a determined foe out to do or die.
PAll fourteen Muslim attackers were slain in bitter
alain.
Living true to the tradition of the P.C., Capt.
a aa ail.
funshot wound in the left hand and a bladed
feapon wound in the head. Unbeknown to many
sople was the fact that the gallant P.C. officer,
lng a reservist, was scheduled for reversion in s
weeks. He could have sought security behind
haalna
 to face the brunt of the attack, and thus
bized danger to his person in the twilight of
ice to country. He elected to lead the fight.
ng bang aia a aiatan kaanan


s but just and proper that such performance
na umna ga ana tana a aig nag
an aaia ba ba aang ang
gulgia ia tuaaa ang ana.
 aa aaila.
S


never adequately express the
and country owe to this brave forces have more like him.
M


gan Mangondato will bear the thej
scars of that epic battle. He d
suffered an ugly wound on the y
head, and his right arm was p
broken. But they will be, not t
scars, but a badge of honor earned in the service of his country.
We doff our hats in salute to
profound debt that the people a brave man. May our armed



The "Khaki and Red" makes its proud re-appearance
amidst a cavalcade of heroic events that brings fulfilled joy to the legion who follow the deeds of the
men in khaki and red.
We shall endeavor to chronicle accurately the RECORD of the Command as our predecessors have
done, never underplaying faults nor over-emphasizing
gains.
We shall assist the Chief of Constabulary in his duties
to Provincial and Municipal Police Forces and other
national agencies by giving the widest possible


dissemination to policies, new techniques, and other
media that may assist our forces for law and order
in serving the people. This obligation we assume in
order that the police officer in Batanes and in the
Sulu group would feel the affinity he should have
towards his Philippine Constabulary. To the officers and men and civilian component of the Command, to all provincial and municipal police forces
all over the country, to all lovers of peace and order,
we say, this is your magazine. May we merit your
trust and gain your patronage.


LSAR CIA


BRIGADIER GENERAL NICANOR D. GARCIA
Acting Chief of Constabulary
“The Record Speaks...



in taling them for granted in favor
5f distant people who are also taking us for granted.
Light and shadow
A
S
3
Law enforcers

. starting to perk
W
Roces
o sti


CONTENTS


Lt. Canuto’s Death Recalled.. Page 4
By Jose N. Halili
A Reappraisal of Our
Defense Concept .......... Page 8


By Lt. (9) Wilfredo D.
Viray, PN
Will Final Judgment on AW 96


and/or AW 97 Bar Trial
Before the Civil Court .... Page 14
By Major Buenaventura B.
Fernandez
Rep. Floro Crisologo, Soldiers"
Friend in Congress . ....... Page 18
Management of a Motor
Vehicle Fleet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 21
On Handwriting . . . . . . ...... Page 23
By Major Agapito Figueroa
The 8th APACL Conference .. Page 28
FIRST "  " SPECIAL
The Philippine Virginia Tobacco
Administration . . . ... . ..... Page 3-A
Balmaceda Explains Leaf
Import Policy . . . . . . . ....... Page 8-A
The Advantages of Early
Planting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 10-A
Our Flue-Cured Tobacco
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 12-A
Tobacco Council Reactivated. Page 14-A
New Future for PI Tobacco.. Page 15-A
Problems of the Virginia
Tobacco Export Trade . ..... Page 18-A


What They Say
.. . . in his nine-month trial period
as constabulary chief he has performed impressively, cracking down
on smuggling, vice, crime and dissidence.
“He has tight control over 15,000
officers and men....
—The Manila Daily Bulletin
October 10, 1962
“. . . . the latest raids in the suburbs
brought to 19,973 the number of
persons booked for gambling since
Brig. Gen. Nicanor D. Garcia, constabulary chief, stepped up the campaign against vices since January 1.
Booked for prostitution and vagrancy for the same period were
1,484 women, including the vagrants
in Las Pinas.
-The Manila Chronicle
September 16, 1962
... you can save space in your de

fense stories by removing the word
'acting’ every time you put down
Nick’s designation.
Secretary of National Defense
Macario Peralta Jr., to the
Defense Press Corps
"Brig. Gen. Nicanor D. Garcia,
who deserves an appointment as
permanent chief of the Constabulary
on the basis of his splendid allaround performance as its acting
chief, mace it clear to his men
that the purpose of the PC details
in strike areas 'is purely for the
maintenance of peace and order and
no PC soldier should show partiality
for either the management or the
strikers.
Ernesto del Rosario's "Off The
Beat" The Manila Chronicle,
October 11, 1962.


KHAKI &. RED


Page 3


A brother, Dr. Joaquin V. Canuto, Philippine National Red Cross administrative officer, told
in an interview with the author that if alive now Lt. Canuto is about o4 years old. The
late PC officer was born sometime in 1898 in Pili, Camarines Sur.
Lt. Canuto is the 17th of 25 children born to ex-Camarines Sur Governor Felix Modesto Canuto
and Juana Vida de Canuto. He took up primary and intermediate education in Pili Elementary
School and secondary education in Camarines Sur provincial high school in Naga, capital of
the province.
As a boy, the late officer was "exceptionally loyal to parents, friends, and teachers. He was
courageous, an average student and a stickler for anything he believes in," Dr. Canuto relates.
Even as a high school student, he was hired as a clerk for the principal during his third
and fourth years with a salary. At an early age he wanted to be in the service of his country
as a military man. After high school he applied for cadetship in the Philippine Military
Academy. But he was disqualified at that time for being underheight (5 feet and 1 inch).
He weighed 122 pounds, strong-built and muscular. After his PMA disqualification, Lt. Canuto
enlisted in the Philippine Constabulary as a buck private. A ranking American officer of
the PC, named Duckworth Ford, and Brig. General Rafael Crame (PC Chief 1917-27) took
special interest to build him up, based upon his exemplary showings during the shooting
incident in Manila between a group of PC soldiers and some members of the Manila Police
Department in December 1920.
Dr. Canuto, 20th of his 25 brothers and sisters, noted he resembles very closely his late
brother.
As a PC officer Lt. Canuto was assigned to almost all the provinces. He died at the age
of between 44 and 45 years.
MU. CGrtito S
DoSehe AeeCecctew
By JOSE N. HALILI, TI & EO, HPC


Japanese troops occupied Surigao province after the defeat of
the USAFFE forces on 9 May 1942.
They rounded up remnants of the
defeated units. Towards the last
week of July that year Lt. Canuto
was the only officer so far who had
not surrendered to the Japanese.
His identity and whereabouts, however, did not escape the pruning
eyes of the Japanese. Reports already had reached them from the
Mainit town officials that Lt. Canuto refused to surrender. He was
residing at his hacienda with his
settlers. (The hacienda is now
known as San Francisco, named
by the Mainit town council recently in his memory).
On Wednesday morning, 22 July
1942, Lt. Canuto asked one of his
trusted men in the hacienda, Felicisimo Diamola, to go to Barrio
Mansayao to buy fish. He instructed him to be on the look-out for


Japanese soldiers in the vicinity,
and to report to him if any. Seeing Japanese soldiers in Mansayao
when he arrived, Simoy (as Diamola is called) returned posthaste
to the hacienda and informed Lt.
Canuto that there was a party of
42 Japanese soldiers led by an officer, named Hachihara. The party
included a Japanese civilian interpreter named Kidoka, who was a
carpenter in Surigao town before
the war, and Mainit Police Chief
Agapito Montaner. The Japanese
had come down from a nearby gold
mine owned by the De la Ramas.
Lt. Canuto was then in pajamas.
Thereupon, Lt. Canuto bidded the
whole barrio to prepare a good
meal for the Japanese party, for he
said he would go and invite them
to visit the hacienda. He counselled
the womenfolk to hide "as the Japanese have a low regard for women."


Then off went Lt. Canuto on
his white horse to meet the Japanese at Mansayao. He was merrily
trailed behind by Simoy, Pedro Digamon, another trusted follower of
his, and some young men who took
pride to go with him anywhere as
before. Arriving at Mansayao before noontime, he immediately
started the amenities with the Japanese. He was busy speaking in a
friendly manner with a short, stubby officer when the conversation
was abruptly cut short by a query
of another officer, who appeared
to be the overall leader of the party. He was tall, husky and swarthy
for a Japanese. The officer asked
Mainit Police Chief Montaner,
through Kidoka, who the man on
the white mount was. Montaner
replied he was Lt. Canuto. Then the
Japanese officer added, as if to
confirm something he had learned
before, “So this is the Lt. Canuto,
of whom reports have reached me
that he is the only one who had
not yet surrendered to us." Promptly, the Japanese officer ordered him
to dismount and salute. But the
Filipino officer refused, growling,
“Why should I salute. I am also
an officer like you.” With their
known atrocities, the Japanese
dragged him down, badly spilling
him on the ground. Then Lt. Canuto pleaded, "Why do you do this
to me? I have helped some Japanese during my tour of military
duties in many ways. I have fairly treated them irrespective of
their race and nationality, like any
other human beings.” But the plea
fell upon deaf ears.
In the next few minutes the
Japanese herded them all inside
the ramshackle barrio chapel. Before the eyes of his followers, the
Japanese ordered him to bow.
Again Lt. Canuto refused. A big
Japanese soldier approached him
and pressed down his head to bow.
Instead, he squatted on the ground
without bowing. Japanese anger
soared to a new height. The soldier
got hold of a blunt object and
started beating him. Still Lt. Canuto would not budge. Then the Jap

Page 4


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


anese interpreter said, "Since you
refuse fo salute us, we will deprive you of your hands so you
could not salute any flag; we will
flatten them.” And the Japanese
started flattening his hands. After
a while, the Japanese turned to
his feet. "Since you refuse to bow
to us then we will deprive you of
your feet, so you will not stand
anymore on the ground we have
conquered," Kidoka logically stated. And the soldier bashed his feet.
Despite the torture, the prisoner
remained stolid. (His brother, Dr.
Joaquin V. Canuto, in Manila, stated
that this seemingly unbelievable
callousness to pain was evident in
his brother even at an early age.
This neurological phenomenon
could be found very rarely among
individuals).


Sensing what appeared to him as
an inescapable rendezvous with his
Maker in the next few days, the
PC officer haltingly said, "Simoy,
you pass to me all the blame. Defend yourself and help your brothers (meaning the settlers).”
It was already past noon. The
Japanese trussed him on top of
a bamboo slat on a boat that was
to ferry him across crocodile-infested Lake Mainit to the town
proper. The Japanese ordered Digamon to go with the prisoner.
The Japanese left Simoy behind to
go home to the hacienda to tell the
settlers what happened to Lt. Canuto. Some Japanese who were
left behind proceeded to the hacienda. On the way, the Japanese
party met one of Lt. Canuto’s
henchmen. Without any provocation, a Japanese aimed at the man
and fired, killing him on the spot.
The soldiers then proceeded to Lt.
Canuto’s house and set it on fire.
By nightfall the Japanese party
was back in Mainit, finding prisoner Canuto already in the town
jail, brought earlier by their companions. The whole night was a
terrible ordeal for the prisoner.
Early the following day, Thursday, the Japanese paraded the PC
officer around the town. He was
ordered to speak before a crowd
that milled around him. Lt. Canuto


One of the rare photographs of 1st Lieutenant Francisco V. Canuto, former PC officer,
reproduced from a treasured pre-war posteard-size picture now in the possession of his
followers in Barrio San Francisco, Mainit, Surigao del Norte. Note: painting was overdone
by reproducer—a silver bar and a silver star on the shoulder boards, PA buttons on the coat
lapels and the name "Major Lt. B. Canuto" all gone haywire. An actual check-up with the
original photo yielded a 99 per cent resemblance, Errors in rank and initial of his Christian
name were inadvertently made, tending to indicate the overwhelming zeal of his followers
to deify him. The followers rendered him almost all the appurtenances of the military service
at the sacrifice of accuracy and propriety.


said he was a soldier before the
war but that he did not abuse anybody. He said he only punished
lawbreakers. The crowd was told
by the Japanese, jeeringly, “This is
your Canuto.” Some people turned
their back to “tahid” (they called
him so because of the spurs he
sported on his boots before). His
enemies approved the tough way
he was being manhandled. His
sympathizers, on the other hand,
pitied him and voiced their displeasure, yelling, "He had done no


wrong.” The same passion play
was made at Magpayang, another
community next to Mainit. The
people reacted variably again. On
reaching Surigao town at past 4
p-m. the Japanese held him in fetters at the local garrison, which
was a private residence. The prisoner had not taken anything. He
was offered nothing.
All along he had wished for a
cup of water. A jail detail of three
Japanese soldiers and two Filipinos kept constant vigil. Early Fri

Page 5


KHAKI &. RED

A crude likeness of the intransigeant Philippine Constabulary officer, fashioned from concrete
and marble quartz that abound in the place, stands on a foothill at a discrete distance from
his shrine of hardwood slabs. Construction of the monument was completed on 15 July
1960 at the very site where his house had stood before it was set on fire by the Japanese
on the night of his arrest, Wednesday, 22 July 1942. His followers, mostly colorums who
rose in arms against the government in 1924 in Pamosaingan barrio of Socorro, Siargao
island, Surigao del Norte, and at Sitio Tumamana, Tubod, Surigao del Norte, keep the statue's
base lighted by candles and oil pots. A well-tended patch of lush begona plants in the
shape of the PC emblem graces the back of the monument. Construction funds for the
statue were realized thru the meager contributions of his impoverished followers. Indeed,
a granite marker would fit to withstand the lake-shore dampness of the place.
Having visited at nightfall of Sunday, 3 June 1962, th exact spot in the Surigao town
cemetery where Lt. Canuto freely gave up his life for refusing allegiance to the Japanese,
author took a boat, MV SWEET HOME, on the first leg of the trip back home, ruminating
on how great a man could be. Author mulled: I fully appreciate this particular officer
whose defiance to the Japanese rule was unfolded before me—after an eclipse of 20 years.
A long list of our national heroes led by Dr. Rizal graces our hall of fame, but a marker
costing less than a fragile table-top glass of some plush headquarters offices will find a
fitting place in perpetuating his memory. I got hold of a pen and paper, unmindful of the
waves lashing at the portside, and scribbled a draft for the desired marker to express
fairly what I felt to be the edifying words of his true worth.
When this could be had is a matter for conjecture.
FRANCISCO VIDA CANUTO
To the memory of the late officer of the Philippine Constabulary who chose death
than to live under the Japanese rule. He was executed by the Japanese at midway of
Sunday, 26 July 1942, manifesting to the end the true example of a Filipino soldier — a
pride of our race and the nativeland.
This marker is dedicated by his countrymen, friends and co-officers in the Armed
Forces of the Philippines, 26 July 1962.


day morning, Lt. Canuto bidded
Digamon to get him a glass of
water. Digamon was afraid, but
the prisoner insisted, "I command
you to get me water.” There was
firmness in his command even as
a prisoner. By a stroke of good
fate, Digamon was able to give him
a glassful. The Japanese began the
day with a dramatic theme when


a group of soldiers unrolled inside
the jail a Japanese flag.
“Salute," a loud voice filled the
jail. The prisoner, whose hands
were tied on the back, merely lifted his face. It was puzzling why
he was asked to salute while his
hands were bound. The Japanese
could have told him instead to
bow. Face to face with the Japan

ese flag, the prisoner promptly
closed his eyes and drooped. The
soldiers were angered naturally by
his refusal. Unexpectedly, they did
not become violent. A sense of
spontaneous respect had taken the
better of them. For there was no
retaliatory floggings afterwards. An
American flag was next unfolded
before him. He stared at it for a
lingering while and drooped again.
But when the Filipino flag was
displayed before him he stared at
it for minutes with a feeling of relief beaming eagerly through open
lesions, abrasions, and bruises that
had badly disfigured him. His pleasure at seeing his own flag did not
escape the attention of his tormentors. But in such a battered situation the Japanese, seemed to have
realized the utter uselessness of
further torture. They have practically done all; the prisoner had
practically suffered everything, including the indignities concomittant to such a situation.
After the dramatic act, both the
prisoner and Digamon sat on the
cold floor. They were allowed to
talk to each other, while the guards
twitted the prisoner with a sword.
They told him he would be killed
the next day. Japanese guards conversed with him in Nippongo,
which surprised Digamon who never expected that Lt. Canuto could
speak the conqueror’s language. On
the afternoon of that day, the Japanese asked Digamon to help in
the garrison kitchen, so he had
no chance to visit the prisoner
until the next morning of Saturday. Digamon on approaching the
prison that morning saw three
priests outside the cell, conversing
with one another.
From that morning of Saturday
until Sunday morning Lt. Canuto
and Digamon were able to converse
inside the cell. The prisoner told
Digamon to be a good man and
not to be scared when he will be
beheaded. "After my death you
must go home to the hacienda and
tell the people to be good, for some
of the Japanese will visit there
someday. Tell the young men and
women to hide; only the old ones
would stay behind. You must obey


Page o


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Japanese orders, but not all. Be
aware that the Japanese are traitors. You must witness my execution. After my death do not worry
on how to go home to the hacienda
(44 kms away, across Lake Mainit).
They (the Japanese) will take care
of your trip."
Lt. Canuto knew well that his
refusal to bow to the Japanese
flag was all that stood between him
and the grave.
Japanese soldiers came to the jail
in numbers at about 11 a.m. Sunday, bringing out the prisoner for
his last mile to the municipal cemetery. The Japanese had dug a
knee-deep excavation under a reclining mango tree in the cemetery.
In the cemetery he was asked to
kneel in front of the dug-out. A
Japanese soldier untied him. The
troops formed a circle around the
condemned man. Two soldiers
stood in front of the prisoner,
pointing their guns at his breast.
Another pair of soldiers at the
back did the same. An army photographer stood ready to take a picture as the blade lops off the condemned man’s head. The prisoner
was in underwear. Then Lt. Canuto took off and cast away his undershirt.
Among the crowd was Digamon,
Sam Hill, who is a Filipino-American mestizo appointed by the Japanese as the provincial governor;
his Japanese wife, and Hill’s bodyguard. Hill worked before the war
as an executive of another gold
mine in the province.
Lt. Canuto’s hands were folded
in front. He was not blindfolded.
When all was set, the executioner
(known as Kanematsu) unsheathed his sword. A pail of water was
nearby. After bringing down the
blade slowly on the condemned
man’s nape, in a mock, he withdrew the saber and washed it carefully in the pail, even wiping off
the water from the blade on his
own left forearm. The executioner
shammed the act twice. This time
the prisoner folded his arms at
the back, and said, “Go ahead, I
am ready." Taking now a careful
aim for the third— and last time
the executioner, with all his vigor
Page 7


and skill, dealt the fatal blow.
The blade cut through with a dull
thud. Digamon did not wink. His
eyes were fixed at the grisly sight.
He saw how the head snapped for
ward, leaving the trunk a veritable
crimson fountain of gushing blood.
The blow did not separate the
head from the torso. It hung by
a fine tissue of the throat. The
expected post-execution convulsion
or spasm was absent. But his eyes


were seen rapidly shutting off and
on. When the blood gush receded,
the executioner approached the limpid form and pushed it into the pit
with the saber tip. One of the dead
man’s knee-caps sticked, as if in
defiance, from out the shallow pit.
Dutifully, the Japanese soldiers
straightened the legs and filled out
the hole.
Meanwhile a big meeting was in
(Continued on page 27)


Photo taken before Lt. Canuto’s monument, beside his shrine, (front row) from left: Pedro
Digamon, incumbent barrio lieutenant of San Francisco; the author, Felicisimo Diamola, until
recently San Francisco barrio lieutenant for the past 20 years. On upper step is Corporal
Micael Desoloc of the 83th PC Company, stationed at Bad-as, Surigao del Norte, under
the command of Captain Gregorio Venci. Not in photo is Sgt Benito Pangan of the same unit.
Both soldiers acted as escorts. Digamon witnessed the four-day detention, ordeal, and subsequent beheading of Lt. Canuto in Surigao town. Diamola witnessed the apprehension and
torture of Lt. Canuto at the lakeshore barrio of Mansayao, adjacent to Barrio San Francisco,
where the officer and his followers resided. Some of the settlers are shown behind, mostly
descendants of former colorums, dressed in their Sunday best.
A footpath, winding through giant creepers and boulders in a marshland seldom trodded upon,
connects the two barrios. Here and there are dilapidated sentry boxes used by Lt. Canuto
to ensure the safety of his place. Now they only serve as disarrayed reminders of his martial
virtues and discipline.


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
The author is a graduate of the US Naval
Academy at Annapolis, Maryland, Class of
1956, who has well-remembered lessons
learned on sea power while still in that
school. Writing continuously while still in
college, Lt(jg) Viray holds the distinction
of being the only Filipino to win first prize
in a short-story writing contest on a naval
subject held at the Naval Academy. He has
published various articles, mostly on sea
power and the navy, both here and abroad,
the most noteworthy being an article entitled “Sea Power for the Defense of the
Philippines,” which was published in the
July 1961 issue of the US Naval Institute
Proceedings. Again, Lt(jg) Viray is the
only Filipino who has written for that authoritative publication. During the six years
of his commissioned service, the author has
served in various billets in the Philippine
Navy both afloat and ashore, and has also
been assigned to positions in GHO AFP,
Camp Murphy. Having just returned from
an electronics course at the U.S. Naval
Training Center, Great Lakes, III., Lt (jg)
Viray is presently assigned with the Division of Naval Electronics (N-7), Philippine
Navy.
The overall strategy for the defense of any country is evolved
from numerous factors and considerations which are either actually existent or merely deducible
within the country and in the world
around her. These factors involve
all the facets of the stature of
states, namely: the physical, the
military, the economic, scientific
and technological, the political, and
the sociological factors. The formulation of the concept of applied
national defense entails the combination and integration of all these
considerations and the derivation
of sound and logical conclusions.
The decision in every case, therefore, takes into full accord the
findings of political geography and
the teachings of its dynamic halftwin, geopolitics, which provides
Page 8


the blueprints for defense and the
driving spirit toward the achievement of national power.
After the last two world wars,
all nations have finally realized the
full implication of geopolitical factors and influences in drawing out
their plans of strategy, both for
preserving the peace and winning
a war. With political geography as
a tool, the evidence has indeed been
conclusive that defense efforts become better directed, and hence,
more efficient and effective.
Defense of a Maritime Country
The Philippines can never turn
her eyes away from the sea, as it is
everywhere around her. We share
common boundaries only with the
sea and our frontiers stretch as far
as our ships can reach. The Philippines sits squarely athwart the
geographic heart of Southeast Asia
and the Far East. This geographical setting has placed her in the
crossroads of seaborne communications in the region and has given
her the most interior position
among the countries adjacent to


her. And Southeast Asia, which
comprises of coastal or insular
states in which seaborne communications play a great role, is a maritime region par excellence.
Considering that the estimated
population of the Philippines at
present is 27,000,000 and that our
total land area is approximately
115,707 sq. miles, the country has,
therefore, a density of 233 persons
per sq. mile, a figure which makes
the Philippines one of the densely
populated states of the world. It is
well to note that the territorial
waters of the country cover an area
about four times as large as the
land area, and that our coastlines
extend to as much as 14,000 miles.
Of the approximately 8,000,000
people employed in the country,
around 609o are engaged in agriculture, forestry, hunting, and fishing. And yet, is the Philippines
truly an agricultural country? Certain facts are worthy of examination.
Of the total land area of the Philippines, only about one-third has


TA Redpp-disar
Ol Our
Defense Concent
By Lt. (g) WILFREDO D. VIRAY, PN


been or can be cultivated. Annually, we import some P80 million
worth of grains, dairy products,
and other agricultural products. On
the other hand, the foreign trade
of the country aggregates around
P2.2, billion annually at the pre
sent time, and the total government collection from our foreign
exchange transactions forms a substantial portion of the expenditure
of the National Government.
Our domestic trade borne by
ships plying the interisland waters
constitutes one of the backbones
of our national economy. Coastwise shipping is the strongest link
between the limited economic potentials of the different islands of
the country, integrating as it does
the various petty economies of our
more than 7,080 islands into one
effective economic system. And because of the great need to expand
our interisland merchant fleet and
the cognizance of the government
of the importance of such development, as evidenced by the passage
of various coastwise shipping acts,
it is predictable that the merchant
shipping tonnage in our domestic
trade will greatly increase in the
near future.
The overseas merchant fleet of
the Philippines is expanding quite
rapidly and the goal is to increase
its carrying capacity to 309% of the
total foreign trade of the country.
This huge expansion program, sustained by the reparations arrangements with Japan and the "Philippine Overseas Shipping Act of
1955,” (RA No. 1407) will provide
approximately 865,000 gross tons of
shipping by 1970. This will mean
that Philippine-flag vessels will be
able to carry around 4 million tons
of shipping annually.
The rapid expansion of the Philippine Merchant Marine can be attributed to the common realization
by the entire nation of the necessity of increasing both our trade
and our handling of the volume
of that trade. An expanded merchant shipping industry will mean


greater income for our National
Government, more employment to
our people, valuable savings in dollars, more prompt shipment of our
cargoes, less expenditure for freight
rates, and above all, greater capabilities for defense through sea
power.
Apart from the foregoing, our international orientation is with the
Free World, or the West, which is
a coalition of maritime powers. We
cannot ignore the fact, therefore,
that the Philippines is a maritime
country, and that the area in which
we are situated and the foreign
countries with which our interests
are linked are also maritime in
nature.
A basic consideration in any defense strategy is the matter of
boundaries, frontiers, and the difference in potential between countries, particularly those contiguous
among one another. Boundaries are
considered by many as artificial
barriers which attempt the segregation of peoples and ideas, a task
which is impossible to achieve. The
difference in potential among nations produces communications of
peoples, ideas, and materials, the
volume of which depends upon the
magnitude of the potential differ
ence. The threat of war and of
conquest stem from differences or
conflicts of national interests arising from this geopolitical fact, and
efforts for defense and security
against undesirable influx of men,
materials, and ideas from other nations which could lead to subversive activities or to open aggression, are in reality measures to
maintain the purposes for which
the boundaries of nations have
been established.
The defense establishments of
countries should, therefore, reflect
the nature of the boundaries and
frontiers in question, and the instruments of war that are provided
the armed forces should suit the
medium of maximum operation.
The boundaries of maritime countries are mostly coterminous with


the sea and for them, the oceans
of the world are in reality frontiers which they could expand and
exploit with the development of
sea power, of which the navy is
the strength element. Thus, land
powers rely upon the capabilities
of strong armies for their security and defense, using the navy and
the air force only as they would
enhance the accomplishment of the
mission of the land force. Maritime countries, on the other hand,
rely on the elements of sea power
to maintain command of the sea
as the basic consideration for defense. To mass on the sea, to use
a familiar expression, is therefore
the logical strategy of a maritime
country.
The Philippines must seek the
control of the sea at all cost if she
is to survive. Being detached from
the huge Asian mainland has given
her a defensive asset which few
countries possess. The nature of
the mission of the defense establishment of the Philippines and the
defensive advantage of the Archipelago as an "island-fortress" make
the formulation of the concept of
strategy indeed simple. The invasion and conquest of the Philippines could only be achieved after
the control of the sea and the air
has been seized by the enemy, and
the organic structure of the country destroyed.
Isolated by herself, a maritime
nation cannot survive long as she
would be denied the vital materials carried by ships, upon which
the entire economic system of the
country is based. Maritime communications are the strongest links
of the unity of the numerous islands comprising the Philippines;
they are, in effect, the one great
bond that preserves the solidarity
of the nation. The loss of waterborne communications, both coastwise and foreign, will result in
the literal dismemberment of the
Archipelago; in the reduction of
the Philippines into nearly 7,000
islands, each one possessing little
or no significance as a political,
an economic, or a military entity.
Thus divided within itself, the coun

Philippine Navy warships in battle formation are shown in left photo patrolling our
14,000-mile shoreline. This is a task being undertaken by the Navy to protect our country
from threats of aggression and from illegal penetration that might eventually become a
stepping stone for internal subversion. (Philippine Navy Official Photo)


KHAKI &. RED


Page 9


try could offer but a meager and
an almost futile token of resistance, and the piecemeal destruction of our forces by the enemy
becomes inevitable.
The "Island-Fortress”
The Philippines is in effect an
"island-fortress" with common
boundaries with the sea. This natural gift, more than any other
factor, has simplified the defense
strategy of the country. As a for
tress by herself, the critical areas
in the defense of the country are
the water and air approaches to the
islands. The loss of the control
over these areas will mean the beginning of the end of the defense
efforts of the nation.
Landlocked countries usually maintain large standing armies
to watch over their borders, inasmuch as invasion by land becomes the easiest and the most
obvious. Maritime countries, on the
other hand, are usually spared the
necessity of maintaining a strong
land force in being” in view of
their geographical setting, their
land boundaries being very limited,
if any at all. A maritime nation
can, therefore, divert much of her
resources toward building a strong
naval force with adequate air cover
as the main basis of her strategy
for defense. Little England during
the darkest period of World War
II in 1940, when Nazi Germany was
knocking at her very doorstep, with
any army hardly a third of the
highly-trained armed divisions of
the Germans, stood firm and unassailable, using the narrow English Channel and her maritime resources as her backbone for defense. Approximately a stretch of
twenty-two miles of water and a
strong navy have made England
impregnable through the ages. Philip II of Spain and the famous
Spanish Armada of 1588, Napoleon
Bonaparte and the Boulogn Flotilla of 1803-1805, and Adolf Hitler and “Operation Sea Lion" of
1940 all in their turn failed in the
invasion of Great Britain.
The Philippines stands to benefit
from a similar geographical advantage if her maritime resources will


be developed and the emphasis on
defense placed on the capabilities
of naval power. Failure to take full
advantage of this enviable defensive
asset will mean a great strategic
loss on our part and consequently,
the enemy’s corresponding strate
gic gain. In view of the material
weakness of the Philippines insofar
as the logistical support of her
armed forces are concerned, it is
mandatory for her to concentrate
her defense efforts at the critical
areas previously mentioned, where
the enemy will have to strive to
maintain a definite ratio of superiority of forces in order to achieve
any substantial success in operations. All the factors of warfare
are to the favor of the defense
establishment of the country. The
purely defensive nature of the mission of her armed forces enables
her to concentrate her efforts in
the establishment of the defense
network and the build-up of forces
exclusively for defensive operations. The Philippine armed forces
will be operating in areas, over
land or sea, which they know very
well. The coastlines of the Philippines are mostly steep and rugged,
and approaches for amphibious
operations are few. There are also
few flatlands suitable for parachute
drops and most of these areas are
within the vicinity of military installations. In the face of such disadvantages, the enemy forces attempting the invasion of the Philippines will have to employ armed
forces which will be much more
superior both numerically and materially.
The critical areas in the defense
of any fortress are the approaches
to that fortress. The impregnability
of any fortress lies in the control
of the ramparts surrounding it, The
success of the defense strategy of
the Philippines will depend upon
the command of the water and air
approaches of the country.
The Old Concept of Defense
Generally, there has not been
much change in the concept of the
defense of the Philippines since the
days of the Commonwealth regime
under the United States. The under

lying principle then was “to create
a defensive force of such strength
as to make invasion so costly in
lives and money that no Chancellory in the world, if it accepts the
opinions of the military and naval
staffs, will ever willingly make an
attempt to wilfully attack the Philippines.” This deterrent concept
was based on the assumption that
the strategic and any incidental
advantages which could be derived
from the conquest of the country
would not justify the expenditure
of the required amount of the enemy resources for such conquest. It
is well to point out that the population of the Philippines in 1939 was
only lo million, and the gross national product and the national income at the time were still very
meager in view of the dominantly
agricultural nature of the Philippine economy. However, even then
the need for a strong seaward defense force has been felt when our
strategists declared that "no military plan for the defense of an
archipelago such as the Philippines
could have had serious prospects
of success against a determined
enemy with a powerful fleet without great reliance on more effective naval support than that provided by patrol boats.
Clearly, the old concept of the
strategy for the defense of the Philippines proposed a defense establishment commensurate with the
economic and political condition
obtaining in the country at the
time. Bluntly stated, it envisaged
an inexpensive armed forces organization that was suitable to the
problem at hand. The country
could not then afford a more complete and elaborate defense network. Moreover, such a set-up was
then considered unnecessary because we were still under the protection of the United States insofar as external defense was concerned. Quite naturally, therefore,
our old concept of defense resulted
in the formation of an armed force
that was dominantly ground forceoriented, foot soldiers and their
equipment being the least expensive to provide and maintain.


Page 10


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


U.S. ASTRONAUT WALTER M. SCHIRRA


The fifth American to make a flight into space and the third to orbit
the earth in a Project Mercury capsule, Schirra was born in Hackensack, New Jersey, March 12, 1923 and graduated from the U.S. Naval
Academy at Annapolis, Maryland, 1945. He currently holds the Navy
rank of Commander. During the Korean action he flew 90 missions as
a fighter pilot and later served as a Navy test pilot and carrier flight
instructor. He has logged more than 2,000 hours in jet aircraft.


Our defense strategy prior to
World War II called for fighting
defensively in Philippine territory,
over beachheads and inland ter
rains which our soldiers knew very
well. The destruction resulting
from such warfare on Philippine
soil must have been considered incidental to the purpose to be
achieved, i.e., to inflict the maximum destruction and damage possible upon the enemy forces. In
view of the very limited economic
and industrial strength of the country, a losing war was assumed right
from the outset, the question being
only how much damage we could
inflict upon the enemy, and whether the enemy, foreseeing such
losses, would still embark upon
a plan for conquest.


Flexibility in Defense Strategy
A changing pattern is a characteristic of warfare as it is of any
other field of human activity. The
dynamic nature of warfare stems
from the changing nature of the
instruments of war, as well as the
very purposes for which it is
fought. Circumstances are never
the same at any one time, and the
efficiency, economy, and effectiveness of any armed forces establishment depend greatly upon the
extent to which all the changes
in the physical world and in all
facets of human activity find expression in the strategy for preserving the peace and winning a
war. It is, therefore, imperative
that the overall concept of warfare
be restudied and reevaluated con

tinually in the light of the developments of the time.
The defense establishment of any
country is governed by the necessity of continually adapting itself
to current exigencies. Planning for
national security should be most
realistic and the organization for
defense should be the most optimum for any given time. The defense establishment should be so
organized as “to obtain a maximum yield with a minimum of
means," and this "must be sought
initially at the highest level of organization: the sum total of resources assigned to the armed
forces as a whole. It follows that
these resources must be divided
among the land, sea, and air forces
in such a way as to produce the
greatest possible return from the
use of the armed forces as a whole
and not merely to provide maximum return from each force as a
separate unit."
A reasonable balance in the allocation of resources among the
four major services, i.e., the army,
navy, air force, and constabulary,
should therefore be continually
achieved. The fact should be recognized that the more flexible the
national defense establishment, the
more effective will be the defense
forces, and the less will be the overall expenditure for national security. The conditions existing at any
given time are never the same and
the changing nature of the economic, military, political, and social
conditions within the country and
in the outside world should be thoroughly reflected in our plans for
defense.
Today, the major policy governing our defense establishment still
rests with the National Defense
Act (Commonwealth Act No. 1),
enacted in 1935, and therefore, promulgated to meet the needs of
the country 27 years ago.
Defense Commitments
Collective defense is one of the
essential features of the modern
pattern of security. Nations sharing the same ideologies and believing in the same social principles strive to unite into a commu

KHAKI &. RED


Page 1I


nity of nations to safeguard and
promote their common interests.
Collective security has become a
fundamental requirement in the
modern concept of total war.
Recognizing the urgent need for
the mutual defense of the common interests of the Free World
in this hemisphere, the Philippines
has spoused the cause of collective
security. Two defense alliances
namely: the Mutual Defense Pact
with the United States and the
SEATO multilateral defense set-up,
constitute the essential features of
Philippine collective security. The
former is based on mutuality of
action in the event either country
is attacked. The US-PI Military
Assistance Agreement, it may be
recalled, was signed on March 21,
1947, extended for a year in 1952,
and subsequently extended for an
indefinite period after an exchange
of notes on June 26, 1953.
The Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, also known as the
Manila Pact of September 8, 1954,


provides for collective action in the
event any of the signatory nations
within the Treaty Area becomes
the subject of armed aggression
or of subversive action by any foreign power. It may be recalled
that the signatory nations are Austrilia, New Zealand, Pakistan, the
Philippines, Thailand, the United
Kingdom, France, and the United
States, and that the Treaty Area
is the whole area of South-East
Asia and the South-West Pacific
below 21 degrees 30 minutes north
latitude and the entire territories
of the Asian partners (Pakistan,
the Philippines, and Thailand)."
The Philippines is committed to
contribute in every manner possible to the achievement of the
objectives of the collective defense
alliances to which she is a party.
The defense planning of the country becomes geared to her role as
a member of collective defense
partnerships which offer the best
means of security. Alone, the defense efforts of the Philippines


may prove futile, but as a link in
the defense network in this hemisphere, the armed forces of the
country become vital.
Recent events have demonstrated that the South-East Asia Treaty
Organization has placed great reliance upon the instruments of sea
power for the defense and security of the Treaty Area. Southeast
Asia is geographically a maritime
region, the countries being either
coastal or completely detached
from the Asian mainland by intervening seas. Maritime exercises
have characterized most of the defense efforts of the SEATO. More
active and substantial participation
by the Philippines in the collective
defense undertakings of the SEATO, therefore, require her possession of those instruments of sea
power which are in keeping with
the standards of the warfare proposed to be carried out in case of
conflict. Greater participation by
the Philippines in SEATO maneuvers could best be achieved by the


Page 12


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


employment of more suitable elements of the naval force.
The Philippines has always sponsored the cause of collective security in Southeast Asia. Her participation in the activities of the SEATO has always been to such extent
as her resources will permit, The
strength of the SEATO depends
upon its ability to maintain command of the waters of the Southeast Asia region and preserve the
unity of its member-nations. The
elements of naval power, more than
any other, can make this so.
Threats to Philippine Security
The massive sphere of Communist influence in Asia constitutes
the main threat to the security and
freedom of the Philippines. Possessed with a manpower strength
of nearly unlimited proportions and
highly-skilled in the art of subversive action, the Communists of
Asia are ever probing the weak
spots of the Free World in this
hemisphere. The Communist naval
strategy in this part of the globe
is predicated on the effectiveness
of undersea warfare, the employ
ment of guided and ballistic missiles, and the striking power of
strategic air forces. The terrific
build-up of both the submarine
force and the air force poses an
offensive threat of great destructive proportions.
“Should the . . . Communists use
their aforementioned forces to attack the countries continguous to
her,... the threat to the Philippines, another SEATO member,
would take the form of air and
limited submarine raids on our own
and allied bases in the Philippines
to neutralize these bases as staging areas and supply points for the
support of our allies." The primary
threats to the external security of
the Philippines are, therefore, the
enemy capabilities in submarine
and aerial warfare; specifically,
aerial bombing, strafing, and roc
ketry, and missile launching and
submarine operations which also
include missile launching. The Communist naval forces have very limited amphibious capabilities, the emphasis being almost solely on sub

marine building. Knowing fully
well that the core of the strength
of the Free World lies in the command of the sea, being maritime
in nature, it can be readily seen
that the primary objective of the
Communist naval forces is not so
much to contend for the command
of the world’s oceans but rather to
disrupt, at every turn possible, the
maritime communications of the
Free World by inflicting destruction
through concealment, surprise, and
striking power. The submarine
force of the Communists now number more than 500, some of which
are also equipped with guided missiles. It may be recalled that at
the start of World War II, the Germans only had 57 U-boats and
they almost tilted the fortunes of
the sea war in the Atlantic to their
favor.
As the threats to our security
have always come from the sea, it
is imperative that we turn seaward
in our provisions for defense. Providence has decreed that we shall
always live by the events that
transpire on the seas that surround
us.
The Navy in Our Defense
A thorough consideration of the
geographic, economic, political, and
military factors that condition the
formulation of the concept of the
strategy for defense dictate greater emphasis on naval power for
the security of the Philippines. The
island-fortress" nature of the Archipelago and the maritime stature
of the country make it mandatory
for the Philippines to place greater
reliance upon the elements of naval
power for her defense and survival.
The dynamic pattern of the world
in which we live necessitates utmost flexibility in our defense strategy. What, then, are the main features of our time which require the
reorientation of our defense concept? The new pattern of collective
defense, the ascendance of Communism over a great portion of Asia,
the radical changes in the geographical summaries of the countries
of this hemisphere, and the modern
concept of warfare, among others,


dictate an entirely new strategy for
the defense of the Philippines.
The gross national product of
the Philippines amounted to P1,687
million in 1955 and around P12,000
million last year. Government estimates predict that our gross national product, at 1960 prices, will
aggregate approximately P17,600
million by 1967 The population
of the Philippines today is about
27 million, as compared to 19 million in 1947, and only 16 million
in 1939.
The old concept of the strategy
for the defense of the Philippines
was premised on the fact that the
country could not afford a more
complete and elaborate defense setup. The expenditure for defense
was then commensurate to the actual material condition obtaining
in the country. However, with the
changes that have been noted in
the basic considerations for the
planning and the expenditure for
national security, it has become
clearly evident that we could not
possibly continue with a defense
establishment that has been pre
mised on conditions which no longer exist.
While internal security is important and indeed paramount, it is
high time for the country to start
building up for external defense.
Once the country’s internal peace
and order are secured, provisions
for external defense then become
a reality. And the strategy for such
defense can no longer be conceived
as being warfare on Philippine soil.
The country now stands to lose so
much in lives and in material to
wage war in our own backyard.
The Philippines should therefore
no longer conceive of national defense as ground-force oriented, although this still provides the cheapest form of defense organization. At
the present time, the country can
not yet possibly determine the decisive major service in our armed
forces, since the Philippines today
is in the midst of rapid transition
in all phases of activity. To be
certain, a well-balanced team of
ground, naval and air forces will
most nearly provide the most ef(Continued on page 31)


 


Page 13


LETTER OF COMMENDATION
Brig. General Nicanor D. Garcia
Actg. Chief, Philippine Constabulary
Camp Crame, Quezon City
Dear General Garcia:
Iwish to take advantage of this occasion to commend
the splendid work of Major Buenaventura B. Fernandez,
JAGS, HPC, in connection with the preparation of the
Anti-smuggling Legal Primer which has been sponsored
by this Committee.
Major Fernandez has contributed very much to the
success of the project because of his unstinted cooperation and legal learning, particularly with reference to the
laws, rules, regulations and jurisprudence pertaining to
the functions and duties of the Philippine Constabulary.
Without him the purpose of the Legal Primer would not
have been successfully achieved.
This is also to inform you that the project is now
underway in its publication. This Committee is undertaking
the printing of 100,000 copies of the same, which we
expect to distribute to Provincial Governors, Municipal
Mayors, local police authorities, and personnel of the Bureau
of Customs, Bureau of Internal Revenve, Philippine Constabulary, Philippine Navy and all other agencies which are
charged with the implementation of the current antismuggling drive.
Thanking you for your commendable cooperation in this
regard, I am
Very truly yours,
(S9d.) ELEUTERIO ADEVOSO
Presidential Executive Assistant


By Major BUENAVENTURA B. FERNANDEZ
Office, Staff Judge Advocate


A COURT MARTIAL IN SESSION
Will Final Judgment on
AWO6 and/or AW 97


Bar Trial Before The Civil Court?


The recent rise of cases cognizable by both our civil and military
courts affecting military personnel
requires that a clear delimitation
of the jurisdiction of each class of
court be made. The jurisdiction
referred to here wherein there
seems to be an overlapping of jurisdiction is that over the offense.
This situation usually arises when
a military personnel is charged
both with violation of the 96th
and/or the 97th Articles of War
in the military courts and with a
crime before the civil courts arising from the same facts.
For a clear understanding of the
apparent conflict of jurisdiction between these two kinds of courts, let
us take a hypothetical case.
Capt. "X" the Commanding Officer of Company "A", 203rd BCT stationed at Pila, Laguna robbed “Y”
of that town at gun point. Thus
he was indicted for robbery before
the Court of First Instance of La

guna but before jurisdiction thereof could attach, he was also charged and thereafter tried by CM with
violation of the 96th and the 97th
AW. Luckily, Capt “X" was acquitted. Subsequently when he was arraigned before the civil court for
robbery, he interposed double jeopardy in a motion to quash. He anchored his motion on the provisions of Art. III, Sec. I (20) of our
Constitution in connection with
Sec. 9, Rule 113 of the Rules of
Court.
In order to understand clearly
the issue raised let us examine the
provisions of law involved.
The 96th AW provides:
Art. 96. Conduct Unbecoming
an Officer and Gentleman.—Any
officer, cadet, flying cadet, or
probationary second lieutenant,
who is convicted of conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman shall be dismissed from


the service. (As amended by Republic Acts Nos. 242 and 516).
The 97th Article of War provides:
Art. 91. Gen eral Article.-
Though not mentioned in these
Articles, all disorders and neglects to the prejudice of good
order and military discipline and
conduct of a nature to bring discredit upon the military service
shall be taken cognizance of by
a general or special or summary court-martial according to the
nature and degree of the offense,
and punished at the discretion
of such court.
Art. III, Sec. 1 (20) of the
Constitution states:
No person shall be twice put
in jeopardy of punishment for
the same offense. If an act is
punished by a law and ordinance, a conviction or acquittal
under either shall constitute a


Page 14


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


bar to another prosecution for
the same act.
Then Sec. 9, Rule 113 of the
Rules of Court provides:
When a defendant shall have
been convicted or acquitted, or
the case against him is dismissed or otherwise terminated without the express consent of the
defendant, by a court of competent jurisdiction, upon a valid
complaint or information or
other formal charge sufficient
in form and substance to sustain conviction, and after the
defendant had pleaded to the
charge, the conviction or acquittal of the defendant or the dismissal of the case shall be a
bar to another prosecution for
the offense charge, or for any
attempt to commit the same or
frustration thereof, or any offense which necessarily includes
or is necessarily included in the
offense charged in the former
complaint or information.
Sec. 11 of the Philippine Army
Manual of Court-martial states:
Article of War 39 states:
COURTS-MARTIAL—Jurisdiction
in general —Exclusive and nonexclusive.—Courts-martial have exclusive jurisdiction of purely military offenses. But a person subject to military law is, as a rule,
subject to the municipal law applicable to persons generally, and
if by one act or omission he violates an Article of War and the
local criminal law, such act or
omission may be made the basis
of a prosecution before a courtmartial or before the proper civil
tribunal, and in some cases before
both, the jurisdiction which first
attaches in any case being entitled to proceed. If in a case where
application under A.W. 75 for delivery to the civil authorities is
anticipated, good reason exists for
the primary exercise of military
jurisdiction, charges should be
promptly preferred.
The provisions of the Articles
of War conferring jurisdiction
upon courts-martial shall not be
construed as depriving other military tribunals of concurrent juris
diction in respect of offenders or


offenses that by statute or by the
law of war are triable by such
military tribunals (A.W. 15). See
A.W. 81-83 for instances of concurrent jurisdiction expressly conferred on courts-martial 1 and certain other tribunals.
Art. 39. As to number. —No
person shall, without his consent, be tried a second time for
the same offenses; but no proceeding in which an accused has
been found guilty by a courtmartial upon any charge or specification shall be held to be a
trial in the sense of this Article
until the reviewing and, if there
be one, the confirming authority shall have taken final action
upon the case.
No authority shall return a
record of trial to any court-martial for reconsideration of —
(a) An acquittal; or
(b) A finding of not guilty of
any specification; or
(c) A finding of not guilty of
any charge, unless the record shows a finding of
guilty under a specification laid under that
charge, which sufficiently
alleges a violation of some
Article of War; or
(d) The sentence originally
imposed, with a view to
increasing its severity; unless such sentence is less
than the mandatory sentence fixed by law for the
offense or offenses upon
which a conviction has
been had.
And no court-martial in any
proceedings or revision, shall
reconsider its findings or sentence in any particular in which
a return of the record of trial
for such reconsideration is hereinbefore prohibited.
In the light of the above, is there
double jeopardy?
That double jeopardy may be interposed in bar of a subsequent
trial for the same offense is a
settled doctrine in this country
even in court-martial cases cannot
be doubted. (Grafton v. U.S. 6 Phil.
55, 206 U.S. 33, 51 L. ed. 1084. See


also Marcos v. Chief of Staff 16
L.J., No. 7, p. 358).
In amplifying the meaning of the
96th Article of War, the Philippine
Army Manual of Court-Martial
which is a copy of the United
States Manual of Court Martial
states:
There are certain moral attributes common to the ideal officer and the perfect gentleman, a
lack of which is indicated by
acts of dishonesty or unfair
dealing, of indecency or indecorum, or of lawlessness, injustice, or cruelty. Not every one
is or can be expected to meet
ideal standards or to possess the
attributes in the exact degree
demanded by the standards of
his own time; standards in these
respects of an officer or cadet
cannot fail without his being
morally unfit to be an officer
or cadet or to be considered a
gentleman. This article contemplated such conduct by an officer or cadet which, taking all
the circumstances into conside
ration, satisfactorily shows such
moral unfitness.
This Article includes acts made
punishable by any other Article
of War, provided such acts
amount to conduct unbecoming
an officer and a gentleman;
thus an officer who embezzles
military property violates both
this and the preceding article.
Col. Winthrop in his book, Military Laws and Precedents, 2nd Ed.,
pp. 711-713, said:
The conduct contemplated in
this article is any action or behavior of an officer in an official capacity, which, in dishonoring or otherwise disgracing the
individual personally as an officer exhibits him as morally unworthy to remain a member of
the honorable profession of
arms.
Though it need not amount
to a crime, it must offend so
seriously against law, justice,
morality or decorum as to expose to disgrace, socially or as
a man, the offender, and at the
same time must be of such a


 


Page 15


nature or committed under such
circumstances as to bring dishonor or disrepute upon the
military profession which he represents.
When the Manual or CourtMartial says AW 96 "includes acts
made punishable by any other Article of War, provided such acts
amount to conduct unbecoming an
officer", and then proceeded to cite
the case of embezzlement, the Manual admits that aside from prosecuting the offender under the
Article of War thus violated, he
may also be punishable under AW
9o as long as the act is unbecoming
of an officer and a gentleman. The
outcome of the action for violation of the said Article of War
does not in any way effect his
prosecution for violation of the
96th Article of War. That this is
the proper interpretation can be
deduced from Winthrop’s comment
on AW 97. He said:
The evident purpose of this
article is to provide for the trial
and punishment of any kind and
all military offenses not expressly made cognizable by courtsmartial in the other and more
specific Articles, and thus to
prevent the possibility of a failure of justice in the army. Whenever the offense committed is
one not certainly, or fully designated or described in some other
particular Article, or where,
though so designated or no
punishment is assigned for its
commission, or where it 15
doubtful under of two or more
Articles the offender should be
prosecuted, recourse is had to
this comprehensible and serviceable provision as the authority
and foundation for the charge
and proceedings.
Although the Manual and the
comment refer to acts which may
be denominated as military offenses, it is believed they may refer to offenses punishable by the
civil courts also. We can deduced
this from the Manual’s explanation of the 97th AW on what discredit means. The Manual says:
"Discredit" as here use means
“to injure the reputation of"


Juned
2 
ie I
punishment by both civil and
military authority. Hence, on
civil prosecution resulting in
acquittal is not a bar to a
proscution under military law,
and a trial and acquittal by
a court martial is not a bar
to a prosecution by the proper civil authorities. Although
the defendant in such cases is
charged with the same act in
both instances, nevertheless the
prosecutions are not for the
same offense, since the act constitutes a transgression of distinct laws and an offense under
each law. This rule, however,
is limited to the case of a single
act which infringes both the
civil and the military law in
such a manner as to constitute
two distinct offenses, one of
which is within the cognizance
of the military courts and the
other a subject of civil jurisdiction. (15 American Jurisprudence, sec. 399, p. 72).
The above doctrine may be all
right if our constitution did not
provide that “if an act is punishable by a law and an ordinance,
conviction or acquittal under either
shall constitute a bar to another
prosecution for the same act." Of
course this is limited to a case
which is punishable by a law and
an ordinance. Except as thus provided, the plea of being twice put
in jeopardy will be unavailing if
the prosecution of what arises.
from the same act is based on

Instances of such conduct on the
part of person subject to military
law may include acts in violation
of local law committed under
such circumstances as to bring
discredit upon the military service. So also is punishable under
this clause any discreditable conduct not elsewhere made punishable by any specific Articles of
War or by the first clause of
AW 97
In the Grafton case which was
decided in 1906 it appears that
Pvt Grafton was acquitted by a
court martial for manslaughter in
Guimaras, Iloilo, a military reservation then. The charge was for
violation of the o2nd Article of
War which is similar to our 97th
AW. Subsequently he was tried
for murder before the civil court.
He invoked double jeopardy. The
United States Supreme Court held:
—An acquittal by a court martial is a bar to subsequent prosecution in a civil court for the
same acts constituting the same
offense when both 2 courts derive their authority from the
same government.
But this is not all. The jurisprudence in the United States as
regards acts violating both military
and civil laws seems confusing.
It is also the prevailing doctrine
IADAR
there that:
A single act may constitute
a transgression of both civil and
military law, and consequently,
make the offender amendable to


Page 1o


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Special
First
KaMIAKand HE
THE PHILIPPINE VIREINIA TOBACCO AOMINISTRATION


President DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL
.fulfillment of a pledge


Chairman CORNELIO BALMACEDA
... qualitative, not quantitative production


General Manager EDUARDO BANANAL
.. export is the answer


BATAC PRODUCERS' COOPERATIVE
MARKETING ASSOCIATION, INC.
BATAC, ILOCOS NORTE


The Seed Farm Demonstration of Batac (llocos Norte) ProCoMa, Inc.


MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MAr. JUSTINO GALANO ....................... President Mr. PLACIDO QUIAOIT
MT. TEODORO NARCISO ............ Vice President
Mr. MARCOS ESQUIVEL
Dr. EMMANUEL BUMANGLAG  Member Mr. DAMIAN RESINI ...
Mr. PABLO BACTIN ............................ Member Mr. EVARISTO CAOILI 
Mr. VENANCIO DIRIC
...... Member Mr. FIDEL BATTULAYAN
Mr. RAYMUNDO BATALLONES ........ Member
Atty. FERNANDO S. ALCANTARA
Secretary & Legal Officer


Member
Member
Member
Member
Member


MANAGERIAL STAFF


Mr. Leon Q. Verano . Manager
Mr. Dominador T. Cocson ................ Treasurer
Mr. Ricardo S. Castro .................... Bookkeeper
Mr. Jose Parbo ............... Supervisor
Mr. Ernesto S. Castro .................... Bookkeeper
Mr. Teodorico Tolentino .......... Computer-Clerk
Miss Damiana lampitec ....................... Clerk II
Miss Eugenia Simisim ........................ Clerk III
Miss Rogelia Singson ........................ File Clerk
Miss Baseliza Gapas .................... Clerk
Mrs. Virginia Inocencio ....................... Clerk
Mrs. Rafaela Arcangel .......... Cashier
Mr. Amando Libed ..


Miss Rosalinda Bactat .................... Int. Auditor
Mr. Eleuterio Miguel ........................ Prec. Clerk
Mr. Eliodoro Caluya ........................ Acctg. Clerk
Mr. Raymundo Sibucao ............ Loan Collector
Mr. Alejandro Gabien ........ Asst. Warehouseman
Mrs. Emiliana Palaspas ................ Store Cashier
Miss Felicitas Demdem ..................... Saleslady
Mr. Apolinario Anday ........... Storekeeper
Mr. Efrain S. Verano .......................... Chemist
Mr. Dominador Rubio ........................ Chemist
Miss Ely Arcangel .............................. Chemist
Mr. Dalmacio Maduli ............ Soil Technologist
................................................. Electrician


One of the fast-growing, big revenue-earning and dollar-saving
industries of the Philippines is the
Virginia flue-cured tobacco industry. Barely seven years old, this
industry has grown to its present
giant proportions occupying eighth
place among the, countries of the
free world producing flue-cured
Virginia tobacco. Its rapid growth
could be gleaned from the production statistics of the Bureau of
Plant Industry which shows tremendous increase from 2.7 million
to 37 million kilograms from 1953-
54 to 1958-59. The preliminary production estimate for 1962 is 46
million kilograms.
The Virginia tobacco is grown
in commercial quantities in the
provinces of Abra, Ilocos Norte,
Ilocos Sur, La Union, Nueva Ecija,
Pangasinan, and Tarlac, in northern and central Luzon. Out of
the total land area of around 4
million hectares of these provinces,
the estimated area planted with


the balance of o million kilograms
were probably sold by private
wholesalers or dealers. The cigarette factories produced 13,009,654.-
400 sticks for the year 1960-61, 800
sticks of 70 mm. in length could
be produced out of 1 kilogram of
tobacco.
As of June 30, 1962 the total
government stock of tobacco is
85,601,985.2 kilograms. This includes the 46,971,551 valued at
₱121,014, 378.28 kilograms bought
by the Philippine Virginia Tobacco
Administration at an average price
of P2.49 per kilogram. The remaining 38,630,434.2 kilograms are ACCFA stocks which are not yet disposed of due to improper grading.
The enactment of Republic Act
No. 1194, providing for support
prices for locally-grown flue-cured
Virginia tobacco gave impetus to
the development of the flue-cured
Virginia tobacco industry. Under
this law, the government through
the ACCFA, bought flue-cured and


built of strong materials. Tobacco
planters sent their children to universities and colleges. The nation.
in general, benefited immensely
from the industry in the form of
increased revenues and more services.
The Agricultural Credit Cooperative Financing Administration or
ACCFA was charged with the functions and responsibilities of organizing FaCoMas under its Charter (Republic Act No. 821) and the
administration of the price support program of the government
under Republic Act No. 1194. The
ACCFA tobacco trading operations
were not satisfactory and because
of their adverse publicity a new
distinct and separate entity was
born to take over such function.
Republic Act No. 2265, approved
on June 19, 1959, created the Philippine Virginia Tobacco Administration or PVTA.
The promotion and development
of the flue-cured Virginia tobacco


THE PHILIPPINE VIRGINIA
TOBACCO ADMINISTRATION


Virginia tobacco is 91,132 hectares.
According to a recent survey made,
87,000 farmers are engaged in the
industry or 2.175 percent of the
total population of 4 million of
said provinces.
From 1955 to 1961, our government has collected a total of P805
₱115 million annually. Comparing
the government, the importance
and contribution of the Virginia
tobacco to the national economy
cannot be overlooked.
The annual consumption of local
cigarette factories of redried Virginia tobacco from 1955 to 1959
also steadily increased from 14 million to lo million kilograms. The
Bureau of Internal Revenue estimated that, based on 15 per cent
increase in the smoking population, the consumption will be
around 18.7 million kilograms for
1960-61. The government sold to
local cigarette manufacturers 10
million kilograms annually so tha:


sundried Virginia tobacco from
the farmers’ cooperative marketing associations or FaCoMas. The
law also has prescribed five (5)
grades of tobacco for the fluecured class and three (3) grades
for the sundried class. The support prices fixed for each grade
are: P3.60 (Grade A), P3.00 (Grade
B), P2.50 (Grade C), P2.00 (Grade
D), and P1.50 (Grade E),—fluecured type, and P1.50 (Grade SDA),
₱1.00 (Grade SDB), and P0.80
(Grade SDC—sundried type.
The beneficial effects of the price
support program of the government for the flue-cured Virginia tobacco industry have been felt and
enjoyed by the people in the tobacco-growing provinces. Tangible manifestations of relative prosperity
in the area could be seen. Even the
most lowly farmer who owned a
nipa house before the enactment
and implementation of said law is
now a proud owner of a real house


industry through the effective administration of the price support
program provided for in Republic
Act No. 1194 is the basic and fundamental mission of the PVTA.
Under this program, the agency is
directed and authorized to purchase flue-cured Virginia tobacco in accordance with a fixed
schedule of prices whereby the
farmers are assured adequate income from their produce.
The purposes and objectives of
the PVTA are the following:
1. Promote the effective merchandising of flue-cured Virginia
tobacco in the domestic and foreign markets so that those engaged
in the industry will be placed on
a basis of economic security;
2. Establish and maintain balanced production and consumption of flue-cured Virginia tobacco
and its manufactured products, and
such marketing conditions as will
insure and stabilize the prices at
(Continued on page 16-A)


 


Page 3-A


Hon. CORNELIO BALMACEDA
Chairman


EDUARDO BANANAL
General Manager


PERFECTO FAYPON
Director—Ilocos Sur


CONSTANTINO VERCELES
Director—La Union


Board of Directors
of
The Philippine Virginia


From left to right—Antonio de Guzman, Assistant to the General Manager; Graciano Rapatan; Corporate Auditor; Dominador S. Lapuz,
Head Executive Assistant; Jaime B. Saguisag, Administrative Officer; OQvirico Samonte, Head Trading Department.


Page 4-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


PATERNO AQUINO
Director—Abra


and Management Staff
Tobacco Administration


GODOFREDO FAVIS
Asst. General Manager


From left to right—Bernardo Navarette, Chief, Field Services Department; Telesforo Ofiana, Chief, Financing Department; Porfirio Aquino,
Corporate Accountant; Alfredo Feraren, Corporate Counsel; Severo Asuncion, Chief, Plans and Program Office; and Rosendo Estoye, Corporate
Treasurer.


 


Page S-A


PVTA DRIVE TO SELL STOCKS IN HIGH GEAR


General manager Eduardo Bananal announced recently an allout campaign to dispose of its
70 million kilos of flue-cured
tobacco stocked in PVTA warehouses. The amount represents
flue-cured tobacco stocks purchased by the agency since 1960.
Bananal said that a plan of
operation has been mapped out
by experts to dispose of these
stocks and thereby pay the P150
million which the PVTA borrowed
from the Central Bank for its
operations.
“Since my assumption of office,
one of my first and paramount
concerns has been to tackle this
big problem of disposal and we
will do everything to get back
every cent which has been invested
in the yellow leaf and to pay back
the loans which the PVTA, as
provided for by law, secured from
the Central Bank," Bananal said.
Efforts are now being geared
at exploiting the local market as


a possible receptacle for PVTA
tobacco stocks.
To date,Management, with the
active support of the board of
directors, has done the following
to facilitate attainment of this
objective:
1. Reactivated the Philippine
Virginia Tobacco Council which
serves as an advisory body to the
PVTA in the disposal of its stocks
and other problems of the industry:
2. Maintain frequent liaison with
top officials of different cigarette
factories to persuade them to buy
flue-cured tobacco from the PVTA;
and
3. Urge redrier-contractors to
comply with the management
contract obliging them to buy 4190
of the total leaf they redry.
“The foreign markets are also
among our targets," Bananal said.
"We are getting in touch with the
the officials of the different consulates and embassies in Europe


and other parts of the world that
we believe are market potentials.
In fact, we had a conference with
Commerce Secretary Rufino Hechanova recently regarding this
matter and he assured us of his
full cooperation."
He also announced the intention
of the PVTA to participate in the
First International Tobacco Trade
Congress to be held in Salisbury,
Rhodesia early next year.
“Participation in this world fair
will give us a chance to display
our wares before the world and
if our flue-cured tobaccos are as
good as experts say, I see no
reason why we cannot dispose of
them,” he said.
Bananal also said that in connection with this all-out campaign
to dispose of PVTA stocks, Task
Forces have been created which
are now actively working towards
carrying out an agressive sales
program.


We help implement
the
SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROGRAM
of
Pres. DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL
VINTAR VIRGINIA TOBACCO GROWERS
VINTAR
ILOCOS NORTE


Page o-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


INFO DRIVE TO BE LAUNCHED


G.M. Issues
Employee
Guide posts
General Manager Eduardo Bananal, in a move to enhance discipline among PVTA employees,
recently issued a set of rules on
personnel conduct and discipline.
The head of the tobacco state
agency enjoined all PVTA personnel to help promote utmost efficiency in the performance of their
duties and honesty in carrying out
their responsibilities.
Turning to the welfare of the
personnel, the PVTA head assured
the employees of the full protection of their rights and privileges,
and reiterated the corporation’s
policy of the continuous guidance
and training of employees through
the facilities that the PVTA can
offer.
Bananal stressed the need for
good public relations and emphasized the importance of practising
proper office decorum and strict


An intensive informational and
educational campaign will be
conducted some time next month
in the Virginia Tobacco-growing
provinces.
This was learned from general
manager Eduardo Bananal shortly
after he arrived last week from an
ocular inspection of the redrying
plants in the provinces, and after
having a heart-to-heart talk with
the tobacco farmers in La Union.
Bananal said that documentary
films showing the different aspects
of the tobacco industry will provide the main feature of the
projected drive.


adherence to rules of courtesy in
dealing with the public.
The PVTA head appealed to
employees to exert efforts to
achieve the best results in the
shortest time possible and pointed
out that each employee’s job is
as vital as the next man’s, as far
as the PVTA is concerned.


He said meetings and conferences will be called in the rural
areas. Leaflets giving pointers on
how to produce quality leaf will
be distributed to the farmers, he
added.
As part of the drive, a special
tobacco supplement will also be
published in one of the forthcoming issues of the leading vernacular weekly magazines.
The PVTA conducted a similar
drive last year. But it lasted only
for more than a month because
it was undertaken at the wrong
time of the year when the rainy
season had just set in.
Bananal said that October is the
ideal month to launch such a drive.
He said this is the time most of
the farmers start sowing their
tobacco seeds.
They should be told, or shown,
how to grow Virginia tobacco the
scientific way, he said, in order
to help solve the problem of
surplus stock disposal.


NARVACAN AGRICULTURAL PLANTERS
& GROWERS ASSOCIATION, INC.


NARVACAN. ILOCOS SUR


President — CONSTANTE R. AYSON
Vice President — CORAZON E. CADACIO
Treasurer — AMPARO F. AYSON
Secretary — AMPARO F. AYSON
Manager — JESUS R. AYSON
Warehouseman — MARTINO PAGUDPUD
Chief Grader — PERLITA QUITEVES


KHAKI &. RED


Page 7-A


BALMACEDA EXPLAINS
LEAF IMPORT POLICY


Those who are opposed to the
limited importation of blending
leaf tobacco fail to consider what
is best for the industry and the
most urgent problem that must be
met immediately, said Cornelio
Balmaceda, acting PVTA board
chairman and member of the Sman presidential committee which
will determine the procedures attendant to the importation.
Speaking temporaneously before
PVTA officials and employes at
the Eugene’s Restaurant, Cubao,
where he was given an "asalto"
birthday party, Balmaceda said the
primary objective of the plan to
allow the importation of 3.3 million kilos of leaf tobacco worth
₱19 million is to dispose of accumulated stocks of the local leaf.
Balmaceda denied newspaper reports saying there was secrecy behind the proposal to import. He
said there were no hush-hush talks
in the discussion of the leaf importation plan.
The best interest of the tobacco
industry and the national economy,
he said, was the top consideration
behind the move to import leaf
tobacco.
Balmaceda, who is also chairman of the National Economic
Council, said that importation is
the only immediate solution of the
government’s tobacco stock disposal. He said ACCFA and PVTA owe
the Central Bank P260 million and
unless this will be paid back
sooner or later, the continued implementation of the price support
law may be adversely affected.
Commenting on the move to
scrap the price support law, Balmaceda said the Philippine fluecured tobacco industry is giving
benefits to more than 5 million
people in Ilokandia who, other

CORNELIO BALMACEDA
PVTA Chairman


wise, would have added tremendously to the government’s unemployment problem. Besides, he
said the industry is contributing
₱130-million to the government annually in the form of specific taxes
alone.
If they scrap the price support
law, he said, they would be killing the goose that lays the golden
eggs.
Balmaceda admits there are several problems confronting the tobacco industry, one of which is the
delay in the release of trading
funds by the Central Bank. As a
result, he observed, this time elemnet is being taken advantage of
by unscrupulous middlemen, so
much so that the small-time farmers are forced to sell their produce even at prices very much
lower than the government’s price
support.
In order to give small-time farmers the full benefit of the law,


Balmaceda said the PVTA board
has started discussing plans of
giving liberal loans to farmers during harvest-time so that they
(farmers) could keep their produce until the Central Bank releases funds for trading operations.
This is the only way of emancipating farmers from the clutches
of exploiting middlemen, Balmaceda said.
Balmaceda deplored the general
misconception that the public has
on the tobacco industry. He said
the industry is not subsidized.
Price support and subsidy are two
different things, he said. He defined subsidy as support given to
an industry without that particular industry’s worrying about giving back that help.
The Philippine flue-cured industry is financed by funds borrowed
from the Central Bank. Sooner or
later, Balmaceda said, the amount,
including interests, will be paid
back to the bank. How could the
tobacco industry be subsidized?
There is no word about a subsidy
charter.
Balmaceda was appointed by
President Macapagal as acting
chairman of the PVTA board concurrently with his duties as NEC
chairman.
My appointment here is welcome
for two reasons, he said. For one
thing, this would afford him an
opportunity to come closer to people with whom he belongs and for
another, he would have a chance
to help "in my own humble way"
stabilize the Philippine flue-cured
tobacco industry.
Balmaceda expressed confidence
on the move of the PVTA to ex(Continued on page 22-A)


Page B-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


ILOCOS NORTE FEDERATION


OF FACOMAS


(INFECA)


BATAC, ILOCOS NORTE


BOARD OF DIRECTORS


Mr. MIGUEL G. CASTRO 


.................... President


Atty. HERMINIGILDO PRIETO


............. Vice-President


Mr. LEON Q. VERANO 


.......... Board Member


Mr. SANTIAGO ESPIRITU 


.......... Board Member


Mr. FULGENCIO J. LUIS ..............................


.......... Board Member


Mr. LUIS E. MATA .


........... Board Member


Mr. RAYMUNDO CRISOSTOMO 


.......... Board Member


Mr. CELEDONIO VIERNES 


........... Board Member


Mr. LORENZO B. ULEP 


.......... Board Member


Mr. LEONARDO VELASCO 


......... Board Member


Atty. FRANCISCO E. POBRE 


........... Board Member


MF. VICENTE SORIANO ..................................................... Board Member


Mr. BASILIO BALILING 


.......... Board Member


Atty. JUAN F. ECHIVERRI .


.......... Board Member


MANAGERIAL STAFF


Mr. FILEMON E. PASCUA .


.................. Manager


Mr. JUSTINO GALANO 


.............. Secretary


Mr. FELIPE B. INOCENCIO 


.................... Treasurer


Mr. JOSE B. PIEDAD ............................................


-......... Warehouseman


MISS ESPERANZA M. ABADILLA 


.............. Bookkeeper


MISS MARCELINA C. BACUD 


......................... Clerk


Mr. ESTEBAN C. COLOMA


Stock Clerk & Guard


Mr. CORAZON L. CAMPILLA 


......... Driver-Mechanic


Mr. PATROCINIO H. CABEL 


.......... Driver-Mechanic


Mr. ROSENDO RAGUINDIN 


......... Driver-Mechanic


MF. RECTO E. CID .............................


............ Representative


More Power To
PHILIPPINE VIRGINIA TOBACCO ADMINISTRATION
from
FARMERS' VIRGINIA TOBACCO REDRIERS, INC.
REDRYING * WAREHOUSING * CIGARETTE MANUFACTURER
PRODUCERS' MARKETING * IMPORT * EXPORT
7th Floor Manhattan Building, Nueva St., Manila, Philippines
Tel. Nos. 3-89-61 8 4-75-81 Cable "FAVITOR" P. O. Box 3489
Plant and Factory: CALUMBAYA, BAUANG, LA UNION, PHILIPPINES


KHAKI &. RED


Page 9-A


THE ADVANTAGES OF
EARLY PLANTING


By ADOLFO T. MAKIL


In almost all phases of Virginia
culture and flue-cured we find
mistakes and malpractices one
way or another. These faults are
recurrently proven to be detrimental in the production of quality
Virginia tobacco in spite of the
existing conditions necessary for
quality production.
One factor which hinders the
production of quality Virginia
tobacco is late planting. During
late harvest season, heavy and
continuous rains in late March to
mid-April bring the nematode and
eelworm population to unprecendented proportions. Frog-eye disease is stimulated by overcast.
Humid conditions and other spot
infections are spread by continuous


early rains. This hazard results in
poor curing especially to the leaves
primed during the downpours.
Undetermined quantities of tobacco
are left to waste in the field. A
great quantity of frog-eye and
mosaic-infested leaves are graded
very low by FaCoMas. All these
can be avoided if farmers start
planting early.
A crop grown under the best
possible conditions will take at
least 120 days from transplanting
to the last day of reaping.
Beginning mid-February, higher
rates of temperature are expected
and the atmosphere becomes drier.
As a result, the possibility of
fungus infection such as frog-eye,
anthracnose, rust, brown spot,


root rot, scabs, sore shanks, stem
rots, fusarium wilt and black
shank is very remote.
Tobacco planted after the first
half of February has the worst
possible conditions for good
growth and the least possibility
of turning out into quality tobacco.
The dry weather that is usually
experienced in February does not
give the improvement expected.
Root system are stunted from lack
of soil moisture and the possibility
of infestation with nematodes and
eelworms is very great because of
the unsanitary water which is
normally but unknowngly applied
to the plants.
Late harvest is another disad(Continued on page 26-A)


GOLDEN HARVEST TOBACCO PLANTERS
ASSOCIATION, INC.
NARVACAN, ILOCOS SUR


President-Manager .......................................... MELENCIO V. MANANSALA, JR.
Secretary-Treasurer .................................. ATTY. JOSE V. MANANSALA
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Atty. JOSE V. MANANSALA
Atty. CESAR BLANKAS
Atty. FRANCISCO D. VILLANUEVA
Mr. MELENCIO V. MANANSALA, JR.
MES. LUCINA MENDOZA
........... Mr. LICERIO PERALTA
Warehouseman .
Grader ................................................................................ Mr. NICOLAS CORPUZ


Page I0-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


The Seed Farm Demonstration of Batac (llocos Norte) ProCoMa, Inc, to produce good seeds for distribution to farmer members to
improve the quality and quantity of Virginia Tobacco, with Mr. Leon Verano, ProCoMa Manager and Mr. Justino Galano, ProCoMa
President, showing an improved variety of Virginia tobacco with the application of the
nount of fertilizer. Soil analysis is
being done in the ProCoMa soils laboratory which they have established for the impre
quantity of harvest.
of the quality a


MORE POWER TO


GREETINGS TO


PHILIPPINE VIRGINIA TOBACCO
ADMINISTRATION


PHILIPPINE VIRGINIA TOBACCO
ADMINISTRATION


from


from


Batac Tohacco Farmers'
Association, Inc.


Narvacan Tohacco Planters"
Association, inc.


BATAC
ILOCOS NORTE


ILOCOS SUR
NARVACAN


KHAKI 8 RED


Page II-A


Manager Leon O. Verano of the Batac ProConda, Inc, delivers his speech on the occasion of
the inauguration of the Batac Soils Laboratory on February 12, 1962. Dr. Ricardo T. Marfori,
Director of the Bureau of Soils, was the guest speaker.


Oath-taking of the members of the Board of Directors of the llocos Norte Federation of
Cooperative Marketing Associations.


1961 annual meeting of Galimuyod FaCoMa, President Alfonso Makil is at the microphone.
Page 12-A


OUR FLUE-CURED
TOBACCO
OUTLOOK
Today, the Philippines can take
pride in her eighth position among
the free nations producing Virginia
leaf tobacco. Yet, it is claimed that
our Virginia leaf possesses fine
qualities for the manufacture of
cigarettes which could compare
with foreign brands.
Our studies of the world free
market for flue-cured leaf show
that the United States, Federation
of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, Canada, and India practically dominate
the world tobacco trade. The United States supplies one-third of the
estimated 1.4 billion pounds world
consumption. The other three top
producers have ready markets in
the United Kingdom and Commonwealth countries. Our country’s
share is very negligible. This becomes possible through barter of
the low-grade type under existing
laws.
Indonesia, Taiwan, Thailand,
South Korea and Japan are now
also producing big quantities of
Virginia leaf tobacco. Indonesia
maintains a quasi-government agency in West Germany handling the
sale of her Virginia leaf in Germany and other European countries. The tobacco business in Taiwan and Thailand is a government
monopoly. These Asian countries
import high grade Virginia tobacco from the United States under
the United States Aid Program or
Public Law 480 allowing them to
pay with their local currencies.
The quality and price of our Virginia leaf are not yet known in
these areas.
Is there any chance for further
expansion of our local Virginia leaf
tobacco industry which has grown
to its present giant proportions?
Objectively speaking, there are
many factors to reckon with, many
problems to solve. All Virginia leaf
tobacco-producing countries are
confronted with the common problem of surplus stock disposal so
that the expansion of their industries is as urgent and necessary.
SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Consequently, our local industry
faces a very stiff competition.
The establishment of the European Economic Community or
Common Market and the European
Free Trade Association with the
view to abolishing over a certain
period tariffs and other trade obstacles away their members and
their .colonies will greatly affect
the flue-cured leaf imports and exports in Europe and Asia. The Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, Canada and India are benefitted by these agreements and being nearer to the European markets have a distinct advantage over
the Philippines. The six members
of the EEC are Belgium, Luxemburg, France, Netherlands, Federal Republic of Germany, and Italy. The EFTA comprises the countres of Austria, Denmark, Norway,
Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, and
United Kingdom.
Our local cigarette factories may
agitate for the lifting of the ban
on the importation of United States
flue-cured leaf for blending purposes. A problem may arise when
these factories will run out of
stock of imported leaf. For they
have to maintain the high quality
of their products which can be
made possible only through proper blending of fine tobacco in
order to remain in business.
Other problems of our local Virginia leaf industry which could
hamper its development and expansion are:
1) non-competitive prices.
2) high costs of production and
overhead,
3) unscientific methods of culture, production, and conservation,
4) need for better classification
and grading in accordance
with world standards,
5) need for sufficient capital
investment,
6) need for effective marketing
system,
7) need for realistic government
policies on foreign exchange
and trade,
8) need for sustained and vigorous market surveys and
sales promotion activities,


9) need for unity, cooperation,
and support of all segments
of the industry, and
10) need for an efficient, honest,
and effective administration
of the government’s buying
and selling programs.
The future of our local Virginia leaf
depends to a large extent on the
objective solutions of these problems and better trade relation

ship with other countries. We cannot hope for a bright prospect of
our Virginia leaf unless these obstacles are removed.
Considering the impact of the industry to the economic and social
life of the nation, all segments of
the industry should join forces to
bolster its advancement under the
leadership of PVTA.


Personnel of Laoag FaCoMa.


Leaf confab at Filipinas Hotel.


 


Page 13-A


IUDALLO COLICIL REACTITARLD
Production of Quality Leaf Underscored


A move to unite the various
segments of the local Virginia
tobacco industry into one compact
body was pushed through with the
reactivation of the Philippine Virginia Tobacco Council recently at
the Filipinas Hotel.
The PVTC was first organized
in 1960 but became inactive after
the initial meeting of its members
composed of PVTA top officials
and executives of cigarette manufacturing firms and redrying
plants.
The council acts as a consultative body to advise the PVTA
board and management on matters
affecting the Virginia tobacco
industry.
A large group of cigarette manufacturers and redrier-contractors


was present during the luncheonconference. They traded views with
PVTA officials on how to effect
the early disposal of the nation’s
mounting surplus tobacco stocks.
Director Nicomedes T. Rupisan,
chairman of the PVTA board’s
permanent committee on public
relations, welcomed the delegates.
He stressed the vital role that
the council can do toward the
stabilization of one of the country's
top money-making industries.
Speaking of cooperation as a
means of achieving the objectives
of the PVTA, general manager
Eduardo Bananal appealed to
cigarette manufacturers to cooperate with the government in the
early disposal of the nation’s increasing flue-cured tobacco stocks.


Bananal also appealed to redriercontractors to cooperate with the
PVTA in stamping out anomalous
practices in the redrying plants.
Crescente Casis, PVTA chief of
the research and statistics division,
emphasized the need of establishing an international market for
the Philippine flue-cured tobacco
and deplored the lack of effective
sales promotions abroad.
Speaking in behalf of cigarette
manufacturers, Ralph Nubla, president of the St. Louis Tobacco
Corporation, urged the production
of quality Virginia tobacco, which
he said is the sole means by which
the Philippines can establish a
foreign market for local flue-cured
tobacco.


CABUGAO FARMERS' COOPERATIVE MARKETING


ASSOCIATION, INC.


CABUGAO,


ILOCOS SUR


BOARD OF


DIRECTORS


Mr. JOVENCIO S.


SOMERA 


---


...... President


Mr. REMIGIO SAEM 


.......... Vice-President
*


Board I


Members


Dr. CRESENCIO S, AZCUETA Mr. CESARIO


GARCIA
Mrs. JUANITO S. SALARZON


Mr. FELIX BRACEROS


Dr. MARIA


R. JARA
Mr.


JUAN PULA II


Mr. BRAULIO SERNA


Mr. JUAN SISTOZA
Mr. NEMESIO SUERO


MANAGERIAL STAFF


Mr. Pacifico S. Sonico ......... Manager


Miss Leonora A. Somera


................ Sales Clerk


Mr. Benjamin C. Pajarillo .


............. Sec.-Treas.


Mr. Jesus Pacis ....


......... Plant Mechanic


Mr. Emiliano S .Sabangan.


—.... Warehouseman


Mr. Patrocinio Siababa ..


....... Asst. Plant Mech.


Mrs. Editha S. Rabe ..


............ Bookkeepe

Mr. Eusebio Escalona ..


......... Lineman—Elec’n


Mr. Francisco S. Seguban .............. Chief Clerk


Miss Rufina S. Serna .


.............. Bill Collector


Miss Adelina R. Manantan .


—. Asst. Bookkeeper


Mr. Crispulo Salamanca .


....... Messenger-Janitor


Miss Caridad C. Arcebal ............ General Clerk


Mr. Amparo Segui .


......... Night Watchman


Miss Marcela S. Sonico .


......... Storekeeper


Mr. Julian Somera


Night Watchman


Attys.


BENJAMIN SOMERA & EFREN S. UBUNGEN


Legal Counsels


Page 14-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 196


PVTA Head Sees
E
TEN ICIURE FOR TI TODACCO


A bright outlook for Philippinegrown Virginia tobacco, was seen
by Eduardo Bananal, general manager of the Philippine Virginia
Tobacco Administration.
In an interview, Bananal pointed
to the opening of a new foreign
market for the leaf as a result of
President Macapagal’s decontrol
policy.
He said that, with this new
development, the government can
now reasonably expect to clear
its huge stockpile of tobacco. This
would be a further argument
against a congressional move to
withdraw price support from the
Virginia tobacco industry.
As it is, Bananal stressed, the
industry is more than paying back
to the government in terms of


taxes every centavo disbursed for
price support. While every year
the government pours some Po0
million into the industry, some
₱130 million in taxes is collected
from smokers of Virginia-blend
cigarettes. At the same time, about
$30 million in foreign exchange
that formerly went to the importation of foreign cigarettes through
legitimate trade channels has been
saved.
Alluding to the new foreign
market that the decontrol program
has opened for Philippine Virginia
tobacco, Bananal recalled that in
previous years, the high support
prices for the industry had kept
the local leaf out of the world
market. Today, the situation has
changed drastically for the better.


While maintaining the same support prices, it is now possible to
realize more pesos from the same
amount of dollars brought in by
leaf exports, Bananal said.
Explaining the situation, Bananal cited the poorest grades of
Virginia leaf produced by Filipino
farmers. These are Grades D and
E, which are sold at an everage
of P2.49 a kilo ex-warehouse.
In France and Germany, American tobacco of similar grade
(Types 11-14) sells for thirty-five
cents (US) a pound, or seventyseven cents (US) a kilo. At that
price and making allowance for
the 20 per cent exported would
fetch P2.71. These figures should
allow sufficient margin for freight.


GALIMUYOD FACOMA,


INC.


or
DAJADA


GALIMUYOD, ILOCOS SUR





BOARD OF


DIRECTORS


Mr. ANSELMO D.


MAKIL ................


----


...................... President


Mr. EUSEBIO MADAMBA
---------


------------------


.............. Vice-President


MEMBERS


Atty. LEONIDAS TILAN
Mr. FRANCISCO ESPANTO
Mr. MIGUEL BANANSAN
Mr. JUANITO LANGOEY


Mr. CESARIO BUGARIN


Mr. MARIANO VALDEZ
Mr. NICOLAS TUDAYAN
Mr. FEDERICO TEOFILO
Mr. MARCELINO QUIDANGEN


MANAGERIAL STAFF


Mr. Santiago Makil .
Mr. Andres Q. Fermil .
Mr. Marcelino Talladen ..
Mr. Felix Garcia ...
Mr. Benedicto Rubang .
Mr. Elpidio Formoso ........
Mr. Pedro Dugat .....


................ Manager
...... General Clerk
...................... Driver
........... Truck-Helper
.......... Chief Gracer
................... Weigher


Mr. Santos A. Domingo .
............ Bookkeeper Mr. Napoleon M. Tilan 
Mr. Domingo Langoey ..
Mr. Domingo Banay ..
Mr. Bernardo Dongalen .
Mr. Bonifacio Sapongen 


. Sec.-Treasurer
Asst. Bookkeeper
................ Janitor
................ Driver
Warehouseman
.............. Weigher


KHAKI &. RED


Page 15-A


... PVTA board in one of its regular sessions.


The Philippine Virginia ...
(Continued from page 3-A)
a level sufficient to cover the cost
of production plus reasonable profit both in the local as well as in
the foreign market;
3. Create, establish, maintain,
and operate processing, warehousing, and marketing facilities if
suitable centers and supervise the
selling and buying of flue-cured
Virginia tobacco so that the farmers will enjo yreasonable prices
that secure a fair return of their
investments;
4. Prescribe rules and regulations governing the grading, classifying, and inspecting of fluecured Virginia tobacco, and
5. Improve the living economic
conditions of the people engaged
in the tobacco industry.
The PVTA is also given the following specific powers:
1. Take over and assume, and
thereafter exclusively direct, supervise, and control, all functions
and operations with respect to the


processing, warehousing, and trading of flue-cured Virginia tobacco,
the provisions of any existing law


to the contrary notwithstanding.
2. Buy flue-cured Virginia tobacco grown in the Philippines for


OUR UNSTINTED SUPPORT
to the
SOCIO.ECONOMIC PROGRAM OF PRESIDENT MACAPAGAL
and to the
PHILIPPINE VIRGINIA TOBACCO ADMINISTRATION
VIRGINIA TOBACCO PLANTERS'
ASSOCIATION OF PAOAY, INC.
ILOCOS NORTE
PAOAY


MANAGERIAL STAFF:
BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
MR. CONSTANCIO DIAZ JR. ...... Manager
MR. CONSTANCIO DIAZ SR. ........... President
MR. PRIMO SI0 ........................ Sec-Treasurer
MISS BARBARA S10 ................. Vice-President
MISS ROSARIO PADAMADA .... ..... Bookkeeper
MR. FELIS TRINIDAD ......................... Director
MR. BENJAMIN SADUMIANO Warehouseman
MR. FLORENDO GALARSE ............... Director
MISS NATIVIDAD COLLADO ..... Chief Grader
MR. PACIFICO CLEMENTE ............... Director
MR. CONRADO DADOY ................. Messenger
MR. DAMASO BUGARIN .. Director
MR. FELIZARDO PACARIEM . Guard
MR. RODRIGO GALARSE ............ Director


Page 16-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


... PVTA officials confer with redrier-contractors and cigarette manufacturers.


resale to local bona fide tobacco
manufacturers and tobacco dealers;
3. Give priority in the purchase
of the flue-cured Virginia tobacco
that are sold through farmers’ cooperative marketing associations,
or federations thereof, dealing principally in flue-cured Virginia tobacco, or any 100 percent Filipino
firm or corporation the majority
of the stocks of which are owned
by said farmers’ cooperative mar
keting associations, or deferations
thereof, locally-grown flue-cured
Virginia tobacco either through
direct sale or barter; (Barter of
locally-grown Virginia leaf tobacco
for foreign grown flue-cured Virginia tobacco or its manufactured
products is not allowable. Only
such locally-grown Virginia tobacco as cannot be sold profitably in
dollars may be bartered.)
4. Give priority in the use of
facilities, equipment, trucking service, warehouses, processing plants
(Continued on page 22-A)


BADOC VIRGINIA


TOBACCO


GROMWERS' ASSOCIATION


BOARD OF DIRECTORS


President ......


A-------


------


 PEDRO D. CAJIGAL


Vice President ...


----


........ PEDRO CAINDEC


Secretary ...


---------------


------


-..... JUAN RODRIGUEZ


MEMBERS


ANTONIO BALDONADO


TEODORO


DAGMANG


FELIX SEURANA


ERNESTO


PADA


JOVENCIO


NAHOR


QUIRINO


TABALBAG


JULIO DAGMANG


MANUEL


VERTIDO


MANAGERIAL


. STAFF


PEDRO D. CAJIGAL


---------------------


........ President-Manager


JUAN LLANA 


------------------------


--------------


........................ Treasurer


CIRIACO RODRIGUEZ


-


A--------


............... Warehouseman


CRESENCIO PEREZ


----------


-----


..................... Bookkeeper


FRED PALAFOX 


---------------------------


--------


................... Clerk


 


Page 17-A


The present production trends
of flue-cured Virginia leaf tobacco
resulting in the accumulation of a
tremendous surplus stock purchased with government funds has
given rise to the need of opening
and promoting our tobacco export
trade. This solution is certainly
more profitable than cutting down
production to the level of domestic consumption. This is so because
overpopulation can be converted
into a veritable dollar producing
industry "provided that the Philippine Virginia flue-cured tobacco
leaf produced is up to the quality
standards of competitive exportable tobacco and the markets are
found."
This need for the development
of foreign markets for our tobacco
is based and bolstered by the fact
that flue-cured Virginia leaf tobacco produced in the Philippines has
a quality potential which, if developed, can profitably and safely
compete with the best flue-cured


chanism which have proved to be
economically unsound, a great deal
of effort and adjustments must be
exerted before our flue-cured tobacco foreign trade become a
growing concern. Which means
that our tobacco should be a permanent element in the blend of
cigarette brands in other countries.
There is also a need for a sincere
appraisal of the economic position
of the Virginia tobacco industry
in the Philippines, the beneficial
and also the harmful effects of the
price support law which brought
the industry into prominence, and
should cause no material loss to
the government. Our goals should
take into consideration the law of
supply and demand which makes
for a sound and healthy national
tobacco program. There must be a
recognition that we do not intend
to make government warehouses
the ultimate market for as has
been stated by Ervin Peterson,
Assistant Secretary of Agriculture


They say that the export markeis the world, for practically every
country in the world imports some
leaf tobacco. A number of important markets, such as the United
Kingdom, the Netherlands, the
Scandinavian countries, and Ireland do not produce tobacco and
import all their requirements.
Many other countries, including
West Germany, France, Australia,
Austria, New Zealand, and Switzerland, import a large proportion
of their tobacco needs. A considerable group of countries like
India, Italy, and Japan import tobacco for blending purposes.
The conditions obtaining in the
market is highly competitive both
with respect to price and quality
because production of the fluecured tobacco has increased tremendously within the last few
years. New competitors have appeared in the market threatening
to dislodge traditional exporters
like the United States which has


Viroima Tobacco Export Trade
Problems of The


tobacco produced in other countries. This view was emphasized
categorically by Elia Salzman, an
international tobacconist. He said:
"From the above study, we conclude that in the visited areas
(with some exceptions) conditions
are very favorable for production
of the very good quality Virginia
type flue-cured tobacco, for which
there could be a ready demand in
the European and other markets
of the world.” The same view and
findings are shared by James Love,
a Virginia tobacco technician of
thirty years experience, a United
Nations expert on the subject and
former consultant to the PVTA.
He said that Virginia tobacco produced in the Philippines possesses
quality characteristics of high aroma and flavor which can approximate that of the United States.
However, in view of the prevailing conditions in the Philippines
especially with respect to production, culture and marketing me

By GIL E. TABIJE
of the United States, "what the
government can give, government
can take away." Any industry is in
a perilous position when a significant part of its income depends
upon artificial economy — and
when this in turn depends on the
legislative process. We must be of
the conviction that price subsidy
law is only necessary when adverse
conditions occur in production and
the farmers do not get a reasonable margin for their investment.
The conditions obtaining in the
world markets should be presented
and analyzed to be the basis for
whatever corrective and constructive action we may take. This will
lead us to the inescapable study
of the factors which influence and
modify market behavior, the problems which the major exporting
countries are encountering in
maintaining their markets. These
considerations will surely affect
our export venture.


felt a decrease of her markets.
The competitive factors which
directly affect and influence market behavior are quality, price, and
governmental action by foreign
markets in the form of economic
and political alliances. These factors have served in making much
of the world not a free market of
tobacco.
Quality is a very strong factor
in determining market demand
and structure. In the leaf tobacco,
trade quality may be measured in
different terms. To the 'ultimate
consumer, quality is measured in
terms of the satisfaction and enjoyment the smoker gets in smoking a particular brand of cigarette. This in turn is primarily
determined by the leaf tobacco
used in the manufacture. To the
manufacturer or broker, quality
refers to the variety and grade of
leaf tobacco. The smoker has no
idea as to the blend used in the
(Continued on page 22-A)


Page 18-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Eastern Cabugao Virginia Tobacco
Producers' Corporation


CABUGAO, ILOCOS SUR


BOARD OF DIRECTORS


President . JESUS AQUINO
Vice-President ... MANUEL CASTILLO


MEMBERS


MATIAS CASTILLO
VICTORIO SAJOR
SALUSTIANO SIRUNO


BENJAMIN SAJOR
GREGORIO SAGNEP
TEODORO BRACEROS


MANAGERIAL STAFF
Manager .................................... ALEJANDRO SAJOR
Secretary-Warehouseman ........... FLORENTINO SUETOS
Treasurer . MAGDALENA C. SAJOR
Bookkeeper .................................. FRANCISCO S. CRUZ
Asst. Bookkeeper ................ HONORATA A. DE LA CRUZ
Grader-Weigher ................ ERLINDA SOCIAS


Sinait (I. Sur) FaCoMa, Inc.
SINAIT, ILOCOS SUR


BOARD OF DIRECTORS


Atty. ULPIANO I. CAMPOS .............................. President
Mr. PEDRO I. IBARRA ................ VicePresident


MEMBERS


Mr.


TEOFILO


YADAO


Mr.


PEDRO


IDICA


Mr.


FEDERICO


FARINAS


Mr.


JUSTO


IPAC


Mr. ALFONSO


AGSALOG


Mr.


FELIX


ILORETA


Mr.


JOSE TUMBAGA


Mr


ALEJANDRO YADAO


MANAGERIAL STAFF


Mr. AUGUSTO T. IBANEZ  Manager
Mr. BERNABE C. ANUNCIACION ............ Sec.-Treasurer
MiSs ADELAIDA CALIBOSO ........................ Bookkeeper
Mr. ARSENIO CABACUNGAN ................ Warehouseman
Mr. CATALINO REYNON .................................... Janitor


Eastern Narvacan Virginia
Tohacco Planters, Inc.
NARVACAN, ILOCOS SUR


BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Capt. GUILLERMO C. SUPNET ..


Presicient


DIRECTORS
MISs LEONORA CORRALES
Mrs. IRENE CORRALES
Mr. FEDERICO CORRALES
Mr. PEDRO SUPNET


MANAGERIAL STAFF
Mr. MAGNO CORRALES  Manager
Mr. ENRIQUE CORRALES ................ Secretary-Treasurer
Mr. ANTOLIN M. AGLIPAY ........................ Bookkeeper
Mr. DIONISIO SUPNET .................................... Weigher
Miss PRIMITIVA SUPNET .. Grader
Mr. ELISEO LAPUTAN ............................ Warehouseman


BATAC NORTHEASTERN


TGA, INC.
BATAC, ILOCOS NORTE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
ISIDRO R. BALTAZAR .


......... President


ROSARIO B. BUMANGLAG





-


Vice-President


BASILIO LOLINCO 





--


............ Member


MARIA PASARILLO 








.......... Member


REMIGIO PASARILLO 





A


.......... Member


TIMOTEA GALACGAC 





-


........... Member


FABIAN LAPAT .


--


A


........... Member


MANAGERIAL STAFF
ROSARIO BUMANGLAG 


....... Manager


BASILIO LOLINCO 


A


*


.......... Treasurer


TIMOTEA GALACGAC 


--


--


......... Secretary


ARTEMIO BUSTO 








Warehouseman


ANTONIA URANI 





... Bookkeeper-Clerk


FELIZA L. MONGE 


---


A


Representative


 


Page 19-A


MANAGEMENT
SURVEY UNDERWAY


PVTA’s unrelenting campaign to
promote efficient performance of
PVTA functions and activities continues as management directed the
organization of a Survey Team.
The survey will undertake an
extensive review and evaluation of
all aspects and areas of PVTA
organization and operations and
adopt recommendations and measures to improve over-all performance.
The Plans and Programs Office
has been assigned to undertake
over-all supervision and coordination of the survey team.
The management survey shall
include the following:
1. Organization
2. Redrying plant operations
3. Sales Promotions
4. Financing operations
5. Field Operations


o. Administrative Operations
General Manager Eduardo Bananal disclosed that the most
important feature of the survey
team is its mission of effecting


further improvements in the performance of PVTA functions and
activities to achieve its corporate
goals and mission at the least
possible cost.


Sinait Virginia Tobacco Planters
Association, Inc.
SINAIT, ILOCOS SUR
BOARD OF DIRECTORS


MARIANO B. IBANEZ .................................... President
LEONARDO DAYOAN .................................. Vice-President
ALFONSO IPALARI .. Director
LORETO REMOLACIO ...... Director
GREGORIO MORALES ........................... Director


MANAGERIAL STAFF
MANUEL IPALAR! . Manager
ANDRES S. SAVELLA ........................................ Treasurer
CESAR CORPUZ ...................................... Warehouseman
ONOFRE BAUTISTA .. Grader
LAURO P. INES .................................................. Weigher


LAOAG FARMERS' COOPERATIVE
MARKETING ASSOCIATION, INC.
42 BONIFACIO ST., LAOAG, ILOCOS NORTE
Leaf Tobacco Dealer, Subsidized Fertilizer Distributor,
Supplier of Farm Chemicals, Garlic & Onion Dealer,
Poultry & Swine Feed Distributor, Dry Goods
Retailer & Dealer of Other Farm Products.
EULGENCIO J. LUIS ........................................ President
APOLONIO DEL ROSARIO ....................... Vice-President
FLORENTINO TAMAYO  Manager
ORLINO A. SAHAGUN .................... 	Secretary-Treasurer
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD
ATTY. ALBERTO SUGUITAN
MR. VICTOR PAULINO
MR. MODESTO JOSE
MR. QUIRINO DUMLAO
MR. TIMOTEO BERNARDINO
MR. FEDERICO TOLENTINO
MR. PEDRO P. ANDRES
MR. FAUSTINO REYES
MR. SEVERO GARO


Page 20-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


PVTA May Participate in Worid Tobacco Fair


The Philippine Virginia Tobacco
Administration may participate in
the First International Tobacco
Trade Congress to be held in
Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia, on
March 6 to 10 next year.
This developed recently even as
inquiries such as size of area for
staging exhibits for delegates, fees,
length and form of paper to be
submitted, have been sent by the
PVTA to the Tobacco Export Promotion Council of Rhodesia and


Nyasalan which is sponsoring the
fair.
General Manager Eduardo Bananal said that at least 5 delegates
will be sent to the tobacco congress should the plan materialize.
He recommends a delegate each
from the farmers group, redriercontractors group, cigarette manufacturers group, exporters-importers group and 3 delegates from
the PVTA.
He also said that delegates will


gain a deeper insight of the world
flue-cured tobacco situation, thus
broadening their perspective of
tobacco management. In effect,
he said, their experiences will
result in a possible world-wide expansion of the local industry.
Bananal said that participation
to world fairs is only one of his
programs of promoting the sale
of surplus Philippine tobacco
which has reached astronomical
proportions.


Iocos Sur-Abra Federation
of Facomas, Inc.
MAGSINGAL, ILOCOS SUR
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
HIGINIO T. FARINAS ...................................... President
CONSTANTINO SOMERA .................... Ist Vice-Presicent
JOVENCIO SOMERA ... 2nd Vice-President
AMBROSIO ANIN . 3rd Vice-President
BOARD MEMBERS
ANSELMO MAKIL
Atty. ARTEMIO CARINO
BERNARDINO ABELLERA
IGNACIO MANZANO
FRANCISCO CALIP
MANAGERIAL FORCE
MONICO UGALINO  Manager
CECILIO PASCUA .............................. Secretary-Treasurer
MELECIO UNICO .......................................... Bookkeeper
JUANITO BENZON .................................... Warehouseman


Vuang Tanag na Day Non
CLUB RIO
The Choice For a Richer Evening Entertainment
 FAMILY COCKTAIL ROOM — For the elite
* FOOD — Your sizzling delight * DRINK — Only the best
Olongapo, Zambales
Telephone: 1141


Ilocos Virginia Tohacco
Development Corporation
TAYAC, BANTAY, ILOCOS SUR
LEONARDO N. SANIDAD
President
FELIPE U. LIQUETE
Manager
CARLINA R. FORMOSO
Treasurer
LEONOR SANIDAD JR.
Secretary
ROSARIO SANIDAD
Chief Grader and Weigher
SERAPIO RABARA
Warehouseman


Join us and have fun at
SHAMROCK CLUB
44 Magsaysay Drive, Olongapo, Zambales, Philippines
Wine * Women * Music
Floor Show Every Pay Day


 


Page 21-


Problems of the Virginia ...
(Continued from page 18-A)
manufacture of the cigarette being
smoked. In the mind of the
manufacturer, therefore, the most
important consideration is where
to find this particular grade and
variety. A demand is therefore
created which gives back to the
farmer or producer.
Generally, however, quality leaf
tobacco which is needed by im
porting countries and on the basis
of discussions of leading manufacturers it comes from "well
matured, ripe, grainy and flavorful tobacco with high aroma.”
This is the reason why the major
exporting countries have doubled
their efforts on more effective
reaserch, better varieties, and
improve cultural practices and
grading which raises quality to
competitive growths. Their tobacce
institutes are turning out tobacco
specialists to the extent that a
grower is a specialist in the tobacco growing.
In the Philippines, current statistics will prove that quality has
been sacrificed for quantity in such
a manner that the high quality
produced may not even be enough
for our domestic consumption. In
truth, we are indeed very far behind the countries which we hope
to compete with in the scientific
and cultural methods of production. And this is the main and
crucial problem — the disposition
of a huge amount of low-grade
tobacco stored in government
warehouses.
We need to initiate, therefore, a
well-defined and directed research
and development program which
will lower production costs and
raise the margin of profit to the
farmer and legitimate businessmen.
This aspect has been sadly neglected. We have not even viewed a
program of training our own
Virginia tobacco specialists as
contrasted with other smaller industries which have their own
training centers or institutes.
The other factor is price. It is
fundamental that when a price fon
a given commodity is high, the
purchaser looks for other markets


Balmaceda Explains ...
(Continued from page 8-A)
plore the world markets as a realistic means of disposing stock piles
of the local leaf. The local leaf
he said, can compare favorably
with those produced anywhere in
the world and, in some respects,
are even better than those produced in the United States.
The acting board chairman urged
all employees to work with a sense
of mission. You are not here mere
ly to work with a sense of mission. You are not here merely to
do typeriting jobs, or to earn a
living, but you are here to help
build a cathedral, he said. The
cathedral, according to him, is the
stabilization of the local flue-cured
tobacco industry and the improvement of the national economy.
The cooperation is nnly as strong
as its weakest link, he emphasized.
About a hundred officials and
employees were present during the
"asalto" party.


from which to buy his needs. And
when he could get it from other
sources grade for grade then we
could sell our products. In the
virginia leaf tobacco trade, prices
must be in accordance with that
of the world market. This is very
essential to a country whose product is still untested and not in
demand.
Last year, several West German
tobacco manufacturers came to
survey conditions obtaining in the
Philippines. They were willing to
buy low-grade flue-cured tobacco.
Unfortunately however, no sale
was consummated because the
price was too high and the same
grade can be bought at lower
prices from other countries.
We must not forget that there
is a need to undersell in order to
capture the market so that when
the quality of our Virginia tobacco
is well established and highly
demanded, prices may go up.
Manufacturers will keep Philippine markets because our tobacco
has become a permanent element
in their blends.


The Philippine Virginia ...
(Continued from page 17-A)
and machineries owned or operated by farmers’ cooperative marketing associations, or federations
thereof, dealing principally in Virginia leaf tobacco, or any 100 percent Filipino firms or corporation
the majority of the stocks of which
are owned by said farmers’ cooperative marketing associations,
or federations thereof, to carry out
its purposes;
5. Develop and expand the domestic and foreign markets for
flue-cured Virginia tobacco, its
products and by-products in order
to promote and expand production
of flue-cured Virginia tobacco, its
products and by-products.
6. Grant loans and credits on
reasonable terms, for trading purposes, to farmers’ cooperative marketing associations or federations
thereof, dealing principally in Virginia leaf tobacco, or any 100 percent Filipino firm or corporation
the majority of the stocks of which
are owned by said farmers’ cooperative marketing associations or
federations thereof, whenever it
deems such loans necessary; (Interest does not exceed seven per
cent per annum.)
7. Enter into, make and execute
contracts of any kind as may be
necessary or incidental to the attainment of its purposes with any
person, firm, or corporation, with
the Government of the Philippines
or with any foreign government,
subject to existing laws;
8. Promote, foster, and encourage the organization of cooperative
associations among tobacco planters, producers or dealers in fluecured Virginia tobacco-producing
regions in collaboration with the
ACCFA; and
9. Do any and all such other
things as may be necessary or incidental to the attainment of its
purposes.
On January 11, 1960, the PVTA
was formally established with the
appointments of the Board of Directors composed of the Chairman
and six (6) members and the Gen(Continued on page 24-A)


Page 22-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


GREETINGS to the


BATAC


PHILIPPINE VIRGINIA
TOBACCO ADMINISTRATION


BAIAC CONSOLIDATED
FACOMAS


ILOCOS NORTE


CENTRAL VIRGINIA TOBACCO PLANTERS'
ASSOCIATION OF BATAC, INC.
BATAC, ILOCOS NORTE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Atty. JULIAN Q. CHUA
................................... President
Dr. ZACARIAS AOIGAN .................................................................... Vice-President
Atty. ISAYAS G. PENEYRA . Manager
MrS. ANITA D. PENEYRA ........................................................ Treasurer-Secretary
Mr. GREGORIO RIGONAN  Director
MrS. PILAR D. FRANCO .............................. Director
MiSS CONSTANCIA LUMANG ............. Director
Mr. JUAN CATUDAN ..................... Director
MrS. FILIPINAS DULDULAO .......... Director
Mr. ALFONSO VIERNES ................................................................ Director
Mr. AMBROSIO DAGUlO .................................................. Director


MANAGEMENT STAFF
Atty. Isayas G. Peneyra ............................ Manager Dra. Anita D, Peneyra ............................ Treasurer
Mr. Manvel Baclig ............ Bookkeeper Miss Felipa I. Malabed ....... Secretary
Mr, Fernando Benson .................................. Clerk Mr. Emiliano D. Quilban .............. Representative
Mr. Dominador G. Querubin .......... Representative Miss Angela Sagun . Grader
Miss Ester Mapugay ..
.......... Weigher


 


Page 2


.. . Mrs. Macapagal asking a few questions about tobacco during the last Public Relations
Week held at the GSIS auditorium.


The Philippine Virginia ...
(Continued from page 22-X)
eral Manager and Assistant General Manager. The six flue-cured
Virginia tobacco-producing provinces are duly represented in the
agency’s governing body.
The establishment of the PVTA
removed from the ACCFA the government’s trading program on fluecured Virginia tobacco and transferred it to the new agency. However, the PVTA, by its Charter, is
not concerned with the disposal of
the Virginia tobacco purchase of
the ACCFA.
It was on January 14, 1960 when
the PVTA set up its organization,
opened its office, recruited personnel and acquired the necessary furniture, equipment, supplies and
transportation facilities. The PVTA
organizational machinery, aside
from the Board of Directors, General Manager, and Assistant General Manager has been subdivided
into three (3) major departments,


Batac Tobacco Farmers"
Association, Inc.
BATAC, ILOCOS NORTE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS


Dr. SAULO B. GARGANTA ............... 	President
Dr. ANTONIO ODUCAYEN ................................ Vice-President
Mr. ALFREDO LAYAOEN ............................................ Director
Mr. GUILLERMO M. CALZADO . Director
Mr. FELIX FRANCO ........ Director
Mr. VICTOR LUZOD ........................................ Director
Mr. CESAR RONDUEN .. Director
Mr. EFREN SIBUCAO ...................... Director
Mr. REGINALDO GAPAS ... Director
Mr. DOMINADOR QUEVEDO ................ Director
Engr. AGATON ASUNCION ............................ Director
MANAGERIAL STAFF
Mr. GUILLERMO M. CALZADO  Manager
Mr. EFREN SIBUCAO  Sec-Treasurer
MiSs URSULA RINGOR .......................................... Bookkeeper
Mr. DOMINADOR QUEVEDO ...................................... Auditor
Mr. FERDINAND GARGANTA ............................ Warehouseman
Miss GLORIA T. SARIAN ................................ Clerk-Weigher
Mr. DANTE QUEVEDO ................................ Computer-Recorder
Mrs. PRESES ORTAL . Grader
MiSs CLARITA PAMBID ............................................ Classifier
Miss ANTONIA SALUCOP ........................................ Classifier
MiSS LUCIA PANGDAN .............................................. Classifier
MiSS ILARINA ASUNCION ................................... Classifier
Mr. ALFREDO LAYAOEN .............................. Representative
Mr. VICTORIO LUZOD ................................ Representative
Mr. REGINALDO GAPAS ................................ Representative


Santa Cruz Farmers’ Cooperative
Marketing Association, Inc.
SANTA CRUZ, ILOCOS SUR
BOARD OF DIRECTORS


ANTONIO A. SALES ................................ President
ANTONIO B. JOVEN ................................ Vice President
BENJAMIN JANDOC .................................. Member


ALEJANDRO LOZANO 
BERNARDINO SILAPAN 
"
JOSE LOPEZ 
"*
MAXIMIANO CABATU 
ARCADIO MADAYAG ... " (Inactive)
ANTONIO JAVILLONAR . " (Inactive)
" (fnactive)
CRESENCIO OMAOENG 
BARTOLA AMOR ...................... " (Inactive)


MANAGERIAL STAFF


TEODORO C. CONTAO!  Maneger
EUSEBIA M. CUDIAMAT ................................ Treasurer
ANTONIA B. JOVEN ........................ Secretary
EUSEBIO A. SALES .................................. Warehouseman
HONORATA CORTEZ  Bookkeeper
ANTONINA JARAMILLA .................................. Clerk


Page 24-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Services Department (with six
provincial offices), and six (6) offices namely: Plans and Programs
Office, Treasury, Accounting Office,
Legal Office, Administrative Office,
and Office of the Corporate Secretary. The Office of the Corporate
Auditor has also been set up by
the Auditor General with the support of the PVTA.
Unlike many other government
entities, the PVTA does not receive
any appropriation for its administrative expenses and business operations from the Government
Fund. As envisioned, it is a selfsustaining agency and as provided
for by its Charter the Central Bank
shall give loans at 2 percent per
annum to the PVTA for its initial administrative expenses and
for purchases of all locally-grown
flue-cured Virginia leaf tobacco
(excluding sundried) which it can
sell. The first loan in the amount
of P4.5 million was released to the
agency on March 21, 1960, for its
(Continued on page 27-A)


.. general manager Bananal looks at hogsheads with satisfaction.


Western Magsingal Virginia Tobacco


Producers' Association, Inc.


MAGSINGAL, ILOCOS SUR


BOARD OF DIRECTORS


MARIANO URETA 


....... President


NICOLAS ROL 


Vice-President


GREGORIO ROL ...... Director &


Sec.-Treasurer


CLEMENTE CASTANEDA 


........ Director


ERNESTO TAMAYO 


........ Director


DOMINGO URETA 


...... Director


MIGUEL VIERNES 


...... Director


MANAGERIAL STAFF


MrS. GUMERSINDA RUARO 


........ Manager


Mr. BARTOLOME SEGU! .


... Bookkeeper


MiSs ROSA ROL .


.. Clerk-Typist


Mrs. FELIZA R. URETA .


...... Crader


Mr. MARIANO ROL 


Warehouseman


San Esteban Facoma, Inc.
SAN ESTEBAN, ILOCOS SUR


BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Atty. BENEDICTO PACQUING ........................... President
DIRECTORS
Mr. FLORENTINO IMPERIAL Mr. GREGORIO ELAYDO
Mr. ADELINO GUZMAN
Mr. IRENEO CUSTODIO
Mr. VIRGILIO AYSON
Mr. ANGEL COLIS
MANAGERIAL STAFF


Mr. BERNARDINO ABELLA  Manager
Mr. SIMON CASIMIRO  Sec.-Treasurer
MrS. ELOY D. ORPILLA ................................ Bookkeeper
Mr. ARTHUR MENDOZA .................................... Weigher
Mr. FLORENTINO IMPERIAL . Grader
MF. ELFREN CASTRO ........................................... Clerk
Mr. GREGORIO ESTRADA ........................ Warehouseman


KHAKI &. RED


Page 25-A


.. a typical scene of a hanging ramp in the redrying plant.


The Advantages of ...
(Continued from page 10-A)
vantage of late plantings. This
means that a crop planted in late
February will not be reaped until
April and will not be finished until
sometime in May. If the rains
come early in April, one will surely
reap tobacco of very poor quality.
The cost of growing tobacco
planted late is expensive and
laborious. Due to excessive rates
of soil moisture evaporation, more
watering is needed. Weather conditions are adverse to the laborers.
Result: less amount of work is
accomplished at the end of each
working day.
Our records show a striking difference on the output between the
yields of late and early plantings.
There is a difference of 283 kilos
per hectare in favor of early
planting operation. It is also
common knowledge that “rained"
tobacco is inferior to cured leaves
of tobacco planted early.
The following are the advantages
of early planting: (mid-November
up to December)


 general manager Eduardo Bananal inspects tobacco deliveries.


1. The temperature in November
and December is much colder than
in January and February. This is
advantagcous both to planters and
seedlings.
2. Pests such as grasshoppers,
crickets, katydids and false wireworms are much less in evidence
during the early part of the season.
This is partly due to abundance
of young grass and weeds in the
paddies where these pests feed on.
It is a sad personal experience that
when I planted in late January and
February, a great number of sturdy seedlings was destroyed by
these pests. These pests could be
minimized by early preparation
which early planting necessitates.
Plowing destroys pests’ eggs which
are found some three inches below
the soil surface.
3. Grubs, including eelworms
and nematodes, are at this time
of ear at least 12 inches below
the surface. By the time they crop
up with the increasing moisture,
(Continued on page 31-A)


Page 26-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


The Philippine Virginia ...
(Continued from page 24-A)
administrative expenses and trading funds which were proportionally apportioned to the six provinces based on available statistical
data. The loans mature from two
to three years.
The PVTA tobacco trading operates with the use of the Management Contract awarded to three
(3) redriers after a public bidding
was conducted. These three redriers are the Philippine Tobacco
Flue-curing and Redrying Corporation (PTFCRC), the Consolidated
Tobacco Industries of the Philippines (CTIP), and the Northern
Farmers' Exchange, Inc. (NOR
FEX). Each corporation has distinct and separate Management
Contract with the PVTA and were
allocated to redry fifteen (15) million kilos, five (5) million kilos,
and three (3) million kilos of Virginia leaf tobacco, respectively,
last year. Under the terms and conditions of the Management Contract the redrier, with proper
warehouse, procures flue-cured
Virginia tobacco for the PVTA
from the FaCoMas, associations, or
federations thereof, registered to
trade with the PVTA. The redrier
regrades, reclassifies, weighs, redries and packs in hogsheads the
flue-cured tobacco it buys for the
PVTA. The PVTA pays for the
warehousing and servicing. The
contractor also agrees to buy 40
per cent of the tobacco procured
by him. The Management Contract
provides for the price per kilograms of every grade of luelcured
Virginia tobacco leaves with which
the PVTA shall reimburse the tobacco procured by each of the
three contracting corporations.
The PVTA trading activities for
the year 1960-1961 were considered
successful. With the amount of
₱105,126,445.10 loans released by
the Central Bank, the agency was
able to purchase and redry 39,275,
019 kilograms valued at P99,430,-
822.78. It paid actually an interest
in the amount of P142,235.11. This
PVTA stock has to be aged from
two to three years before it could


be sold to the cigaette factories so
that during this period of aging the
agency has to depend on Central
Bank loans for its tobacco business. Also the PVTA extended merchandising loans to FaCoMas and
federations engaged in the production and trading of Virginia leaf
tobacco and registered with the
PVTA. The yhave a total membership of 80,229 farmers and a total
authorized capital of P14,010,147.00;
P2,060,085.74 is paid up. All these
associations and corporations are
located in the six tobacco-producing provinces in northern and
central Luzon. As of July 31,1962,
the grand total rose from 109 to
273 FaCoMas and other associations or corporations registered to
trade with PVTA. The screening
of the applications for registration
is very rigid in order to forestall
anomalies.
Learning from the pitfalls of
past government tobacco trading
under the ACCFA, the PVTA took
several courageous steps toward
improving the clasifying, grading
and inspecting of the Virginia leaf
tobacco, paying the farmers’ crops
on time and other phases of the
program. Classifiers, inspectors


and graders have been trained before they were allowed to perform
their jobs. This methods improved
to a great extent the classifying
and grading of the PVTA purchases.
The Philippine Virginia leaf tobacco industry has attained present progressive status because of
the government’s price support
program. The farmers shifted from
rice to tobacco farming because of
the high protective price paid for
the flue-cured Virginia tobacco
which is considered the most unrealistic in the world. As a result
of overproduction which exceeds
the domestic requirements for
cigarette manufacture, there exists
a large surplus.
The industry is young compared
to the flue-cured Virginia tobacco
industries of the United States, Canada, Rhodesia and Nyasaland, and
India. These countries are the
major producers and suppliers of
flue-cured Virginia tobacco in the
free world. However, laboratory
tests indicate that the locallygrown flue-cured Virginia tobacco is comparable to its foreign
counterpart in aroma, flavor, mild(Continued on page 28-A)


.. New Board members take oath of office.


 


Page 27-A


CCE-A Service Organization


The Philippines is traditionally an agricultural country. But rice farming as an
industry has not reached the desired maturity by which our people might achieve
sufficiency in our rice production. Though
hard to admit, it is nevertheless an admitted
fact that our staple foods production is the
lowest in the world so much so that we
are importers instead of exporters of our
major cereal needs. This has been a great
drain on the national budget and our
dwindling dollar reserves as the bulk of
importation has reached such proportions
as to render perennial food shortages, necessitating our dependency on low-grade
cereals, more specifically rice.
Our agricultural practices are so antiquated that our farmers’ living conditions
and production have so suffered as to
greatly affect our national economy. An
average farmer in the Philippines does not
own the land he tills. He is a tenant
who slaves for another, working a farm
of about 3.5 hectares with the most primitive of farm implements and planting
system. Most probably he owns a carabao
or two for plowing purposes and has only
a single crop harvest annually. The average
yield of his farm is 27.3 cavans per hectare
and his credit facilities are limited to
scheming usurers and loan sharks who
victimize the farming segments of our
society. Hardly does an average farmer have
cnough cash for his barest needs as his
limited income does not permit much margin after paying his debts and the exhorbitant interests imposed on him.
And so it is a vicious cycle by which
our farmers are unwitting victims of a
lopsided social system from which they can
not rise above their immediate problems.
Unwanted poverty and misery plague our
rural folks giving wake to the waves of
lawlessness, criminality and discontent that
our government is trying to check before
they assume alarming proportions. Although
these manifold national crises are inherent
with any growing republic they should
nevertheless be treated in accordance with
their apparent gravity. And so, an awakened populace became conscious of the
task at hand and the crusading spirit rose
to take up the challenge that the post-war
era brought forth in our midst.
A handful of men and a determination
born out of the devastation of the last
war served as the foundation for a bold
government program that was aimed towards
the emancipation of the small farmer. A
government office was created to work out
a truly effective way by which the many


ills affecting our rural folks can be alleviated by government assistance througli
a self-help program. This office came to
be known as the ACCFA (Agricultural
Credit and Cooperative Financing Administration). The ACCFA’s two-fold missions
are: 1) to promote the organization of
associations and 2) to extend to farmermembers liberal credit facilities thus helping
them escape the tentacles of rural usury.
This program also introduced to the
country dynamic and far-reaching socioeconomic reforms and the combatting of
Communist-inspired elements by democratic
ways beamed towards the regeneration of
the uninformed segments of our rural
population. In areas where want and unrest
was most common, the government concentrated on a frenzied activaton of an
organized cooperative spirit. The success of
this concerted movement resulted in the
development and acceptance of the new
pattern of agricultural reforms and corrective measures designed to boost production
and contribute to the stability of our
national economy.
Because of the immediate and enthusiastic
response that met the implementation of
this undertaking, within three to four
years after the ACCFA was created, thousands of farmers throughout the country
banded together under ACCFA supervision
and organized themselves into cooperative
marketing associations and federations called
FaCoMas. This led to the establishment of
the Central Cooperative Exchange, Inc. or
CCE, the national marketing arm of the
FaCoMas delegated with the efficient and
effective marketing, processing and distribution of farm products. The CCE was
organized on January 14, 1955 under Act
No. 3425, otherwise known as the Cooperative Marketing Law. It was incorporated on
February 25, 1955, and was affiliated with
the ACCFA on February 12, 1955, dedicated
to serve the FaCoMas. It was authorized
with a capital of one million pesos with
10,000 shares, each valued at P100.00.
At the date of incorporation, the CCE
had a membership of 14 FaCoMas with
14 paid up shares while 2,486 shares were
subscribed by the ACCFA which was 99.44 90
of the total capital. Recent figures record
FaCoMa membership to 418 active associations owning 5,836 shares while the
ACCFA now holds only 41.642% of the
shares. This is in line with the main
objectives of the ACCFA in organizing
the FaCoMas, that the ACCFA would slowly
withdraw its capital stock from the CCE
upon the ability of the member-FaCoMas


The Philippine Virginia ...
(Continued from page 27-A)
ness, burning capacity and other
characteristics needed in the manufacture of a good quality cigarette.
The industry as a whole has become a P70 million a year business
enterprise so much so that it requires effective and efficient high
financing and scientific marketing
management.
After intensive researches and
studies on the local and world tobacco situation, particularly on
production, consumption, price
trends, tariffs, trade agreements,
Philippine balance of payments,
foreign exchange, and many other
relevant factors have been conducted, the PVTA Management and
Board of Directors decided to survey potential markets in Europe
and Asia and Oceania. Survey
teams were sent to selected countries therein to implement the
project. However, it would seem
that the production of sufficient
quality flue-cured Virginia tobacco
at lower prices deserves equal immediate atention and action in
order to have a continuous supply of the type that is acceptable
in the free world market. The government’s price support program
cannot go on forever. In fact, some
legislative leaders are in favor of
abolishing such program and make
the flue-cured Virginia tobacco
business a free enterprise.
Indeed, the PVTA is faced with
manifold problems. What are the
major problems and their solutions? Shall the government continue the price support program
considering the impact of the industry to the national economy?
If the price support is withdrawn,
what would be the best alternative?
to raise enough funds to buy out the
ACCFA shares. This stipulation has been
the goal of all the active FaCoMas which
to them would be the apex of their cooperative efforts.
Of the 418 activated FaCoMas, 341
handle rice and corn. The CCE through its
members serve about 236,346 families from
40 provinces with 9,327 barrios in 537
(Continued on page 30-A)


Page 28-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


GREETINGS from—


Philippine-American Cigar
& Cigarette Manufacturing
Co.. Inc.


PAOAY FaCoMa


354 Protacio St., Pasay City


Cable Address: "PHILAMCIG Tels.: 8-24-07 &. 8-24-87


Ilocos Norte
Paoay


Smoke
SNOWMAN—Filter Cigarette


COMPLIMENTS OF


CHINESE CHAMBER Of COMMERCE


of LA UNION


San Fernando
E


La Union
SE


For A Pleasurable Evening


GREENLAND NITE
CLUB


MrS. MAGDALENA BLAZA
1690 Manila Avenve
Prop
etor
Olongapo, Zambales


Compliments of—
STO. DOMINGO FaCoMa
llocos Sur
Sto. Domingo


— ILE MA N La 9 3
CLOVER NITE CLUB
28 Magsaysay Drive, Olongapo, Zambales
Tel. 1263
Open 9:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M.
JULIAN BUENAFE
Eng. SIXTO BASOBAS
Proprieto
Manager



GREETINGS from—
SAN ILDEFONSO FaCoMa
llocos Sur
San Ildefonso


Welcome Everybody
Young and Beautiful entertainers
with lovely music at
ROYAL NITE CLUB
& LUNCHEONETTE
FRED G. LIM
2499 Manila Avenue, W.B.B.
rop. & Manager
Olongapo, Zambales
E


Have a good time ...


Visit the


BAMBOO


GROVE


Rosendo (Sosing) Lara


2420 Manila Avenve


Manager


Olongapo, Sobic Bay
Philippines


 


Page 29-A


CCE—A Service ...
(Continued from page 28-A)
towns. Being a farmer-owned-and-controlled
national marketing agency, the CCE is a
potent factor that works for the benefit
of the farmer-producers and the consumers
as well. Its centralized marketing activities
also include the buying of farm implements
and supplies on a collective basis for the
member-FaCoMas to be used in the production of staple foods. At the low wholesale
prices that these farm needs are bought
the farmers pay at relatively low rates
than the prevailing market prices of whatever supplies they get from their local
FaCoMas.
Based on this principle of collective
marketing and buying for the members,
each and every one share and benefit two
ways as the marginnal savings derived from
such transactions are converted into patronage funds. The CEE also functions as a
ready buyer of the pooled produce of
FaCoMa members assuring them of better
incomes from their products thus saving
the farmers from the clutches of greedy
money lenders and unprincipled usurers.
In its role as a middleman between the
farmer and the consumer, the CEE works


towards minimizing excessive profitecring
and price manipulations of opportunists and
economic saboteurs, at the same time effecting an efficient and reliable system of
organized marketing, processing and distribution of our basic staple products. This
cooperative undertaking among our rural
population have been found to be a most
important factor in the implementation of
accepted government reforms for rural development from which the great potentials
of our agricultural resources may be tapped
to meet the increasing food needs of the
Philippines’ unprecedented population explosion.
The CCE has the machinery and working facilities to carry on its multi-farious
serivec activities for its members. It also
supervises the barter of commodities from
different FaCoMas that produce diverse
crops and regional products. In this exchange, distribution of much needed food
supplies from farmers who produce an
excess amount of one particular product
to others who are in need or shortage of
same is effected through the CCE.
As the national federation of farmers
cooperative marketing association, the CCE
serves the FaCoMa-members as stockholders


and producers at the same time by the
standardization of quality and prices of
farm produce thus assuring them of savings
far beyond what they may expect from
private quarters. The CCE as the motherFaCoMa is dedicated towards the moral,
physical and spiritual regeneration of its
members by elevating the humble farmer
from the depths of poverty and despair.
It seeks to give back to the farmer his
lost dignity and self-respect as an essential
member of our present society. Although
the scope of its activities has been limited
due to adverse circumstances and temporary
setbacks, it is nevertheless rallying fast
to the growing needs and problems of our
farming industry.
Management Staff of the Central Cooperative Exchange, Inc. Eugenio V. Mendoza. Officer-inCharge; Clemente Terso, Jr.
Administrative Officer: Benedicto Togonon,
Assit. Administrative Officer: Geronimo
Garcia, Internal Auditor: Vicente Samson,
Asst. Auditor: Teodorico Advincula, Legal
Officer: Bienvenido Faustino. Assit. Legal
Officer: Romeo Gavino, Chief. Accounting
Division: Marie Lou P. Shih, Public Relations Officer.


COMPLIMENTS of—
Northern Farmers
Exchange, Inc.
73 Quezon Blvd. Ext., Q.C.
Tels. 6-67-38 8. 6-30-20 Cable Address: NORFEX
Compliments of:
CONCEPCION BAKERY
306 Gen. Luna, Malabon, Rizal
ANTONIO GREGORIO
Proprietor


Compliments of:
LA TONDENA, INC.
Products:
Ginebra San Miguel
Ginebra Cruz de Oro
Manila Rum
Anejo Rum
Volga Vodka
San Fdo. Lao Cham Bros.
San Edo., La Union


Compliments of:

NORTHERN FILIPINO
CHINESE CHAMBER
OF COMMERCE
P. O. BOX NO. 22
Laoag, Ilocos Norte, Philippines


Page 30-A


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE PERSONNEL: Standing from left: Severo Ventenilla, Artistlllustrator; Melchor Gasmen, Editor-Translator; Ramon Peralta, Typist; Hilario Untalan, Jr,
Information Writer; Jaime de Jesus, Artist-lllustrator; Arthur Diaz, Information Editor 1;
Rogelio Rodriguez, Photographer. Sitting same order: Miss Sonia Borje, Clerk; Miss Fely
Marron, Stenographer; Miss Connie E. Valdez, Officer-in-Charge; Mrs. Rose Recto, Librarian; Mrs. Annie Corpus, Asst. Librarian.


The Advantages of ..
(Continued from page 26-A)
the tobacco seedlings will have
been strong enough to withstand
their attack.
4. There is no feeling of "rush”
in plowing and land preparation
which usually affect soil texture
and porosity, and decreases pore
spaces which are conducive to
proper soil aeration. Seedlings
with roots well bedded in good
texture soil have better chances
of developing into strong plants.
The four advantages cited above
eventually make tobacco culture
easier. They increase the quality
of cured tobacco.
If we should plant tobacco, it
should be through by late December. There will be plenty of time
for firewood preparation, repair of
shedhouses, curing barns, tools
and implements used in the care
of growing plants and the general
repairs preparatory to stringing,
sticking, poling and curing opera

tions. Early planting means, therefore, an early curing and hence,
the elimination of petty worries


and headaches.
It is always good to be ahead
with one’s work.


Compliments of
BENNY DEE
Laoag
llocos Norte


BATAC EASTERN BARRIOS


VIRGINIA TOBACCO PLANTERS'


ASSOCIATION, INC.


Batac


, Ilocos Norte


BOARD


OF DIRECTORS


FRANCISCO GAOAT


ANGEL AGLIPAY


TOMAS RA. VALDEZ


TOMAS ESTAVILLO


JOSE AGLIPAY


ROGELIO QUIAOIT


ROSENDO CARIAGA


LUCIANO ORTAL


ALFREDO SACLAYAN


TEOFILO SACLAYAN


QUIRINO BANIAGA


MANAGEMENT STAFF


President ...........


..................... LORENZO SEGGAY


Vice President ...


........... NUMERIANO CAMANGEG


Manager .


.............. NAPOLEON R. FLOJO


Secretary-Treasurer ..


 MARIANO AGDIGOS


Warehouseman .


................ CRISPIN CAMANGEG


Bookkeeper ..


............................ OFELIA LOPEZ


Representative ..


........... LAUREANO INVENCION


Cashier .


................ OPHELIA CAMANGEG


Clerk .


......... I. FILIPINAS CAMANGEG
2. ELMER ARCHANGEL


KHAKI 8 RED


Page 31-A


We Do Our Part...
in the implementation
of the
SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROGRAM
of
President DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL
TILOCOS SURI
VIGAN G
9 FACOMA
VIGAN
ILOCOS SUR


another statute. Delegate Jose
Aruego writing on The Framing
of the Constitution, Vol. I, p. 190,
claims that “this point was not
definitely decided in the debates
in the Convention". The interpellations of Delegates Joven and Rafols
on Delegate Jose P. Laurel really
did not settle the question. However, .this dilemma was partly
solved in several cases decided by
our Supreme Court. The principle
is clear — a single act may amount
to an offense against one or more
statutes, if one statute requires
proof of additional fact which the
other does not.
In People v. Bacolod, G.R. L-2578,
July 31, 1951, the above principle
was applied by the Supreme Court.
The accused in a previous complaint for serious physical injuries
thru reckless imprudence pleaded
guilty. Later on a second complaint was filed against him for
public disturbance. The Supreme
Court in denying the motion to
quash held that while both informations were based on the
same act of firing a submachine
gun, the first offense charged was
a crime against person and the
second, against public peace and
order. The proof establishing the
first would not establish the second, it being necessary to show
besides the willful discharge of
firearm that there was a dance
in the tennis court in connection
with the town fiesta with the consequent disturbance to the people
Oz
in attendance.
The same doctrine was followed
in People v. Tinamisan et al. G.R
L44081, January 29, 1952. The evidence showed that several accused
went fishing with five bottles of
explosives. After throwing one bottle into the water, they were
caught and arrested. The remaining four bottles were then seized.
They were convicted of the crime
of illegal fishing with explosives
under Secs. 12, and 76 of Act 4003
as amended by Commonwealth Act
No. 471. Thereafter they were prosecuted again for illegal possession
of explosives under Secs. 1 and 2
of Act No. 2225 as amended by
Act No. 3023. They raised the ques


tion of double jeopardy on the
ground that the exhibits mentioned
in the information for illegal possession of explosives were the
same bottles presented in the former case of illegal fishing with
explosives. The issue boils down
to the question of whether or not
prosecution for illegal possession
of explosives will lie when the accused had previously been convicted for illegal fishing with explosives. In overruling their contention, the Supreme Court held:
One offense is distinct from
the other. When a man fishes
with explosives, he violates the
first mentioned law or the second, or both, or he may commit
no offense at all. No offense,
if he obtained licenses from
both the Secretary of Agriculture
and the Chief of Constabulary.
He infringes the first (and not
the second) if he has no license
from the Secretary of Agriculture but he has license from the
Chief of Constabulary. He transgresses the second (but not the
first) if he holds no license from
the Constabulary but he wields
a permit from the Agriculture
Secretary. He transgresses both
laws as in this case when he
exhibits no license at all.
Coming back to the 96th and
97th AW, it is also said that like
in the Bacolod case, supra, there
is an element in AW 97 not found
in any other punitive article penalized either by the civil court
or by the military court. That
element is the prejudice to good
order and military discipline or the
bringing of discredit to the military service. Assuming this to be
true, how about Sec. 9, Rule 113
of the Rules of Court which says
“The conviction or acquittal of the
defendant or the dismissal of the
case shall be a bar to another prosecution for the offense charged,
or for any attempt to commit the
same or frustration thereof, or
any offense which necessarily includes or is necessarily included
in the offense charged in the former complaint or information", as

suming of course that all the other
elements of double jeopardy are
present? On the question of when
an offense includes or is included
in another, we have Sec. 5, Rule
11o of the Rules of Court. It says:
An offense charged necessarily
includes that which is proved,
when some of the essential elements or ingredients of the former, as this is alleged in the
complaint or information, constitute the latter. And the offense charged is necessarily
included in the offense proved,
when the essential ingredients
of the former constitute, or
forms a part of those constituting the latter.
5
The Grafton case which upheld
double jeopardy says "for the same
acts constituting the same offense".
In the hypothetical case I cited it
is for the same acts but constituting different offenses, one is
for robbery under Arts. 293 and
294 of the Revised Penal Code and
another under either AW 96 or 97
of Commonwealth Act No. 408 as
amended. Following the doctrine
enunciated in Welch v. State 185
S.E. 390 cited in 15 Am. Jur,, sec.
399, p. 72, supra, that—
Although the defendant in such
case is charged with the same
act in both instances, nevertheless the prosecutions are not
for the same offense, since the
act constitutes a transgression
of distinct laws and an offense
under each law. This rule, however, is limited to the case of
a single act which infringes both
the civil and the military law
in such a manner as to constitute two distinct offenses, one
of which is within the cognizance of the military courts and
the other a subject of civil jurisdiction.
there will be no double jeopardy.
But as was previously stated, this
point was not sufficiently clarified
by the framers of our Constitution. It is hoped in the immediate
future this impasse will be resolved once and for all.


 


Page 17


Floro Crisologo has always been
a controversial figure in politics.
But there is one outstanding trait
in him which has made fanatics
out of his admirers —his steadfast loyalty to his friends. Inured
in the rough and bloody political
climate of Ilocos Sur, he knows
how to share his fortunes with his
friends in defeat or in victory.
Contrary to popular expectations,
Floring, as he is popularly called,
has very little military experience.
His only military training was his
stint in the guerrilla forces of
Northern Luzon where he started
as a buck private. He received a
purple heart for wounds in the
bloody battle of Bessang Pass
and was discharged as a captain.
Unlike other guerrilla outfits, Col.
Volkmann’s guerrillas were stingy
in promotions, so that Floring was
already a full-fledged lawyer when
he started his guerrilla stint


Bureau (R.A. 624), and Social
Security Act (R.A. 1792).
He is now a member of the
powerful Commission on Appointments.
The fighting legislator of Ilocos
Sur is also the vice-chairman on
the committee on banks, currency
and corporations; and the Committee on Reorganization. He is a
member of the National Defense
Committee, the CAFA, Committee
on National Language; Committee
on Labor and Industrial Relations;
and Committee on Mines.
Fighter
The story behind the increase
of soldiers pay started when President Macapagal pledged to improve the soldiers’ lot in his first
speech as President at Camp Murphy. Since then serious studies
have been made for the increase
in pay and cautious planners from


fortunately, H.B. 958 on the longevity pay was vetoed by the Presiident because of some technical
defects.
More Projects, Benefits
Floring is not too familiar with
the internal problems of the AFP
but from his little cubicle in Congress he listens and studies reports
on the morale and welfare of the
Filipino soldier. He is still awaiting proposals on the increase of
officers’ pay, a funding system for
the AFP, a nation-wide housing project for the soldiers’ families, and
such other measures affecting the
welfare and morale of the armed
forces.
In his recent speech at a graduation exercise in Camp Vicente
Lim, he promised to reintroduce
the bill granting longevity pay for
the enlisted men and sponsor another bill for the increase in pay
of officers. He is aware that with


Congressman FLORO CRISOLOGO
soldiers friend in congress


as a buck private. He may not
be too familiar with the art of
soldiering but he knows the sufferings and deprivations of a soldier. This experience later on was
to help him help his friends who
shared with him the hardships of
the war.
Good Record in Congress
Among the first measures he
sponsored when he became a member of congress was the G. I. Bill
of Rights (R.A. 65) which granted
deserving guerrillas free hospitalization, medical care, educational
benefits, right of land settlement,
and other preferential privileges.
Now in his fourth term in Congress, Floring previously sponsored other measures like the increase in teacher’s pay (R.A. 2040),
the Central Bank Charter (R.A.
265), New Press Freedom Law
(R.A. 1477), Home Financing Act
(R.A. 680), Tourism and Tourist


Murphy presented proposals calling for increase of allowances only
that will entail an increase of P8
million in the AFP appropriations.
Floring found the proposal inadequate to meet the rising cost of
living. While DND top brass
agreed in principle on a substantial increase, they were skeptical
on the passage of Floring’s H.B.
957 which called for the huge
amount of P34 million. Other members of the National Defense committee were equally skeptical.
Floring was adamant —it was either his bill or nothing. This resulted in his being the sole sponsor of this bill in the lower house.
Senator Balao sponsored the same
bill in the Senate. Apparently irked
by the attitude of some Defense officials, Floring sponsored
another bill, H.B. 958 giving longevity pay for enlisted men. Floring
succeeded in the passage of both
measures in the lower house. Un

the implementation of the WAPCO
wage scale in civilian offices, the
officers’ salary is comparatively far
from adequate to be commensurate
with the responsibility attached to
the position.
Thankful Soldiers
The soldiers were not remiss in
thanking the congressman for
their pay increase. Floring was
honored in a dinner party given
by a representative group at the
Rufino Building where he pledged
anew his services to the Filipino
soldiers. He also spoke in graduation exercises both in the first
and second PC zones.
During his last birthday, he did
not hesitate to leave the company
of his colleagues in congress to
receive Col. Lucas Cauton and a
group of soldiers from the first
PC zone who presented him a gift
as a token of the esteem the Filipino soldier has for Floring.—
Contributed.


Page 18


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Any motorist who makes regular out-of-town trips
in addition to daily hazardous city driving should
by now be inured to signs at check points. The
Motor Vehicles Office (MVO), the Public Service
Commission (PSC), Traffic Bureaus, Schools, bottling
companies, civic organizations, private corporations,
Municipal Boards, now assist the Philippine Constabulary in cluttering up the highways. It is not our
aim to discuss the legality of "NO PARKING" and
othersigns. That we reserve for future discussions.
Nor is it our desire (it is too tempting to pass up
though) to discuss the unrealistic speed limits imposed by municipal and city boards. (Have you
ever tried driving in high gear at five kilometers per
hour?) We shall just discuss the simple
STOP
PC CHECK POINT
one sees all along the north and south approaches
to Manila.
These signs are strewn along the highway, some of
them manned, some abandoned, some down, some
placed on the right center of the road, day and night.
A few meters away, probably under a tree, shade,
or in a tienda, one or two PC troopers are keeping
an eye on the check point. A confused motorist


slows down, looks at the PC troopers who look back,
slowly accelerates speed, and drives on. Sometimes,
he is whistled back, he backs up and is accosted by
the check point guard. He is perfunctorily waved
on, a confused man. Why not remove the
STOP
PC CHECK POINT
when not intended to halt the motorist? What’s
wrong with portable signs?
In searches at check points when passengers are required to alight, can’t the order for male passengers
to alight be given in a less Prussian-type military
command? BABA LAHAT ANG MGA LALAKE could
be expanded to: MAWALANG GALANG NA PO, MAARI PO BA NA ANG MGA LALAKE AY UMIBIS
LAMANG, maybe? The practice would do the nontagalog speaking troopers some good.
There should be a law prohibiting PC troopers from
giving erring motorists looks that could kill.
How about using the PC Rangers sparingly?
When municipal police forces are placed under PC
control, the municipal government is not included
in the control.


Biographical Sketch of
BIRTHPLACE:
Vigan, Ilocos Sur
PARENTS:
Father — Moises Crisologo, revolutionary hero who was sentenced to
death by the Spanish authorities
for revolutionary activities but said
decision was destroyed by his
friends.
EDUCATION:
1. Colegio de la Inmaculada Concepcion—Vigan, llocos Sur
2. Public Schools—Vigan, llocos Sur
3. University of the Philippines
a. Associate in Arts
b. Bachelor of Laws
aa. President of the U.P.
Debating Club
4. 1933 Bar Examinations:
One of the ten bar topnotchers
WAR RECORD: 1942—1945
1. War hero, wounded in action
2. Recipient of war medals for bravery
and heroism
3. From Private, he rose to the rank
of Captain.
4. Under Col. Walter F. Cushing, US
Army, and Col. Russel W. Volckman,
U.S. Army, he fought in the battle.
fields of llocos Sur, Ilocos Norte,
Abra, La Union, Mt. Province, Cagayan, Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya and
Pangasinan.
POLITICS:
1. Elected Congressman, 1st District,


Congressman Crisologo
llocos Sur for four terms:
a. 1946—1949
b. 1949—1953
c. 1953—1957
d. 1961—to the present
Liberal Party Vice President for Special Operations; Member of the
Executive Committee.
LEGISLATIVE WORK:
Author or Coauthor or Cosponsor of
the following laws:
a. G. I. Bill of Rights (R.A. 65)
b. Central Bank Charter (R.A. 265)
c. Increase of Teachers Salaries
(R.A. 2040)
d. New Press Freedom Law (R.A.
1477)
e. Home Financing Act (R.A. 680)
f.Tourism and Tourist Bureau
(R.A. 624)
g. Social Security Act (R.A. 1792)
h. Enemy of Graft and Corruption
i. Enemy of Smugglers, and tax
Evaders, and Embroidery manufacturers who sell their imported
textiles in black market.
j. Champion of the Virginia Tobacco Industry (R.A. 1194)
k. Fearless Advocate of Civil Liberties.
LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEES:
Member, Commission on Appointments
Vice Chairman, Committee on Banks,
Currency and Corporations
Vice Chairman, Committee on Reorganization


Member, Committee on National Language
Member, Committee on Anti-Filipino Activities (Cafa)
Member, Committee on Labor and Industrial Relations
Member, Committee on National Defense
Member, Committee on Mines


BE A BLOOD DONOR
It Makes You Feel Good!
CALL AT YOUR
LOCAL RED CROSS
OFFICE TODAY.


 


Page 19


"PC DAY" AT CAMP MURPHY — Four PC officers
and enlisted men received well-earned awards for
valor from President Macapagal at Camp Murphy
last 26 September. The four (from right to left)
are: Sgt. Pedro Velasco, who was awarded the
military commendation ribbon; Capt. Apolinario de
Guzman, bronze cross; Sgt. Remigio Mabagos, gold
cross; and Capt. Diamongon Mangondato, gold
cross and wounded personnel medal. Accompanying the President is Lt. Gen. Alfredo M. Santos (left)
Armed Forces Chief of Staff.


Ponciano L. Capistrano (right) of HPC Service
Battalion was recently awarded a certificate by
Secretary Macario Peralta, Jr. for being chosen
PC civilian employee for 1962. Capistrano of Tipas,
Tagig, Rizal, has been with the PC since June 1947.


PAGE 20


The author (right) with Deputy Commissioner and Mrs. Allan MeNab of the Department of
Transport, Ontario, Canada.
mnanagement of a
Motor Vehicle Fleet
By Major PATERNO R. SANTOS, OMS


In so far as the principles of
management of a transportation
unit is concerned we can say that
it is no different from the management of any other industry. It
involves the management of men,
money, and materials. In the transportation business we use proper
ways and technique to make sure
that each function is properly coordinated with each other for a
safe, good, and profitable operation.
Profit is the goal of every transportation business. This is achieved
thru proper selection of personnel
and equipment, the wise scheduling, routing and maintenance of
equipment, the proper training and
supervision of drivers, mechanics,
and other personnel. Accomplishment of the above will result in
a well-knitted operation. Any
breakdown in any of the points
mentioned will bring undesirable
results and will cause delays in
operations, friction among personnel, occurrence of more frequent
accidents, damaged equipment and
cargo, lowering morale among
workers and employees’ complaints from customers and above
all high operating costs.
It is, therefore, important that
the management should — particularly a sizeable transport company —set up a sort of a control
program. This can be done by
first identifying the problem
areas, those which are the causes
of troubles in the organization.
This is more readily done by studying the operations of the company and records of accidents and
breakdowns.
In studying the operations, one
tries to find the weakness in the
application of the basic principles
of management, the basic control
factors responsible for the faulty
conditions and to find correct or
improved methods and procedures.
Here, it is important that the day
to day operating records are studied closely. One of the tools used


more effectively is the use of
check sheets” which itemize those
which need to be known about
equipment, causes of damage to
equipment and cargo, the selection of drivers, training of personnel, scheduling and routing
procedures, operating delays, road
failures, causes of high operating
costs, customers’ complaints, supervision and the like. One method is to list all problems and/or
so-called headaches of the company and as they are found indicate those conditions you feel
may be responsible for them. The
important thing is to get on the
paper the problems and indicated
causes, even if you have to revise
them later. After you have placed


all these on paper, the next thing
to do is to study them from the
point of view of the overall operations. It is wise to list all phases
of the operations and those which
cause the most troubles, such as
bottlenecks, frictions, etc. If the
study is thorough, you will be able
to identify a great many of the
problems.
The next important step is to
develop corrective actions. At this
point, you should know those most
important and common problems,
who are responsible for them or
what causes them. Judging from
the seriousness of the individual
problem you should decide which
of the solutions or actions should


 


PAGE 21


be given the priority. It is wise to
discuss the problem areas and
the proposed solutions with other
supervisors and personnel who
may have some knowledge or who
are experts on the matter. Any
business venture is a teamwork
and the solving of the company’s
problems is best done by teamwork which may be done by getting the supervisors gather for a
meeting, preferably with the boss”
permission, and get their suggestions as to the area most in need
of correction and which should
get priority attention.
In a transportation business, as
well as in government operations,
it is always the aim to consider
those actions which require the
least financial outlay, that which
can be established without too
much difficulty and one which
holds the most promise for improvement and profit within a
fairly short period.
In the transportation business
also, it is important to remember
that any improvement made in
preventive maintenance can help
materially reduce operating costs,
maintenance costs, eliminate road
failures, prolong the life of equipment and reduce mechanical failure, lessen accidents, and improve
drivers’ attitudes towards their
equipment and their work.
One of the important considerations in a good preventive maintenance program is the establishment of an effective driver train
ing program and methods. This
can increase drivers’ skill and
vehicle operation. A good train
ing program should and can eliminate common mistakes, bad habits, reduce cargo damage, reduce
number of mis-deliveries and lessen customer complaints.
The application of good driving
principles by well-trained drivers
can reduce accidents, damage to
cargo and equipment, and exces

sive operating costs. Improved
drivers’ habits and attitudes likewise will result in better care of
equipment on the road and reduce maintenance costs. In order
to avoid confusion and make
corrective actions effective, they
should be specific. Each action
contemplated should be looked into
very well and see to it that they
will result in improvement or in
economy without sacrificing the
other phases of operation or the
profit to be realized.
A simplified procedure often is
less misunderstood and gives bet
ter result. It is, therefore, wise
to avoid thinking in terms of elaborate programs as they are apt
to be more misunderstood by both
supervisors and workers.
The training program for drivers
and other personnel should be
designed to be inexpensive and
should result in minimizing if not
completely stop repetition of previous mistakes and/or accidents.
While profit is the main objective of any transportation company, yet transportation companies — the personnel and management, have certain obligations to
their customers, the riding public,
the consignors and consignees
Probably the best form of advertisement for any company is reliability of service and courtesy
of company personnel to its customers and the general public.
The drivers, conductors, and helpers who have direct contact with
the public can be the best sales
representative of the company. As
had been previously stated, courtesy and service are what the public looks for. The performance and
attitudes of drivers, conductors
and other personnel can gain or
loss public confidence, and in
terms of operating cost, can mean
the difference between profit and
loss. So it is also important that
in the design of training programs,


such subjects as courtesy, reliability, safety, service, etc, be included. Management should be
concerned and every effort should
be done to insure the fine quality
of service, because as public confidence is built up, it will mean
better business. While these are
known to business executives and
personnel, the basic principle of
good public relations is often
taken for granted or even ignored,
especially where there is little or
no competition. However, such
should not be the case. Many experiences show that where monopoly takes the better part of the
management, in the long run it
becomes detrimental to the company’s interest, in that bad public
opinion will cause customers to
turn to other means of transportation and company growth towards
modernization and meeting the
changing needs is often slow or
retarded.
Every corrective action should
result or point directly to the correction of at least one of the conditions responsible for the company’s problem and each should
in turn tie directly to the basic
control factor for an efficient, profitable organization.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
MAJor PATERNO R SANTOS was a
Colombo Plan Trainee on Advance Transportation Management in Canada and USA
n 1961. He also graduated from the
Officers’ Advance Training Transportation
Course from the U.S. Army Transportation
School in Fort Eustis, Virginia, in 1958
and Infantry School in Ft. Bepning, Georgia, USA in 1952. In addition, he also
graduated from the GHO. AFP Management Course and several other courses in
the AFP. He is a holder of a B.S.A. from
the University of the Philippines and BSME
from the PCP He was a former Technical
Assistant to the Chairman of the Committee
on Transportation and Public Services and
the Committee on National Defense & Security, Philippine Senate, and a former member of the Presidential Committee on Navigation in the Philippines. Major Santos also
made observations and studies on the Trans
portation industry in England and other
European countries.


PAGE 22


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Analysis of Questioned
Documents
The study of handwriting has
been so perfected that the expert
can be of the greatest assistance
to many professionals. This is especially true in the probate of
contested wills. The testimony of
a handwriting expert may be admitted in evidence. The Rules of
Court, in Rule 123, Sec. 50, states
"HANDWRITING, HOW PROVED
—The handwriting of a person may
be proved by any witness who believes it to be such, and has seen
the person write or has seen him
writing, purporting to be his upon
which the witness has acted or has
been charged and has thus acquired knowledge of the handwriting of such person. Evidence regarding the handwriting may also
be given by a comparison made
by the witness or the court with


laws to be violated with impunity.
The number of individuals who
devote a lifetime to the examination of criminal documents is few.
But the number of people who in
the course of their daily avocations
find themselves brought closely in
touch with the handiwork of the
forger and the blackmailer must
run into countless thousands, and
this vast number is composed, for
the most part, of members of the
legal profession and the Police
Force.
It is not suggested that either
lawyer or policeman must be an
expert analyst of handwriting in
order to attain a high standard
of efficiency in his proper sphere.
But, the lawyer who finds himself
armed with the weapon of expert
testimony of handwriting, and who
does not know how to use the
weapon given him or how to parry
blows when directed against him


—such a man can never hope to
achieve triumphs save such as
come to him by default. The day
is gone, moreover, when an advocate could successfully hope to
contest evidence of this type to
be professing to decry handwriting
analysis as something essentially
conjectual. Further, there are many
crimes in which handwriting does
not constitute the corpus delicti,
but which during investigation furnish clues of documentary nature
which can be turned into account.
A Disputed Document Case
In Court
Whether it is in a little square
court-room with its plain wooden
benches or in a great marble hall,
the court problem in a disputed
document case is the same: the
proof of certain facts and the
transformation of a client’s contention into legal judgment. The


OMABVILPO


writings admitted or treated as
genuine by the party against whom
the evidence is offered, or proved
to be genuine to the satisfaction
of the Judge.” And again, Sec. 18
of Rule 123, provides: “Expert
Evidence, —The opinion of a witness regarding a question of
science, art or trade, when he is
killed therein may be received in
evidence."
The basic principle upon which
handwritings are classified, indexed and identified depends upon
the truism that NATURE never
offers to us her handiwork in
facsimile. Again and again, in her
flora and fauna, she reproduces
specimen after specimen marvelously and miraculously true to
type. But meticulous as is her
case to faithfully reproduce the
species, it is not wise to outstrip
her caution never to completely reproduce the individual. And what
is more, in this as in all other
particulars, she will not permit her
 


By Major AGAPITO FIGUEROA


ideas, suggestions and warnings
presented in this writing are intended to aid in the important
task, but to be effective they must
of course, be correctly and directly
applied to the problem in hand.
This practical application is the
task of the lawyer. There is no
way to insure success in an un
dertaking of this kind even if on
the right side of a good case, but
there are certain things to do and
to know that contribute to the
success even if they do not insure
it; and, if they are known, certain
common errors can be avoided.
In the first place the lawyer
should know the facts in his case
and he should know the law he
depends upon or that which may
be cited against him. In a case
involving a technical problem, he
should qualify himself so that he
can assist in presenting the technical testimony in the most convincing manner. To be fully prepared he also must understand
these technical questions well
enough so that he can crossexamine adverse technical witnesses effectively if they are either
mistaken or dishonest. To do this
well, he must be able to promptly
recognize fallacies, incorrect logic
and unwarranted inferences that
appear in testimony. To be fully
equipped he must likewise be pre
pared to argue promptly and effectively on certain technical
points that have a distinct bearing upon questions of proof growing out of objections he makes or
that are made against him. This
preparation or technical argument
is a highly important phase of a
trial involving a technical question
The attorney is the one who
mainly creates the atmosphere. It
is he who asks the questions and
by his incidental argument emphasizes, connects and clarifies the
testimony and shows its purpose.
As a rule, witnesses cannot answer questions unless they are
asked. They can not make arguments to the court on the manner
of presenting the testimony. The
witness often necessarily remains
dumb, helpless and almost useless
because the attorney fails to say


at just the right time the few
necessary words that the conditions
require. Certainly silence is not
always golden; it sometimes is simply stupid.
The failure of the attorney is
mainly due to lack of clear and
accurate technical knowledge on
the exact point under consideration. He cannot fully elicit and
emphasize the testimony because
he has had no conference with
the witness and does not know
what it is to be and does not
fully understand its application
and significance. The failure is
also sometimes directly due to his
stubborn and ignorant insistence
on conducting the examination according to his own plan instead
of the plan that will bring out
testimony in the most effective
manner as the witness is prepared
to give it and has given it many
times.
It is pitiful to see fraud triumph
because the interest of truth and
justice are thus put into the hands
of one who is uninformed and unprepared. If he is unable to attack
a grotesque and illogical theory of
a witness against the facts, this
erroneous or perjured testimony
may prevail. Ignorance is the only
word that clearly describes the
condition that leads to stupid
cross-examination or to no crossexamination when there should be
cross-examination. Again it needs
to be said that one cannot consider intelligently or discuss effectively a subject that he does
not understand.
In contrast with this inefficiency
of the unprepared attorney is the
work of the skillful artist in crossexamination who sees the weakness, the error or deliberate perjury in testimony and is fully prepared to lay its base. One of the
most stimulating of spectacles is
the effective cross-examination of
a pretentious lying witness by a
qualified and courteous attorney
who puts the wriggling victim on
the gridiron and broils him. The
interest of justice are thus served
in a most effective and conclusive
manner. A cross-examination of
this kind often is a work of art.


By a series of carefully framed
questions nearly all to be answered
by yes or no, which answers are
mainly a succession of admission
to skillfully worded significant
statements in the questions themselves, the witness is led up to
the brink of the precipice and like
the swine in the ancient tale is
then cast into the sea.
The attorney enlisted to attack
a fraudulent document, or engaged
to defend a genuine paper wrongfully attacked, sets about the task
by preparing for the undertaking.
He properly interviews his client
with thoroughness and following
Quintilian’s advice of A.D. 88, investigates, doubts, assails and
cross-examines every phase of his
story until he is satisfied that his
client is not deceiving him and that
his story will bear the fierce light
that beats upon the witness-box.
While knowledge of the facts
and of the law are the first essentials in the preparation of a
disputed document case there are
some other important incidental
matters that should receive careful attention. One of these outsided questions is the investigation of the standing and character
of the special witnesses to be
called or that may appear and
give erroneous, unwarranted or
dishonest testimony for the opposition. This is a subject on which
the lawyer need not remain ignorant, and if he does it is his
own fault. As a duty to his client,
as a protection to his own reputation, and in the interest of justice, this is a part of his preparation for the trial that should not
be neglected. Of all the phases of
a trial of this sort this is the one
phase in which promptness is also
especially important.
Criticism is aimed at the expert
testimony of all classes, not mainly because no capable and reliable
men can be found but because incapable and unreliable men are
found to disagree with them. This
is as unjust as to condemn all
lawyers as dishonest merely because one out of many is a disgrace to an honorable profession.
There are honest lawyers and hon

Page 24


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


est experts and the main fault is
in the intense spirit of advocacy
that makes of a court of justice
a game of wits and technical trickery, and seeks until it finds what
will support its contentions.
With the improved procedure,
however, allowing effective illus
trations and reasons for opinions
these pretenders do not have as
free a field as in former days and
cannot render the easy assistance
they once give in questioned document cases, when their principal
service was not to prove anything
but to bring a “Conflict in testimony," by giving a mere opinion.
These assistants to fraud and assistants to the attorney who aims
to defeat justice must, however,
still be reckoned with in many
cases. The most effective protection against this testimony is a
thorough technical preparation by
the attorney who represents the
facts and who cannot only see and
understand the presumption and
falsity of the testimony but also
able by cross-examination and by
argument to show it to others.
Mere abuse of even a lying wit
ness may not be very effective.
Many technical questions that
arise in disputed document cases


can be intelligently examined and
discussed only by those with some
special experience who have investigated and studied the particular
problems involved and possess the
necessary instruments and reference material. They know the
limitations as well as the extension of the subject considered and
can show others what they them
selves see.
With no one present who is qualified on the controverted technical
subject it would no doubt be safer
in many cases, as heretofore suggested, to decide the case entirely
on the outside and collateral issues rather than on the main question involved.
The Law and Legal Procedure
In Disputed Document Cases
The probability of success for
those who represent the facts in
disputed document trial varies
greatly in different jurisdictions
and strange to say, this great variation appears to be practically
unknown to many participants
who conduct these contests. The
practical efficiency, intellectual
grade and cultural quality of law
suit in one jurisdiction cannot as


a rule, be directly compared with
a similar performance in another
state or in another land by the
actual participants. Many who have
not had experience in widely separated field do not know how very
poorly they are doing what is better done elsewhere. They compare
themselves only with themselves.
Participation in trial of exactly
the same nature in actual progress
in widely separated states and in
different countries soon discloses
that the administration of law in
certain jurisdiction is more rapid,
more scientific and more efficient
than in another jurisdiction.
One would think that this important fact would have great interest to those who take part in
law administration where the work
is poorly done. There are many
who apparently have never stopped
to inquire or to wonder why the
United States Federal Courts are
generally more efficient than the
State Courts.
There are certain of these "Practical Men", with no interest whatever in reform, who appear to look
upon the court with a sense of
ownership and consider them not
a tribunal for administering justice
where the facts are to be discovered and shown, but as a place
where lawyers practice law to earn
a living. These alleged owners of
the courts intimate, if they do not
assert, that it is an impertinence
for the ordinary outside individual
of the “THEORETICAL COLLEGE
PROFESSOR" even to suggest that
the administration of any phase
of the law is not at all times and
in all places one hundred per cent
perfect.
There are many legal practitioners who assume that nothing can
be done about improvements anywhere, even if improvement is necessary, and they complacently
speak about the “Uncertainty of
the Law" as something fixed and
inevitable. These unscientific and


KHAKI &. RED


Page 25


indifferent performers could in
many instances find that some
thing could be done by merely
going across a state or national
boundary line with their prejudices left behind and their eyes
wide open and see how that something they are doing can be better
done. There is no more suitable
word to characterize this indifference and lack of progress in
what vitally affects human rights
than the word shameful. In some
cases and in some places, a trial
at law involving a disputed document is in fact just about a 50-50
adventure. There is no ample opportunity or legal permission to
teach those who need to be taught
if the matter is to be preserved,
considered and decided in a scientific manner. Sometimes it is most
discouraging to know at the end
that one of those who still re
main uninformed on the subject is
the one who was supposed to be
trying to prove the facts.
With too many members of too
many professions, it avails little
that scientific and progressive
methods have been developed and
they do not know what they are
Without scientific method a disputed document trial after involving a difficult problem is more
than a farce.
The contention in simpler words
seems to be that these judgments
must depend upon an impression
of a handwriting as a whole and
certain indescribable intuition that
excludes all analysis and necessarily jumps to a conclusion. Few
things are misleading or deceptive
than general resemblance or “General Character" in writing as in
many other things and nearly all
errors in examination are in fact
made by those who literally follow this unscientific method. This
vague and fallacious argument,
however, has been quoted with
approval in hundreds of legal opi
nions and is still printed in the
books and heard in Court.


In the old days a forgery many
times was as good as a genuine
paper if boldly presented and positively and plausibly supported by
perjury and still is in the same
jurisdiction. This peculiar procedure in connection with the proof
of document like that in some
other fields in some measure at
least justified the alleged statement of Aaron Burr regarding the
law: “The law is what is boldly
asserted and plausibly maintained".
In most courts now, after a long
and bitter fight, the expert witness is also permitted to present
the reasons for his opinion. This
he is permitted to do on direct
examination and as the enlightened
opinions in the New York courts
say, "An Opinion without reasons
may be of little value, while an
opinion with reasons amount almost to a demonstration . There
are still courts, however, where the
word demonstration seems to be
unknown and effective reasons for
an opinion can not be given, for
what might have been effective
testimony is sometimes restricted
to an extent that makes it but
little more than the expressing of
a mere opinion.
May I state at this juncture that
the success of cases which involves
analysis of questioned documents
depends on the expert’s thorough
analysis of the document. In this
work, as in the conduct of lawsuits, the following saying of John
C. Reed is applicable: "non-preparation or hasty preparation against
thorough preparation is empirical
matched with scientific and rational knowledge and as a mob
against the regular troops. Good
luck and accident will sometimes
lead the unprepared to success,
but in the average he will be
beaten and hardly understand
why.”


Officers' Register in the NonCurrent Records Branch of the
Adjutant General’s Office in
Camp Murphy reveals:
1st Lt. Francisco V. Canuto was
Born on 4 June 1897. A private, corporal, sergeant from
23 Nov. 1918 to 31 Jan. 1921
From 1 Feb. 1921 to 31 Ociober 1922, a cadet in the old
PC Academy.
Assigned 7 May 1923 with
the 58th PC Company in
Pangasinan. On 22 April 1925
assigned with DHM.
The following month transferred to the 99th PC Company
in Surigao.
On 10 June 1926 promoted
junior officer of the 117th PC
Company also in Surigao until
April 1927 when he was given
the command of the 99th PC
Company in Tandag. Surigao.
Became CO of 11Ith PC
Company in that province on
16 March 1929.
In 1930 served with the
Agusan PC until 25 February
1931 when he was made commander of the 87th PC Company in Camp Kalao, Davao.
Next year was placed on temporary duty with HPC in the
old Oriente Bldg.. Binondo,
Manila.
Brig. Gen. Charles E. Nathorst, dubbed "Tiger", “Old
Man , was then PC Chief. PC
Surgeon was then Col. Basilio
Valdez, and Manila Garrison
Commander was Captain Mariano Castaneda.
Following his Manila assignment, was assigned as junior
officer of the 123rd PC Company in Lambales on 4 January
1933. On 1 Dec. of same year
was placed on duty with PC
Rizal in Pasig.
Then followed a gap of seven
years in the available records
until 24 August 1940 when the
enigmatic entry in the Officers'
Register reads: "Left the service.


Page 26


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Inside photo of Lt. Canuto’s shrine taken by the town photographer with the permission of
his followers. On foreground is his easy-chair behind his low round table of ornate hardwood.
A framed photograph of his once occupied the "hallowed center of the altar", side by side
with pictures of Andres Bonifacio and Dr. Rizal clipped from old magazines and almanacs.
A local movie producer visited the shrine with a plan to make a movie of the life of
Lt. Canuto, borrowed the picture and brought it to Manila. He promised to return it afterwards. His followers keep on waiting for more than one year since. It is an unpleasant
sight among his followers to see anyone sitting in his easy-chair. An enigmatic air of
reverence pervades the place. Behind the altar are some of his belongings, mainly consisting
of insect-devovred personal and official papers accumulated during his tour of military
duties. Two tumbled-down narra king-size chests hold less than half of the papers. The rest
is strewn around. During masses Lt. Canuto was said to occupy the easy-chair, surrounded
by a retinue of his trusted men. During liberation an unidentified plane made a passing
strafe of the shrine. No one got hurt. The shrine and the monument are the centers of
the barrio celebration every 26th of July, the date of his execution. Formerly the barrio
celebrated the yearly fiesta on 30 December (Rizal Day) which was switched to 26th July.


Lt. Canuto’s Death Recalled.
(Continued from page 7)
progress at the high school ground.
Digamon stealthily slipped away
from his Japanese companions as
they came downhill from the cemetery, and attended the meeting to
find out what it was all about.
Among the speakers was Sam Hill,
who broke out the news of the
execution to the crowd. Hill said,
“I have witnessed a total of 96
executions but I have not witnessed
one like that of Lt. Canuto among
them. Up to the point of death,
the officer of the Constabulary
maintained his firmness, unruffled
by any adverse physical influence
that could have induced him to
change his mind —and lived.” Japanese soldiers were around and
understood him. No one among
them contested the governor's
statement.
As if to confirm Lt. Canuto’s
prediction that the Japanese would
take care of his trip home to the
hacienda after the execution, the
soldiers offered Digamon a free
trip in one of their vehicles. The
tense settlement was awaiting the
news. Digamon told all.
Author’s Note:
When the Japanese pulled out
from Surigao town after two years
Diamola and Digamon dug up the
grave, hoping to bring home to the
hacienda the remains of Lt. Canuto. After excavating a pit "wide
enough to bury two carabaos,” they
failed to find his remains.
Diamola is an eyewitness to the
capture and torture at Barrio Mansayao. Digamon is an eyewitness to
the torture and execution. Before
the interview with these witnesses,
I reminded them that accuracy is
the PC’s main concern, and that
the general purpose of the interview was to find out the circumstances surrounding the death of
Captain (sic) Canuto, pre-war PC
officer, per CS PC directive to C-l
dated 3 May 1962. Both witnesses
assured accuracy of information
within their knowledge. The interview was conducted in public to


allow others who might have additional information to bring out
what they know. No less than 30
hours were allowed the witnesses
to enable them to fairly recollect
the fateful incident 20 years ago.
The interview was conducted in
the Surigaonon dialect, translated
into English by the two PC escorts, the barrio school teacher,
who once resided in Pasay City,
and some tagalog-speaking ex-colorums who learned the national
language in the Bureau of Prisons
in Manila and in Iwahig Penal
Colony in Palawan. I asked Diamola for some of Lt. Canuto’s belongings which he willingly gave:
Two khaki breeches, one with red
and the other with blue pipings
on the side seams; a University
of the Philippines insignia, a pair
of leather boots, a pair of leather
leggings, a threadbare khaki
blouse, a cut-off rosary, a pillow
case with initials “FVC", a sleeveless undercoat, two pairs of hand

sewn fabric footwear, personal and
official papers, pre-war newspapers
and a copy of   
magazine, PC official journal, issue of August 1938. I brought
them all to HPC.
Coming to Surigao town for the
home trip to Cebu, I proceeded
with two PC soldiers who escorted
me from Mainit town to the grave
of Lt. Canuto. Because of the previous failure to find his remains,
I decided to help to find them if
and when another attempt is made
in the future. A crude grave of
flat concrete nearby bearing either
Chinese or Japanese calligraphy,
aroused my curiosity. I am not
a student of Professor Virchow nor
of Professor H. Otley Beyer, but
in the somber twilight that shrouded the place at the end of that
busy day I copied the characters
and brought them to HPC for deciphering, hoping they might unravel even at this late age something for posterity.
V


 


Page 27


ATto


OUl MAUM
Conference


The APACL 8th Conference was preceded by an Extraordinary Conference at Seoul, Korea, last May. Above photo shows the delegates
and a few of the observers (foreground) Mr. Jean Litho of Congo (Brazzaville), Madam Suzanne Labin of France, and Mr. Rama Swarup
Sabhorwal of India, during a plenary session at the Chosun Hotel. At the chairman’s dais could be seen Mr. Kyu Hah Choi, league council
chairman, and directly below in the center Mr. Tran Tam, APACL Secretary General. Counter-clockwise from the left could be seen
Australian M. P. Bruce Wight, Mr. Liy Peng Kiou and Dr. Ku Cheng-Kang of China, Mr. Chang Kuo-Sin of Hongkong, Mr. Tan Ye-Ming of
China, Mr. Saburo Chiba and Mr. Daisuke Takaoka of Japan, Dr. Hadji Ibrahim T. Y. Ma of Malaya, Mr. Fung Hon-shu of Macao,
Mr. Damodar Prasad Ghimire of Nepal, Mr. Max L. Peers of New Zealand, Mr. Lo Kwock Chuen of North Borneo, Dr. Pao Shis Tien
and Dr. Jose Ma. Hernandez of the Philippines, Mr. Tsai Chang of the Ryukyus, Miss Michaela A. Montemayor and Major Constante Ma.

ASA
Cruz of the Philippines.
SD
3!
E


Page 28


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


"Free peoples of Asia, unite!
Seek the help of your fellowmen
in the East and the West, and
persuade them to join with us in
this crusade. Fight Communism
or any aggression as individuals
and as nations. Fight it at all
levels and in all theaters of war.
Penetrate the Bamboo and Iron
Curtains to bring hope to those
held in bondage behind them, and
to establish a free underground
that can strike against International Communism... Thus reads
Resolution No. 1 at the historic
First Asian Peoples’ Anti-Commu
nist League Conference at Chinhae,
Korea. Forty-two delegates from
eight countries and localities in
the Asian and Pacific region met
from June 15th to June 18th in
1954. Next month, from October
Ist to the 5th, well over a hundred
delegates and scores of observers
from twenty-two member countries
and nineteen observer units will
converge in Tokyo, Japan, for the
Eighth Conference of the League.
Mr. Nobusuke Kishi, Prime Minister from 1957 to 1960, is the host
chapter president and will be
league council chairman during the
conference.
The Story of the APACL
June 1954.
Korea was still a shambles. The
beautiful land of the Korean people had been divided into North
and South Korea; the North was
Communist, the South democratic.
The Communists were on the
loose in Asia, in Europe, in Latin
America. The world was in a seething ferment and although writers
and journalists called the struggle
between Communism and Freedom
“the cold war" everywhere in Asia
there was a definite and clear ap
prehension the long-centuried and
peaceful lands of the Oriental peoples would fall under the hammer
and the sickle.
It was under these circumstances
that Syngman Rhee, President of
the Republic of Korea, called a
meeting of the yet unravished na

tions in Asia at the peoples’ level
in order to secure the active, unit
ed, and unrelenting support of the
people for the worthy efforts of
their respective governments, not
only to contain but finally to conquer the dark forces of Communism.
The meeting was held at the
naval base of Chinhae, Korea.
Only seven countries and regions
responded to the urgent call of
the Korean President; namely, the
Philippines, Free China, Vietnam,
Thailand, Hongkong, Macao, and
Ryukyus. The first Chairman was
Mr. Young P. Lee of Korea. Mr.
Ku Cheng Kang of China, Dr. Jose
Ma. Hernandez of the Philippines
and Mr. Nides of Thailand were
asked to preside over the plenary
sessions.
It was quite clear that the peoples gathered in Chinhae, Korea,
had come to establish a united
front to fight Communist imperialism; to refuse recognition of the
fruits of Communist aggression or
subversion; to outlaw the Communist Party; to counteract Communist infiltration, subversion, the
aggression; and to maintain a collective security in accordance with
principles promulgated by the
United Nations.
At the end of this first conference it was decided that a Charter
be drafted for the League and that
the membership of the organization be enlarged to make it truly
representative of the peoples of
Asia.
The APACL met in extraordinary
session in Manila in 1956. All the
countries were represented in Manila except Thailand. The main
item on the agenda was the approval of the Charter.
In the course of the discussions,
the thorny question regarding the
proposed admission of Japan as
a member of the League came up,
with China in favor and Korea
vehemently against.
The Draft Charter was approved
by the delegates present without
resolving the Japanese issue. The


Charter was to be submitted to
the Second APACL Conference for
ratification. It was agreed that the
second Conference be held in Taipei, Formosa.
In the year 1956, because of the
unsettled question of the admission of Japan as a member of the
League, the proposed Conference
scheduled for Taipei was cancelled
at the last minute. Instead the
Second Conference was held in
Manila on March 9, 1956, and the
Charter was approved.
Since the Second Conference the
APACL has increased its membership. It has expanded its activities
and has drawn fire from the Communist camp. It has been under
attack particularly by Red China
but it has neither wavered nor
vacillated in the pursuits of its
objectives: to expose, fight and
ultimately to defeat Communism.
The Third Conference was held
in Saigon on March 27, 1957. Six
new members and six observers
were admitted. Saigon was chosen
permanent site of the APACL Secretariat.
In Bangkok, on April 27, 1958,
the Fourth Conference admitted
Irad as a member and India as
an observer. Four standing Committees were established.
On June 1, 1959 the APACL held
its Fifth Conference. Iran and New


“Y eah, we have a potato peeling
machine. And you're the latest
model."


KHAKI &. RED


Page 29


3. How to strengthen anti-Communist solidarity of the free nations of Asia;
4. How to aid economic cooperation and cultural interflow among
the members of the League.
5. How to support the enslaved
peoples of the world.
As a result of the discussions
of these topics, various resolutions
of importance were adopted, showing beyond doubt that solidarity
and cooperation had become bywords among the members of the
League and that there was unmistakable determination in the
APACL to destroy Communist ideology and practice all over the
world and to supplant Communism
with Freedom characterized by
peace and justice.


Mr. Nobusuke Kishi, president of the Japan chapter of the APACL, was born in November,
1896 in Yamaguchi Prefecture, second son of Hidesuke Sato. He was later adopted by
Nobumasa Kishi. Graduating from the Faculty of Law of the University of Tokyo in 1919,
he first entered the government service in the department of agriculture and commerce,
becoming minister of that department in 1941. During the war years he served in the
House of Representatives. In 1956 he became Foreign Minister in the Ishibashi Cabinet.
Asked to head the government in 1957, he served as Prime Minister up to 1960.


Zealand were added as new members.
On the fifteenth of June, 1960,
the Sixth Conference of the APACL
was held in Taipei, Taiwan. The
membership included Australia, the
Republic of China, Hongkong, Iran,
Japan, Jordan, the Republic of Korea, Macao, Malaya, Nepal, New
Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines,
the Ryukus, Singapore, Thailand,
Turkey, and the Republic of Vietnam. Observers were present from
the Cameroon, Ceylon, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Laos, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, North Borneo, Saudi Arabia, the United
States of America, the Anti-Bolshevik Bloc of Nations (ABN), the
National Alliance of Russian Solidarists (N.T.S.) and Free Front.
The long-standing question on
the admission of Japan had at last
been resolved and the APACL had
been extended not only as far south
as New Zealand but also into the
Middle East, Europe, and the
emerging new nations in Africa.
In the Taipei Conference the subjects considered in the various
committee meetings as well as in
the plenary sessions were:
1. How to strengthen anti-Com

munism to reserve the spiritual
crisis of the free world;
2. How to strengthen anti-Communism in Asia, Africa and the
Middle East to consolidate their
common effort against the Communist bloc;


Objectives of the APACL
In the light of its charter and
program of action, the Asian
Peoples' Anti-Communist League
strives for the realization of the
following objectives:
1. to consolidate the anti-Communist forces of all Anti-Communist people in Asia, and establish
anti-Communist united front to
fight against international Commu

The Philippine delegation to the APACL 3th Conference calls on President Diosdado
Macapagal who is shown fourth from left handing to Congressman Ramon D. Bagatsing,
vice chairman of the delegation and PACOM president, his message to the conference. From
left to right are Major Medardo T. Justiniano, Congressman Bagatsing, Speaker Cornelio
T. Villareal, Major Constante Ma. Cruz, Mr. Yao Shiong Shio, and Attorney Antonio Meer.
Dean Conrado Aquino, Attorney Leon O. Ty, Attorney Jose G. Guevara, Lt Col Ricardo P.
Bahia, Captain Isagani P. Cruz, Mr. Cua Piok Poo, Manila Acting Collector of Customs Teotimo
A. Roja are the other delegates.


Page 30


SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1962


Republic of China Vice President Chen Cheng, APACL supporter and anti-Communist
stalwart, receives Major Constante Ma. Cruz during the latter’s visit with APACLROC
colleagues last May.


nist imperialism until it is wiped
out;
2. to call the attention of all
Asian peoples to the fact that Communism is contrary to human nature and is an iniquitous ideology,
which must be completely wiped
out before justice, freedom, and
peace can prevail;
3. to unmask the cold-war strategy and tactics of International
Communist imperialism and oppose the policy of neutralism and
appeasement;
4. to prevent and eradicate infiltration and subversive activities
of Communist imperialism and
urge all governments to outlaw
the Communist parties;
S. to broaden the contacts with
all existing anti-Communist organizations and leaders and to promote the convention of the world
people’s anti-Communist congress,
so as to build up a world antiCommunist alliance;
o. to strengthen and support anti

A Reappraisal ...
(Continued from page 13)
ficient, effective and economical
defense establishment for the country.
The Philippine Navy must not
lag very far behind the other major
services. A mere cursory examination of our defense organization
will reveal that at the present time
we are a maritime nation that has
massed on the ground in our defense orientation. If ever, we should
mass on the sea as the very life and
strength of our country depends
on it.
Help Keep the World Free
But Under the Rule of Law
Join the Philippine Anti-Communist Movement Inc. (PACOM),
now! Your least bounden duty to
the Free World cause is to enlist
in the crusade pledged to strengthen and defend the ramparts of
our democratic way of life. Fill out
this membership card at the PACOM Headquarters/ Secretaries at
No. 924 Oregon St., Ermita Manila,
or call up Tel. No. 5-93-09 for details.


Communist revolutionary movements by people shut behind the
Asian Iron Curtain, and to promote
closer union of the anti-Communist
forces on both sides of the Iron
Curtain, so as to emancipate the
people shut behind the Asian Iron
Curtain at an early date;
7. to build up a free, peaceful,
prosperous Asia and to promote
world peace and prosperity.
—O0O—
The delegates look forward to
the 8th Conference. To be discussed among old friends and new
acquaintances are:


1. Problems of neutralism and
the counter-measures,
2. Problems related to economic
and technical assistance to underdeveloped areas.
3. Problems of international cultural exchange and cooperation.
4. Problems of strengthening and
widening the base of international
anti-Communist movements.
5. The critical situation in Southeast Asia and remedial measures.
The APACL Eighth Conference
in Tokyo will add a chapter to
Japan’s development as a post-war
power.


E TOLT


MEMBERSHIP CARD


(Name)
Of


(Address


Charter Member
Asian Peoples
Anti-Communist
League


is a bona fide
member of the PHILIPPINE ANTI-COMMUNIST MOVEMENT, for
the year .


Executive Secretary


President


 


Page 31


HOUSE BILL NO. 958 TO BE RE-INTRODUCED
BY CONGRESSMAN CRISOLOGO IN THE NEXT CONGRESS
Begun and held in the City of Manila on Monday, the twentysecond day of January, nineteen hundred and sixty-two.
AN ACT PROVIDING FOR A LONGEVITY PAY TO ENLISTED MEN
OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES, AMENDING
FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION ONE AND THE TITLE OF
REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED ELEVEN HUNDRED THIRTY FOUR,
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
the Philippines in Congress assembled:
SECTION 1. Section one of Republic Act Numbered Eleven
Hundred Thirty-Four is amended to read as follows:
"SECTION 1. Hereafter, each officer or enlisted man of the
Armed Forces of the Philippines shall receive in addition to
his monthly pay longevity pay equivalent to ten per centum of
the monthly base pay authorized for his grade for each five years
of faithful and efficient service heretofore or hereafter rendered
as an officer or enlisted man of the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and of recognized guerrilla units, such additional
pay to be compounded every five years: Provided, That the
total amount of longevity pay shall not exceed fifty per centum
of the soldiers monthly base pay as prescribed by law: Provided,
further, That nothing in this section shall be construed as
authorizing payment of any back longevity pay for any period
of services heretofore rendered."
SEC. 2. The title of the same Act is amended to read as


follows:
"An Act to provide for longevity pay to officers and enlisted
men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines."
SEC. 3. The sum of eight million pesos is hereby appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not
otherwise appropriated, to carry into effect the provisions
of this Act.
SEC. 4. All laws or parts thereof inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.
SEC. 5. This act shall take effect upon its approval.
Approved,
(S9d.) EULOGIO RODRIGUEZ
President of the Senate


S/t/CORNELIO T VILLAREAL (Signed
Speaker of the House of 10:25H
Representatives
11 June '62)


Finally passed by the
Senate on May 14, 1962.


(S9d.) REGINO S EUSTAQUIO
Secretary of the Senate


This Act, which originated in
the House of Representatives,
was finally passed by the same
on May 7, 1962.
OK. INOCENCIO B PAREJA
Secretary of the House of
Representatives


FIETH CONGRESS
of the
Republic of the Philippines
First Session
Begun and held in the City of Manila on Monday, the twentysecond day of January, nineteen hundred and sixty-two.
(Republic Act No. 3460)
AN ACT INCREASING THE MONTHLY BASE PAY OF ENLISTED.
MEN OF THE REGULAR FORCE OF THE ARMD FORCES OF
THE PHILIPPINES, AMENDING FOR THIS PURPOSE SECTION
FOUR OF REPUBLIC ACT NUMBER EIGHTEEN HUNDRED THIRTY.
ONE.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:
SECTION 1. Section four of Republic Act Numbered Eighteen
Hundred Thirty One, otherwise known as the "Enlisted Men’s
Pay and Allowance Act of 1957," is amended to read as follows:
"SEC. 4. The monthly base pay of enlisted men of the
Regular Force shall not be less than the following:


"(a) E-7 .
175.00
-----
16500

"(c) E-5 . 155.00
"(d) E-4. 145.00
"(e) E-3 . 140.00
"(f) E-2 ..... 135.00
"(g) E-l. 130.00
SEC. 2. There is hereby appropriated, out of any funds
in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the sum
of thirty-four million pesos to carry out the provisions of this
Act.
SEC. 3. This Act shall take effect on July first, nineteen
hundred and sixty-two.


Approved,


(Sgd.) EULOGIO RODRIGUEZ
President of the Senate


s/t/CORNELIO T VILLAREAL (Signed
Speaker of the House
10:25
of Representatives
11 June '62)


Finally passed by the
Senate on May 15, 1962.


(Sgd.) REGINO S EUSTAQUIO
Secretary of the Senate
Approved:


This Act, which originated in
the House of Representatives,
was finally passed by the same
on May 16, 1962.
OK. INOCENCIO B PAREJA
Secretary of the House of
Representatives


(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL
President of the Philippines


"HE WAS A MEMBER ALRIGHT, HERE'S HIS MEMBERSHIP CARD."


  
Philippine Constabulary Journal
and
General Magazine
MAJ. CONSTANTE MA CRUZ
Editor & General Manager
Subscription Rates


In The Philippines:
One Year .............. ₱10.00
Six Months ...........
6.00
Three Months .... 3.00
In The United States of America
& Abroad:
One Year .............. P40.00
Six Months ... 24.00
Three Months .......... 12.00


Entered As Second Class Mail
At Post Office, Manila, On November 6, 1926.
Single Copy: P1.00
Vol. XXXV Headquarters Philippine Constabulary Camp Crame,
Quezon City, Philippines
Tels. 71011 or 66611 thru
66620, local 4-74-83


th HAND
TnGt MUULDS


ESUNUM.


ENTRAL
OOPERATNER
XCHANGE


WHEN ARE YOU
N
GETTING A
PACKAGE
DEAL...?


When you join your local FaCoMa
as a cooperative member you share
and benefit by the experience and
technical know-how of men
dedicated to help improve, store
and market your products on
a systematic nation-wide exchange. This is only possible
through the CCE, your
National Federation of
Farmers Cooperative
Marketing Association
pledged to organize
self-help and
cooperation
among the
members.


NDC COMPOUND, PUREZA, STA. MESA, MANILA
TELEPHONE NO. 6-35-96 * 6-35-97 * 6-35-98


PHILIPPINE VIRGINIA TOBACCO ADMINSTRAT