A



DEC 12 MBE
Dha. Bpoatla
Y3 M ste
CCME LET UE
TUI


Christmas is more
than a yule log, holly or tree.
It is more
than natural good cheer
and the giving of gifts.
Christmas is even more
than the feast of the home
and of the children,
the feast of love and friendship
It is more than all these things together.
Christmas is Christ,
the Christ of justice and charity,
of freedom and peace.
The joy of Christmas
is a joy that nothing can kill,
for it is the joy of the soul
and the soul cannot die.
Poverty cannot prevent
the joy of Christmas
for it is joy
no earthly wealth can give.


(Continued — Backcover)


THE APOSTII
VOE. XXXVI, No. 3
Dec., 1966


In December
we pray ...


That leaders of men may
not stir up the fires of Na
tionalism.


For Chinese Christians ses
parated from their homes
land.


IN THIS ISSUE


Christmas Pictorial... 2
All Is Well That
Ends Well ........ 8
God’s Word Today .... 12
Bagay Ba?.... . . . . . 13
Pointers for
December........ 14
Flash-Stones-InDialogue . . . . . ... 15
To The Missions. . ... 17
Keep Smiling .. ..... 22
Beauty Hints . ...... 23
The Church in the
Norld ....... . .. 24
Danny and Liza..... 26
A Happy llome ...... 28
Contest of the
Month....... . .. 31


Now it came to pass in those days
that a decree went forth from Caesar
Augustus that a census of the whole
world should be taken... And all
were going, each to his town, to register.


And Joseph also went from Galilee out of the town of Nazareth into Judea to the town of
David, which is called Bethlehem to register, together with
Mary his espoused wife who
was with child.


And it came to pass while they were there that
the days for her to be delivered were fulfilled.
And she brought forth her first-born son, and
wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him
in a manger, because there was no room for them
in the inn.


And there were shepherds in the same district
living in the field and keeping watch over their
flock by night. And behold an angel of the Lord
stood by them and the glory of God shone round
them, and they feared exceedingly. And the angel
said to them, "Do not be afraid, for behold, I bring
you good news of great joy which shall be to all
people; for today in the town of David a Savior has
been born to you, wuho is Christ the Lord.”


Now when Jesus was
born in Bethlehem of
Judea, in the days of
King Herod, behold,
Magi came from the
East of Jerusalem,
saying, "Where is he
that is born king of
the Jews? For we
have seen his star in
the East and have
come to worship
him.”


And behold the star that they had
seen in the East went before them,
until it came and stood over the place
where the child was. And when they
saw the star they rejoiced exceedingly.
And entering the house, they found
the child with Mary his Mother, and
falling down they worshipped him.


Father Theo could feel his self-confidence seep away with
every peal he gave that Sunday morning. Was he mistaken? Was
this perhaps not a Sunday? His mission helper did not show up
so he had to ring the churchbell himself. People came around,
passed by the chapel and disappeared behind the bushes along
the river. Giggling girls came along with baskets on their heads.
As they passed, they shyly covered their faces and ran a step or
two, but nobody entered the church.
Father Theo carefully calculated his days. He surely left
the central mission last Monday. On Wednesday he was at Kumao.
Step by step he checked his jungle calendar and, yes, this was
Sunday!


8


Finally, he left his bell string and went to investigate.
Sure enough he found Bernardo, his cafechist. Unmistakably it
was Sunday.
“I tried to convince them, Father, said Bernardo. "But
they did not listen to me! It is the day of the Lord, I told them,
but they answered that it is the day to poison the river, and so
they went!"
Father Theodore did not yet know what river-poisoning
meant. He was a newcomer in this mission.

fhen it may be better to wait for one hour and say Mass
at 8 o’clock,” he suggested.
A sly grin appeared on Bernardo’s face, "River-poisoning
y
takes hours, he said. "It will surely last until noon.
It was a disturbing reality for inexperienced Father Theo.
When he began Holy Mass only Bernardo, old Gusamay and blind
Diego were present.
“Dominus vobiscum — The Lord be with you,” he said to
them but his eyes wandered through the backdoor straight to the
river. His thoughts went to those who thought that they did not
need the Lord...
All was set for the big catch. The boys stripped and
splashed hip-deep in the water. They carefully spread the poisonous brown tuba powder, cautiously staying upstream so that no
water with powder could touch their bare limbs.
A clumsy joker pushed Buginak down from a boulder. Down
he went, but he had been jerking his body swiftly so that his bare
buttocks hit the water first. He made a big splash and the brown
tuba film hit his back and bottom. He crawled out, anxiously
protecting his eyes. Big blisters formed all over his body, but
nobody had a time for him. They followed excitedly the opaque
stain that stretched all over the river now and presently shot
down the rapid.
“Orate fratres — Pray, brethren . . . " Father Theo whispered.
Buginak ran crazy with pain. The rising sun burned his
back and the blisters burst. He leapt to his feet, careened from
stone to stone, and finally dived in the cool little brook nearby.
Darts of pain shot through his shoulders.
“Hoc est enim Corpus meum — This is My Body . . . ” The
O


priest said in the chapel by the river. Christ came down unto the
salvation of mankind, even of Buginak and his companions in
the river.
The Mass was over. Diego felt his way down the stairs,
but Gusamay sneaked through the bushes straight to the river.
She knew a vantage point from which she could overlook the
surroundings. She was trembling with indignation. No, she would
not eat any fish of the whole unholy catch, she said to herself.
And all who would eat were deserving the wrath of Our Lord, she
climaxed.
Father Theo was more soft-spoken. He suffered the pangs
of a deep frustration. He had hiked all weary 68 kilometers to
serve these people. He had been crossing rivers neck-deep
fought rapids and crawled over rocks and cliffs just for old Gusamay and blind Diego, while those hundreds were just passing
by.
Gusamay came back triumphantly. Not even a single fresh
fish as big as a finger had they caught! From her stone on the
riverside she had seen them squatting around their baskets. Selfassured, she broke away the branches and emerged in their sad
gathering. It was not all strictly gospel talk she did, but she
spoke about the Apostles who did not catch a fingerling in a
whole weary night because the Lord was not with them. All the
immense care to gather the tuba beads, to dry and pound them
had asked for a year’s patience; but all their care for the daily
bread did not help a thing! “There are prayers for the daily bread,
and made by the Lord Himself,” she said. Really, Gusamay knew
her religion and lived by her faith.
A sad procession walked home. The only path led along
the mission chapel. Father Theo saw them coming and awaited
them.
“And you, folks, will attend the afternoon Mass at four
o'clock!” he said.
They did, and with devotion. Gusamay, too, attended. the
Mass. She did it in reparation for the Mass. She did it in reparation for the sins of her people.
The following Friday, they tried their last bag of tuba
powder. Fish popped up by the basketful. Feast there was, and
Gusamay ate from the catch. And Father Theo, too!


10


JER
5


VONIOOG AGSCMIO
GF CHE SWAN.


FImng


Jessica Afable
153 Leonard Wood
Baguie elny


God’s Word Today


A Sister of Charity was begging alms for the orphans. "An
alms?” answered an anticlerical. "To support you in idleness
and help enslave those kids? This is what you need.” And he
struck her. The Sister thought for a moment and then replied without a change of countenance, "That was for me, sir. Now, something for my orphans. The man’s anger vanished; he asked her
pardon and gave her a substantial donation.


If the mere presence of a good person for
whom you have an aversion draws a curl to
your lip and brings you a thousand sharp
thoughis and words, do a bit of spiritual gymnastics and meditate on his virtues. See in
him “Jesus Christ disguised in his defects,"
Who draws near to you that you may smile
at Him.
Peter “All of you, have unity of spirit, sympathy, love of the
says: brethren, a tender heart and a humble mind. Do not return evil for evil or reviling for reviling; but on the contrary bless, for to this you have been called, that you
may obtain a blessing.


1 Peter 3, 8-9


12


Helen Keller wanted to be free from her dark prison and be acquainted with the world. Annie Sullivan, who had been nearly
blind herself, so understood the difficulty of Helen’s life — freed
her from her dark prison and did the job with charity and patience.
She looked on Helen as another human being who needed what
only she could do to help her. She looked for Helen’s good qualities, for her capacity to learn and understand, and cultivated
these. Helen, with Annie’s help, overcame her difficulties but
only at the cost of much charity, patience and perseverance.

1 was common clay until the roses were
planted in me.” And the common clay of ordinary humanily is not only fertilized but beautified by the transplanting of noble deeds, or
holy aspirations fallen from the lives of those
whose pathway is towards the stars.
Paul “Let brotherly love continue. Do not neglect to show
says: hospitality to strangers, for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.


Hebrews 13, 1-2


Pomnters
ior
G
m


You better don’t read this page. I may
contaminate you with my flu. I have to
pass to you my Christmas spirit but it
cannot be. It’s not available. It’s only
my flu spirit and bad mood.
You expect me to say something about
peace on earth and good will? But there
are obstacles: not only Vietnam but also
the thermometer and calamansi and those
pills — all the best but none-working.
I even switched off my transistor. I can
no more stand the anti-flu advertisements,
and even less, the carols.
But the day is near when I’ll be asked
to dust my 'gitara’ and there we will go
again to sing for good purposes: be of
good will and show it in pesos. Maligayang Pasko! Perspiring we will "dash
through the snow ... laughing all the
way." Big laugh! Jingle, jingle. Kling,
kling, klang. And for 9 days mama will
send us to that mass, almost in the middle of the night. Oh, my goodness! What
an invention and that — just to beat the
crowing of the cock.
But flu may be over by that time and
when nobody is in church I may prudently
go and have a close look at the 'belen.
I hope it will be nicely old-fashioned
with a smiling Lady, a very old Joseph,
and plenty of cattle and shepherds and
kings.
How bright the star of the Holy Night
and the stars at our porches. Ve will go
to Bethlehem again and adore Christ the
Lord.


14


A test of fire!


When St. Therese of Avila was suffering a bitter trial,
she complained to Our Lord. Jesus said to her: “It is
thus that I treat my friends.” The saint answered:
“Yes, Lord. That is why you have so few!”


Fuel for the fire


True love of God burns best on the embers of self. The
decision must be made: God or self. You cannot claim
to love God perfectly if you share or divide this love
with self-love. God is so greal and lovable that even
the completely dedicated heart cannot love Him sufficiently. Much less can a heart that divides its love.


Plan of love


“I do not think that anyone can know the story of his
own soul until he looks back at the map of his life,
from God’s side in eternity, and that because in everything that happened to him the mercy of God was
manifested or hidden, but always there, drawing him
like a magnet to Himself. His life, whether he knew it
or not, was simply God’s plan of love for him.”


15


VRAO01
The Adventurous and Dramatie Journey
of the First C.J.C.Y. Vissionaries


November, 1865
The first four C.I.C.M. missionories, led by their founder, Very
Rev. Theophilus Verbist, are on their way to their mission station. The sea travel ended in Takou, the harbor of Tientsin. Now
they have to travel by land. Since 7:30 this morning they are
riding in the very uncomfortable tilt-carts. At 5:00 in the afternoon, they arrive at a small inn which proudly bears the name
“Hotel de France. They have some food at last!
This French name, however, is the only European aspect
of the entire inn! That is what they experience as soon as they
enter the inn. The innkeeper, repeatedly bowing, invites them to
take their "seats.” They make acquaintance with the Chinese
k'ang or oven bed. It is an earthen platform of about two feet
high, whereunder a fire has been kindled. This platform serves
as a table during the day and as a bed during the night. Since the
travellers are firmly resolved to eat, they take place on the k’ang
and, following the example of Francis, try to assume a more or
less comfortable position near the one-foot-high bench which
takes the place of a table. Their stiff and painful limbs refuse all
cooperation! They enjoy at least the comfortable heat.
The choice of the menu is a complicated task. They don’t
understand a single word of the long tirade of the innkeeper, who


17


apparently praises and recommends his culinary products. Francis
is their interpreter but he, too, speaks only Chinese!
What they see and smell frightens them! They want a wholesome meal and not something which will burn their stomachs.
They have decided to eat bacon and eggs. How to explain this
choice?
Father Hamer volunteers to express, or rather to portray
what they want. He descends from the oven bed, takes his stand
in front of Francis and starts a masterly performance of dramatic
acting. First, he imitates a cackling hen, leaving her nest and
looking proudly at the product of her efforts. The second act
represents a grunting pig and is followed by a pointing at his
own buttocks.
There is general hilarity in the inn. But the clever Father
Hamer attains his aim: Francis understood and they eat bacon and
eggs!
After this refreshing break, the trip is continued. Tientsin
is still far away!
Around midnight, they arrive in the city. They are worn out.
How they long for a good sleep! In order to reach the Procure of
the Lazarist Fathers they have to cross a river. There is no


bridge and the ferryboat lies at the other side. The boatsman is
soundly sleeping. What a bad luck! Paul and Francis organize a
choir with the drivers: they start shouting and screaming at the
top of their voices. It seems to be all in vain. They already have
given up hope and are planning to spend the night in the open atr,
when suddenly they perceive a tiny light in the distance. Their
voices have been heard at the French Consulate and helpful
people now wake up the boatsman. At last the exhausted travellers are brought to the other side of the river.
It is 1:30 in the evening when they are received and most
cordially welcomed by Father Thierry, the procurator of the Lazarists. The extraordinary hospitality of the good French missionary makes them forget all fatigue and inconveniences of the
past day. They have to tell him so many things. They have had
quite some experience, indeed! And they have passed the test
with honors! But now, for a good rest!
On the following morning, their first visit is for Our Lord.
How fervently they pray, our first missionaries. It is a prayer of
Thanksgiving for the safe journey, a prayer of resignation to the
Holy Will of God, a prayer of petition for perseverance and for
many conversions in their mission field. It is a real missionary


prayer.


They spend one day in Tientsin. They visit the different
Catholic institutions of the city and get their passports from the
French consul. Francis prepares everything which is needed for
the trip to Peking.
The following day, they courageously board again their
tilt-carts. The distance between Tientsin and Peking is 125 kilometers. In nomine Domini. In the name of the Lord.
Through the narrow streets of Tientsin they arrive at the
gates and there is again the "highway!” The jerking begins again.
They have scarcely left the gates of the city behind them when
everybody is startled by a loud plaintive shouting by one of the
drivers. All jump to their feet. What has happened? Good Lord!
An accident! One of the carts has slipped off the road and lies
upside-down about fifteen feet deep in a precipice. The mules
have been dragged down with it and lie on their backs, swinging
their legs desperately in the air.
Everyone descends quickly to the place of casualty.
*
"Who is it?'
“It's I!” answers a voice from underneath the cart. It is
the voice of Father Verbist.


*
"Are you hurt, Father?'
"No!"


All hands are helping to lift up the cart and to rescue the
unfortunate man. And there appears his face. Everyone is in
anxious suspense, but everyone heaves a deep sigh of relief:
Father Verbist looks tousled, indeed, but he smiles reassuringly!
When at last he is rescued from his perilous position, he stands
up laughing and calmly removes the dust from his clothes and
combs his hair.

'Are you all right, Father? Don’t you feel any pain?” they
ask.
“I am perfectly all right,” he answers. "I have seen it
coming. I could protect myself by clinging to the tilt-frame. God
is with us!”
tar
Thanks be to God!” all exclaim.
All feel relieved. The incident, which could have been a
tragic accident, becomes now a topic of jokes and laughter.
Meanwhile, the mules have been rescued and the cart has
been pulled up to the road. Everything is fixed and repaired; the
trip is continued. The long, long trip.
God is with the first C.I.C.M. missionaries!


KEEP
SMEING


A Russian by the name of Rudolph looked out of the open
window one morning, sniffed the air, and promptly predicted:
"It’s going to rain today, I know.
"But — it’s so bright and clear out," objected his wife.
By noon, however, it was raining hard. "Now, Rudolph,
just how could you tel!?” exclaimed the surprised Mrs.
‘I’s just like they say,” smiled the Russian. "Rudolph,
the Red, knows the rain, dear.

*
Why 3 Japanese sisters never married:
Tu Young Tu
Tu Dumb Tu
No Yen Tu
X
*
Teacher: “If your family owes P19 for light, P17 for water,
P6 for milk and another Po for bread, altogether totaling P48,
how are you going to solve the problem, Peter?"
Peter: "Very easy, ma’am, we’ll transfer to another place.”


“They tell me you won a prize by guessing the beans in a
jar. How did you do it?'
“It was easy; it was the 20th day of the month and I am
20 years old; I just multiplied 20 x 20 and got the exact number,
507."
“But 20 x 20 is not 507.”
“Okay, wise guy, you got the brains, but I got the prize.


22


BEAI L


The young woman of poise
has an excellent sense of timing. She thinks before she speaks
and she thinks before she moves.
She does not rush into a room;
she walks into it. The knowledge
that what people see on the outside is a reflection of what is in
the inside encourages her to develop an inner serenity that
manifests itself to you when in
her presence. The deepseated
belief that God made her as no
better than any other individual
helps to give her a feeling of
self-confidence and security
that places her at ease in any
group. Yet, there is no suggestion of haughtiness about her,
because this girl is so relaxed
that she relaxes others who
happen to have the pleasure of
her company.
But the girl without poise reveals herself by her excessive
arm waving when she is speak““T'
ing. She seems to cross
and dot “I”' and make exclamation points with her head. Once
in her presence you find that she
is either chipping off her fingernail polish, biting her nails,
fingering her jewelry, rubbing her
face, scratching her head, twirling a strand of hair, adjusting
her dress, biting her lips, chewing gum, or doing something that
is so annoying to you and dis

tracts so much from her that only
a fearof a violation of politeness
stops you from telling her to
stop it.
But STOP it you must if you
are to give others the impression
that you are what I am sure you
want to' be - A POLISHED
YOUNG WOMAN!


ROME


In a letter addressed to the International Congress on the Theology of Vatican Council II, the Pope reminded Catholic theologians of
the need for following the Church’s teaching authority, while exercising freedom in investigating the meaning of the ecumenical council’s documents.
The teachings of the council, he said, “constitute proximate and
universal norms of truth from which it is not permissible for theologians to depart in their studies."
But within the limits of the Church’s teaching authority there is
"a vast area of research" in which the theologian’s liberty is assured
and "in this legitimate liberty itself the progress of theology finds its
foundation."
Quoting St. Augustine, the Pope asked all theologians to obey this
maxim: "In essentials, unity; in non-essentials, liberty; in all things,
charity."
In this regard, the Pope went on, "it is necessary for you to recall
carefully the great importance the council always attached to Sacred
Scripture in doctrinal explanation .. when there was question of
applying the Gospel message to more concrete situations. Moreover, in
reflecting on revealed matters, the council considered these matters
in a way that was essentially religious and pastoral. It speaks of the
message of Christ in relation to man. It considers man as taking in


24


the history of salvation and proposes a more complete and articulate
anthropology. It prepares the way for re-establishing the union among
all Christians without any detriment to the doctrine of Christ transmitted by the Catholic Church ...
"No one can introduce personal criteria into the interpretation of
the doctrine of the council, rejecting the guidance of the Church’s
teaching authority. There is a vast area of research in which is recognized the 'liberty both of ecclesiastics and of the laity to investigate.
consider and manifest, with humility and courage their own opinions
in the fields in which they are competent.' In this legitimate liberty
itself does the progress of theology finds its foundation.
“He who respects this liberty in himself and in others will never
be over-confident of himself, will never dismiss with contempt the
opinions of other theologians, and will never dare to present as truth
certain of his personal hypotheses, but will seek in humility a dialogue
with other theologians, and over and above his own system and conjectures will always seek truth.


ROME


Human dignity demands that man be free from all coercion in
religion "so that he may accept in the presence of God responsibility
for his religious decisions and actions." This need, Father John Courtney Murray, S.J., said, "is the ultimate ontological root of religious
liberty and likewise the root of other human liberties.”
“It is a need rooted in the very existence of the human person or
if you will, in the objective truth of the human person. Therefore it
appears as a juridical value in society so that it can impose on public
authority the duty of not standing in its way, provided a human person acts in religious matters according to his dignity. Public authority
is bound to recognize this duty and to carry it out by reason of its
special task, which is to protect the dignity of the person."
Although this assertion is "altogether true” he said, "it is nevertheless a simple assertion and no reasons are offered for its truth.”
The Council’s doctrine, "as I understand it,” Father Murray said,
"is totally different from tolerance. We are not talking about tolerating evil. The Council’s insistence on the free exercise of religion is not
tolerance, but a recognition of this right in a human being, which is
the evolution of Pius XII’s own doctrine."


25


Danny and liza
My dear Heart,
Liza, I regret everything. (I do fear I do not have the
eloquence of your heart, and I must ever speak with my
silence.) I regret the day I told you I loved you, not that
I wish to part with you, my love, but I’m no longer sure
of myself.
You told me to “test" our love, and now I think the
test is over—and I fail miserably. Perhaps you are too
noble to pair with one like me. Liza, I love you still, but
1 don’t feel anymore the strong and burning affection 1
had for you in days past. (Pardon my frankness, for I
believe I must confess to you the truth.) All those months
of my waiting for your answer, I was getting exhausted.
And exhaustion is perhaps no sign of true love. You are
too good to suffer with me the rest of your life. And it
might be best that we seek each other no more (or at least
for sometime). Let us not be sentimental about it, but if
you need to talk personally with me, I’ll be very glad. Let’s
keep our heads cool and tranquil.
I know, Liza, that I’m the author of all your present
misery. I’ll not make a victim of you and sacrifice you at
the altar of some strange “goddess.” No, Liza, Pll not do
that. But I beg of you patience. Let me test my love once
again. This time I may pass. I don’t doubt you, but I must
doubt myself for a while. If this be unwise, Liza teach me.
I wish to honor you with a faithful love, not with my
passion. But I’m haunted by dark troubles, and I would
not have you take part in them.
With love,
Danny


My Love,
A woman’s heart, like a man’s, is tenderly sensitive to
the ebb and flow of tides, even to the almost imperceptible changes in the direction of the wind. Danny, how is it
with you? Why must you keep quiet so long? I gave you
my love not only because you asked for it, but also because I love you sincerely. And yet you frighten me with
your silence. Did you perhaps all of a sudden cease to love
me after I gave you my word? Must you treat me thus?
Last night, I felt so bad. I called you up at home because
I wanted some assurance: whatever the truth may be!
If my love be widowed even before she says "I do," how
shall it meet the frightful face of future time? I have
thought to put my whole trust in you—to love you here
and beyond the grave. I have hoped to be yours forever.
(and yet I must learn bitterly how freely a man can
change his mind). But must I doubt you? Beyond all possibility, I will not doubt your goodness. Perhaps we may
find out that we were not meant for each other. God’s will
be done. And may He help me to bear my sorrows lightly.
And wherever you go, may joy and peace bless you, Danny.
forever.
It was with joy my heart could hardly contain that 1
gave you my love; and I thought to make you happy by
assuring you that I love you so much. But for days you
neither saw me nor answered me. I saw you pass the other
day, and I watched you till you disappeared in the crowd
in the street hoping all the while that you might look
back and notice me. But you didn’t. If I were a man, Id
go to your house and ask you what the matter is—not to
steal your heart if it is not meant for me, but at least to
get some assurance, to get some notion of what the matter
is. But I’m a woman and social custom must prevent me
from doing so. I think it not refined.
Danny, dear Danny: I’ll not recall whatever words of
promise you have given me. Your freedom is yours. But
must you make me the victim of a blessed sacrifice, your
will be done.
Lovingly,
Liza


P RA HO


TEN SIGNS OF LOVE
IN MARRIAGE


I. The sign of respect
Love cannot long survive the
failure of a husband or wife
to show, both in private and
in the company or sight of
others, genuine respect and
esteem for their spouse. The
rules of courtesy and politeness are a basic and important means of expressing
love, and the avoidance of
words and actions that imply
or express disrespect is necessary to its survival.


2. The sign of words
Love between husband and wife needs and thrives on frequent assurances; it dwindles when it rarely is put into words. The husband who
never tells his wife that he loves her (and vice-versa) will eventually
find that he lost the power to love and be loved.
3. The sign of gifts
One of the most effective manifestations of love is to be found in the
presentation of thoughtful gifts to the one who is loved. Such gifts
need not be expensive. But they should be marked by unexpectedness
and understanding. A gift is doubly appreciated when it comes as a
surprise, with neither tradition nor common custom making it a matter of routine.
4. The sign of companionship
When keeping company and when first married, most couples cannot
see enough of each other. Instinctively their love inspires them to give
the sign of true love that is implicit in the wish to be with the one
loved.
Marriage demands companionship; and love is a vain boost on the part
of any husband and wife who studiously avoid it.
5. The sign of appearance
It cannot be said too often that love will not be taken for granted as
residing in the soul unless it be manifested through the body and its
actions. One of the important manifestations of love, one that is necessary to keep a partner’s love strong and faithful, is reasonable
attention to one’s appearance. A wife must desire to keep herself
attractive to her husband; a husband must avoid as much as possible
making his appearance an object of distaste or disgust to his wife.
6. The sign of preference
It is essential that a husband shows he prefers his wife to everyone
else in the world, and that the wife shows a similar preference for her
husband.
To keep love alive and strong in their partner, they must show a
preference for that partner over father and mother, friends and associates in business, and everyone else whom they may meet.
1. The sign of responsibility


20


When a man and a woman marry, each one takes on a responsibility
for some part of the work that goes into the making of a home. In
general, the man takes on himself the responsibility of earning a living for the family; the wife accepts the responsibility of making and
keeping up the home. Both assume the responsibility of encouraging
and helping insofar as possible, the other in the specific tasks designed
for each. Love can be destroyed if the husband or wife shows no
interest in and offers no help and encouragement for the work of the
other.
8. The sign of sacrifice
The sign of sacrifice takes two practical forms. The first is the form
of compromise. Not compromise in the form of surrendering in a matter of moral or spiritual principle.
Sacrifice must also take the form of forgiveness. There are a few perfect beings in the world, and even these few sometimes make mistakes
that try others. There are no marriages in which forgiveness is not
sometimes required, which means the sacrifice of anger, bitterness,
resentment and revenge against one’s partner.
9. The sign of religion
It is religion alone that brings out the full attractiveness of a human
being. It is oapacity for religion that makes a human being unabridgely
higher and nobler than brute animals. It is religion alone that provides
the motives and sanctions and practical precepts for the practice of
the virtues that appeal most strongly, over the years, to the love of
another.
Nothing is harder for a human being who possesses religious convictions and aspirations than to live long in marriage with a person who
does practically nothing that a brute cannot do. A saintly wife or husband of such a one will bear up heroically under such obstacles to
love, praying and trying always to awaken some spiritual convictions
in the animal with a dead soul.
10. The sign of sex
Among all the other manifestations of love that are required to keep
it alive in one’s married partner, there is the very important one of
the right attitude and right cooperation with the use of the privilege
of sex. Wrong attitudes toward sex and its purposes, and wrong habits
of action in this regard, can kill love and make marriage a great burden.


30



—

O
E

—-



A




E

KL
A
P

E
A
A
2
E
A


A



maa
a
-

E
7


A
E
YA
3


335
2

4


A
E


E


N
E


31


There are eight (8) differences
between the two pictures on
page 31. What are they? Send
in answers not later than December 20, 1966 to   , P. O. Box 42,
Baguio City.


P.O. Box 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on
January 3, 1950


Vol XXXVI No. 3


Dec., 1966


EDITOR
C.I.C.M FATHERS
MANAGING EDITOR
MISs ROSALIA S. GALIMBA
BUSINESS MANAGER
REV. Fr. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.L.C.M
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:
Life ..................... P50.00
Foreign ................. $ 3.00
One Year ......... ₱ 4.00
Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PRESS
BAGUIO
Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


32


Time cannot wither Christmas
for it belongs to elernity.
The world cannot shatler it,
For it is the union of Him
Who has overcome the world.
The leaders and peoples of the nations
must understand these fundamental truths
if we are ever to have
freedom and peace.
Unless writers and poets
have a divine sanction, unless God
is the "Paramount Ruler of the World"
as waves upon the shore,
must catastrophe follow catastrophe.
Not until men lay aside greed, hatred, pride,
and the tyranny of evil passions,
will the Star of Chrisimas Peace
illuminate the world.
Christmas is the birthday of freedom,
for it is only like the following of Christ
that makes man free.


mERRr GHRiSTmas
To the 'Fathers, the Brothers, the Sisters,
To the married, the single, the professional people.
To the graders, the teen-agers, the adult readers,
Hlay the bells ring out joy from every church steeple.
for the thousands who call themselves
Tour constant subscribers,
Ht the altar and the crib we shall be your interceders.
the editors


Y






n


OCTOBER, 1955


APUSTLE


RERD


n
B


S


S
S
U
E


Who dares to burn a Church .. 3


Pointers . 9
C.I.C.M. family news ........ 10
Pontifical Intention ........... 13
Beauty Hints .... . . . . . . . . . . . .. 15
Pictorial .................... 16
Superstitious belief .......... 18
Keep Smiling ............... 19
TOM DOOLEY, the famous
doctor ................. 20
Seminary Corner ............ 27
Puzzle of the Month ........ 28
Church in the World ........ 29


To Our Readers:
We welcome your comments and suggestions for the improvement of this magazine in all aspects.
Mailing Address:   
P.O. Box 42
Baguio City


vol

BONTOC, Mt
seot 9 GeNSsos hien school
in Sabangan
ed by fire las
was


ce held a suspended
t. Henry Palangeo,
shman, on suspeicion
e set the fire,


imaan ag aa
Palangeo had been suspended by the parish
Sa a a ag
ing cnurch alms. They said
the boy asked to be transferred to another school
so.
but was not allowed to do
He Feportedio ibote

2


Rev. Fr. Paul de Middeleer, parish
priest of Sabangan, deemed it
necessary to write this letter to
clarify some fallible information
in the newspapers regarding the
motives behind the burning of the
church and the high school.


b


W
al


H
IR


lo
IB


S


TO
BURN
A


D


ha


H 


Catholic Mission
Sabangan


September 30, 1965
learned that there were so many guesses and suppositions as to the cause of the burning of the
church and the high school. I shall try to tell somewhat in
detail what is behind the whole thing.
On Monday, September 6, I was called to Capinitan
with Sister Bertha, the nurse, for an emergency. When I
came back at 7 o’clock that night, the teacher in charge of
the dormitory reported that there had been stealing in the
dormitory that day: Leonardo Leyaley lost about P30.00
and Henry Palangeo of Amtadao, Sagada had lost P5.00.
Henry had been shouting bad words to the boys for having
stolen P5.00 from his pocket. Upon this report I went to
investigate, because I was suspicious of Henry who made
so much trouble of it.


3


From the day he enrolled, Henry had attended classes
only for three days. He re-entered on August 25, the day
of my return from Manila where I had been confined in the
hospital. I was surprised to find the boy back in school but
I did not say anything since he was already in. Had I been
present at the time of his re-entry, I would have refused
him.
That evening of September 6, I went to the boys' dormitory which was on the groundfloor of the convent. I
questioned Leyaley first but he did not know exactly how
much he had lost. “Maybe 26 or 27 . .. but I’m very sure
it is less than thirty pesos, he said. Then I called Henry, a
big First Year student of 19 years. I asked him how much
money he owned. He said he had got P25.00 but P5.00 had
been stolen. “Show me your money, I told him. While he
took the P20.00 from the pocket of his pants, I noticed that
he was pushing down something. So I put my hand inside
that pocket and took out a bill of P5.00. He then had P25
all in all when he was supposed to have only P20. I asked
him about the extra P5 which he had lost and he told me
that he borrowed it from Medio, the husband of Doris Pilacan. I went to inquire from Medio who told me that he did
not even know the boy. I went back to Henry who admitted
that he had told a lie. He said he had actually P30.00 given
by his mother and that P5.00 had been stolen. I asked him
where he had put the money. "All in one pocket." I thought
it very strange that they would take only P5.00 and leave
the other P25.00 in the same pocket, while they stole everything from Leyaley. He explained that the boys who did it
were afraid to steal all because of the fortune tellers in his
barrio who can point out the guilty one. I told him that I
found it very strange because there are also such fortune
tellers in Pingad, Leyaley’s barrio.
Henry was drunk so I asked him where he had drunk.
He told me that it was in the store of Victor in Lengey. I
went with the teacher, Henry and three other boys to the
said store and found out that he had not drunk there. He
had bought only something for 50 centavos. On our way to
the dormitory he told me that he had drunk in Nacagang
and had spent P1.00 so I asked him where he had got the
₱1.50 which he had spent. He told me he had P13.00, his own


money, which he had spent for pants, socks, drinks, etc.
Back in the dormitory we explained to the boys all the
evidences we had on hand: Henry must have been the one
who stole Leyaley’s money but he did not want to admit it;
he insisted that his mother had given him the money. I
never met any boy who insisted so much upon his innocence.
I was convinced that he had stolen, but to remove all doubts,
I told him that the next morning I would go to Amtadao to
question his mother. He fully agreed and told all the time:
"My mother is the only one who can solve this problem."
The next morning I went to Amtadao with Dalmacio
Padsoyan, Leyaley and Salvador Ngaleo. We met his mother
who told us that she gave only P5.00 to her son because she
had nothing else. Coming back to Sabangan we stopped the
bus on which Henry was riding. Arriving at the convent, I
sent a boy to call the policeman to whom Henry had admitted that he had taken P29.00 from Leyaley. I gave then the
P25.00 to Leyaley and the pair of pants of Henry for the
₱4.00 that was lacking. The policeman took Henry to the
Presidencia and I told Leyaley that it was up to him to file
a complaint since it was his money that had been stolen.
This happened on Tuesday, September 7.


On Wednesday afternoon, Sept. 8, I met Henry outside
the convent and he asked for his transfer card. Since I
wanted to notify the school authorities of Bontoc High about
his behavior here, I told him to transfer; my letter would
follow. That evening, a few minutes after 9 o’clock, I came
out of my office to tell the convent boys who were still studying to go to sleep because I would go to switch off the
generator. All at once we heard the dormitory girls run towards the convent while screaming "Fire!” My first thought
was that the boys were fooling them. Looking in the direction of the generator-shed, I saw a glow coming from behind the wall of the library. I was about to run there when
they told me that it was on the other side of the school, so
we ran to the kitchen of the school-feeding-program and
from there we saw the light in the Fourth Year room. I
went to open the door of the church and we ran forward,
but coming at the communion rail I felt the intense heat
and forbade the girls to go farther. They took the mike from
the pulpit and the statues of the Sacred Heart and the
Blessed Virgin. I told them to ring the church bell while I
ran to get the fire extinguishers. I ran to the library of the
school but it was of no use. The tiny fire extinguishers had
no power to fight the blaze
When I first ran to the church, I did not have the key
of the cabinet in the sacristy where the key of the tabernacle
was kept. I tried to put out the fire on the altar, but it was
already too late. The whole front of the church was aflame,
so I just watched calmly the whole thing burn down while
a crowd of people were evacuating everything from the convent. The generator-shed soon began to burn. People ran
like crazy to take water from all possible sources. I got
them inside the convent to destroy the ceiling because all
the rafters and purlings were catching fire. This was a very
tense moment. All the neighbors started evacuating ... it
was then that I really worried, because half of Sabangan
would burn down if the fire couldn’t be checked at the convent.


6


While the fire was going on, I kept wondering about
its cause. I presumed it had started in the library and was
thinking of a short-circuit, but the girls who had first noticed the fire told me that it started in the Fourth Year
room. I then thought of a foul play. I told Mr. Kairuz, ViceMayor Fermin de Castro and others who were present that
I suspected Henry of Amtadao. Upon hearing this, Ernesto
Rafael of Ilagan told that the boy had bought kerosene that
same evening. Another boy came to tell that Henry had met
him on the road telling him that he had burned the church.
So Samir Kairuz, Fermin de Castro and a policeman went
to look for the boy. They found him in the Forestry Camp
in Nacagang and brought him to the Presidencia where he
confessed his guilt. In the meantime the priests of Bauco
and Bontoc, the F.C. and the Bontoc Hospital Personnel had
arrived at midnight when the fire was practically over and
there was no more danger of spreading. I went to see the
boy in the Presidencia where there were plenty of people.
I gave some advice to the boy and then told the people not
to touch him. He was heavily guarded by the P.C. because
the people wanted to take him and throw him into the blaze.
During the fire all the lumber for the boys’ dormitory
had been pulled to the basketball court. It was a real sight
to see how the people ran here and there in panic., For.


the next three days people were working to clear the bul


he


h


area. They went back and forth with two trucks to dump
the ashes, cement and glasses into the river. They looked
black like devils. The next week they removed the roofing
that had collapsed in one big piece. This was a very dangerous work. All the people helped very much and risked
their lives during the fire. On the Sunday after the fire I
said Holy Mass on the stage here on the plaza and during
the sermon I really broke down and cried. I was not alone
. many were doing the same. The next day the mother
of Henry came with three other women of Alab. She was
truly a sorrowful mother.
We made three classrooms in the gym and three others
in the girls' dormitory. The first floor of the convent where
the boys were formerly staying is now a temporary chapel
where mass is said every morning. On Sundays the mass
is said on the groundfloor of the burned down classrooms.
On September 19, all the christians of the barrios came to
Sabangan to take part in a kind of reparation we have
offered to our Lord for His burned church.
We are trying to hurry up the building of the boys”
dormitory where we shall have three classrooms instead
of the three rooms that are now in the gym. I want the gym
to be available for Sunday masses.
All the laboratory equipment, the library, the 2 generators (one big and one small), etc. are gone. Only two
statues, 8 pews from the church, the mike and a few books
were salvaged. So quick was the fire! We are lucky that
there were no accidents. All our belongings at the convent
were returned. Practically nothing was lost. We have, of
course, some damage in the convent but the people came
to repair it the day after the fire.
The damage is very big; it certainly amounts to P150,
000. The walls and the posts of the church will have to be
tested to see whether they are still strong enough to carry
another structure. Otherwise, they will have to be broken
down. I don’t know when the reconstruction will begin, but
that will not happen in the near future.
The damage is only financial. I think the people have
grown spiritually under the ordeal.
Sincerely yours in Christ,


(Sgd.) Rev. Fr. Paul de Middeleer


September in the waste basket.
.. . . . October
Septiembere . . . . . ... Octubre
Tve got one of those
Spanish calendars
too bad!!!
Let's study the redsmany 'virgens ... few holidays
too bad!!
7 de Octubre “Dirgen SDel 9
Id better buy another rosary
.a cheap one I always lose
them. Im not so good in praying rosaries... three or four H.
Marys with attention... the rest
dreaming... with devotion. Perhaps it is better to dream with a
rosary in your hands rather than
not praying at all.
Ill pray for peace
R looked shaky recently
Iguess Im going to pray for the
bishops too.
They are working hard in
the council.
That is good for them...
good for us.


Miocion Sunday soon:


Fll have to cut down on
cigarettes against cancer and for
the missions.
Maybe Im going to pray for
the misstonartes . .. . they surely
nced it.
Then sull "Grioto “Rey
Kings are on the way out
NOT so for Christ the King.
October will be over then.


I can as well lose my rosary
again—but only after November 1. 4 rosary is still
doing better—on the cemetery
than a transistor.


See Mou!!!!!


29


C.LC.M. prlesto and brothero get
sick or dis, arrlvs at or depart
lrom thetr mieciono and konero
ars conlerred upon tham la one
way or another. Ol thess and ether
thinga, the raadero will be inlormed



Apaya


For the first time under its charter, St. Louis University
conferred upon Rt. Rev Msgr. Louis de Roeymoeker
Ph.d.. S.T.D., Very Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh, C.S.C..
S.T.D. ond Deon Woldo S. Perfecto the honorary degree
of Doctor of Education on September 14, 1965.
Very Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh is the present president of the Nofre Dome University ond by presidential
oppoiniment, is a member of the U.S. Commission on Civil
Bights, U.S. Advisory Commission on Internotional, Edu

10


cational ond Cultural Affoirs ond the National Science
Boord. He is the permonent representative of the Holy
See to the Internotional Federation of Catholic Universities (for three consecutive ferms). He received the
Medal of Freedom from President Johnson, the highest
civil honor the President con bestow. He holds the U.S.
Navy’s Distinguished Service Medal. He was conferred
honorary degree by sixteen universities all over the world.
Right Rev. Msgr. Louis de Roeymoeker is the present
Pro-Rector of the Catholic University of Louvain. He is
the President of the Higher Institute of Philosophy ot the
University. He is the edifor of the Revue Philosophique de
Louvain. Since 1949 he hos been President of the World
Union of Cotholic Philosophical Societies and in 1953
he was elected member of the council of Federation
Internotionale des Societies de Philosophie.
Dean Waldo S. Perfecto is the Vice-President of De
Lo Salle College; the President of the Catholic Educationol
Association of the Philippines (CEAP); a member of the
Coordinating Committee of Private Educational Associations (COCOPEA); the Regional Secretory of the International Office of Catholic Education; a member of the
Professional Advisory Committee. Philippine Mental
Health Association; the Vice-Choirman of the Executive
Boord ond Choirman of the Advisory Committee on Scientific Progrom Development of the Executive Boord, World
Federation of General Assembly of the World University
Service.


Rev. Fr. Rene de Brabander,
32, of West Flanders, Belgium,
arrived here last Sept. 15 and will
serve temporarily as the Procurator of Maryhill Seminary, Taytay, Rizal. Before arriving in the
Philippines he studied Philosophy
at the University of Louvain and
the Catholic University in Washington. U.S.A., where he obtained his doctorate in Philosophy.


11


Fr. Bonifacio


Fr. Aquino


Fr. Madriaga


Rev. Fr. Roberto Bonifacio of Manila; Rev. Fr. Conrado
Aquino of Manila and Rev. Fr. Gabino Madriaga of Tubao, La
Union left for Rome last October 4 for higher studies at the
Gregorian University. Rev. Fr. Bonifacio and Rev. Fr. Aquino
will specialize in Sacred Scriptures and Rev. Fr. Madriaga in
Moral Theology.


Rev. Fr. Al-l
bert Bouillon, 49,
of Lamorteau, Luxembourg arrived
here last August
11 as a visitor to
St. Louis University, the Bureaul
of Forestry and
the College of Forestry. U.P.. Los
Banos for a research work on
Termites.


The research
work brought
him to Baguio Cilty; Fabrica, Negros Occidental;
Maco, Davao; Nasipit, Butuan; Palawan and Los
Banos.
On October
18, he left for Leolpoldville, Rep.' of
Congo.
He attained
his doctorate’s de

gree in Sciences (Biology) at the University of Louvain
in 1948 and in Paris in 1949. At present, he is a professor
of Molecular Biology at the University of Lovanium, Leopoldville, since 1945, year of the university s foundation.


Very Rev.
Fr. Joseph Billiet, 77, who
was
widely
known and
respected as
a man of great
wisdom and exceeding kindness, died after almost seven months
hospitalization
at 6:45 A.M.
last August 12


at the Notre
Dame Hospital. His body lay in state
at the Bishop's
Residence till
the day of the
Interment on
August 17 at
the Baguio Cemetery.
He came
to the Philippines on October 5, 1912.


Very Rev. Joseph Billict


two months after being ordained a priest and was assigned as
an assistant parish priest in Pasig, Rizal. Till 1929, he was
the parish priest of Paco, Manila and from 1929 to 1931, he was
the secretary of Msgr. Jurgens. In September 1935, he was
eppointed Provincial General of the C.I.C.M. Fathers in the
Philippines. After two months he was appointed Apostolic
Prefect of the Mt. Province until June, 1948. In 1953, he
was appointed Rector of the major Seminary of San Carlos


13


BEFORE THE MIRROR


"It’s early morning and
from a cozy bed.
You get a pretty good re
of yourself
Handsome? Ugly? not
so bad
anyway, it’s you!


You’ve got the eyes of an auntie
The nose of a great grandpa
Who died
Some 34 years before you were born:
The face of your darling mother,
The build-up of your uncle,
The voice of your father.
You seem to have everything from
every kinsman
Although everything belong to you
personally.
Funny ... Everyone is so
proud to say that you are like them.
It isn’t surprising that people are
like that.
But there’s someone else
Whom you resemble — that’s God!
You’ve got a soul like Him


You’re more like Him than anyone else
in this world.


So as you stand before the mirror
You should know that you’re like Godthe life of grace is in you
He loves you for being like Him.


So keep on making God love you
by being like Him.”


14


Your Rusty Razor Blade


BEAUTY HINTS


For Wrinkled Brows
Try the well-known cream,
SWEETNESS OF TEMPER. It tones
up the facial muscles, reduces
wrinkles and is very uplifting.


For the Lips


Use the marvelous lip stick
SILENCE. It is particularly good
for lips that have been distorted
by uncharitable gossips.


For Lovely Hands
There’s really one preparation to use. It is called GENEROSITY.
Get a large size jar.


For Facial Tone


Expose the face to the morning
air, especially between six and eight
o’clock. The air on the way
to Mass is especially refreshing
and uplifting.
For Clear Eyes
aithful care with that tried
ang
protective preparation,


An Ideal Conditioner and Beautifier
HOLY COMMUNION


A Wonderful Cleansing Agent


For the best results we
nd that you carry it with
yonlwherever you go.


CONFESSION


15





A
ME
YAUR





AOTHER
)


For sure you too can do something for the mission


*


A


VIP N-SPI CAO BEMV
SOMTONESI
GOING TO
AN OWI
Pi6
E
*



—X

7


PATAY
a
/
NV
SALAMAT
OWI


“You’re a lowdown cheat," shouted
one lawyer.
“You’re an unmitigated liar, replied
his opponent.
The judge rapped sharply on the
bench. “Now that the attorneys have
identified each other, he said, "we
shall proceed with the case.


Private: “Sir, the enemy soldiers are
before us thick as peas.


Captain: "All right, shell them!"


Overheard at the Zoo: "Daddy, if
that lion eats you up which is the
number of the bus I take to get home?”


EARLY TO BED


TOM—DOOLEY


FAMOUS


DOCTOR


His name was Thomas A. Dooley but the Americans
who knew him very well simply called him “Tom Dooley
He was a big man with blue eyes, a descendant of an lrish
family.
He was born in Saint Louis, Missouri on January IY,
1927. After one year of preparatory studies in Medicine, he
volunteered in the American Navy where he served from
1944 to 1946.
Having left the navy, he went to study French for one
year at the Sorbonne University in Paris. He went back to
the States to continue his studies at the University of Saint
Louis where he got his degree of Doctor of Medicine in
1953. He had all the possibilities of making a very promising career in America but he joined again the Navy,
this time as a doctor. His ship was sent to Laos in 1954 to
help the refugees. In Indochina he saw the terrible conditions in which millions of people lived: women and children
who were driven away from their homes, just lying on the


20


streets. That was the time a feeling of charity was born in
Tom Dooley; it never left him. Touched by the misery of
these refugees he understood the sense of his mission here
on earth.
"I was then 28 years old. I had been medicine-lieutenant
and had never doubted anything. They had left me in Haiphong, North Vietnam to direct a camp of refugees. There
I had immediately more than 600,000 patients, all of whom
were escapees from Red China. Many of them had been
tortured by the communists. They were dirty and sick and
they really needed better doctors than I."
Tom Dooley told this tragedy in his first book, "Deliver
Us From Evil," a best-seller.
When he left the Navy in 1956, he used his rights as an
author to send a medical expedition to Laos. He succeeded
and at the same time he convinced many factories of medicine to donate to Indochina, where he, accompanied by three
friends, had gone.
14
in 1956 I went again to Laos which was then in complete disaster. I put up my first hospital at some distance
from Van-Vieng, in the center of the country, and a second
at Nam-Tha, 8 kilometers from the Chinese border.
Some Americans living in Southern Asia told me that
my work could not last very long and that I was practising
Medicine of the 19th century. They were right! But what
escaped them was that I was not treating people who lived
in the 19th century but in the Middle Ages. If I did not
help them in my way then most of them would have been
dead before there should ever be a modern hospital there.
It was an immediate medical help that these people needed."
He worked day and night without stopping until November, 1957.
On that day he gave over his hospital officially to the
Laotian Government and the whole inside installation with
his assistants, nurses, materials, etc. It was part of his plan
to make everything simple and easy for the Laotian people
so that they could run it without him.
He returned to the States to prepare a third plan of
the operation. He was always convinced to make things
simple and to build them up slowly for he gave more value
to man-to-man contact.


21


His second book, “The Edge of Tomorrow” helped a lot
in the search for help and the need for money. After a chain
of conferences he started with Dr. Peter D. Commanduras
the organization MEDICO (Medical International Cooperation) and in 1958 he built another hospital in a Laotian
village, Moung-Sing, again near the Chinese border.
‘It is the responsibility of everybody to help with his
own means the millions of people who are suffering. I have
discovered my life-work among the Asians and nobody is
happier than I am."
When he went to Rome in 1958 he was given the Cross
of Honor of the Oblates by the General of the Oblates Fathers of Mary Immaculate. He worked with this congregation in Laos.
In the autumn of 1959 he became sick of cancer. He
himself told this terrible news to his friends and he went to
the States to be operated on.
He described his return in his book, “The Night They
Burned the Mountain.
“I am in Bangkok. My side and shoulder are painful.
I am tired. I am hungry. I enter a small restaurant to eat
a little and ask the owner whether I can play the piano.
Neither Chopin nor Schumann come to my help that night.
I’m too tired and sick, my heart is still more painful than
my chest and shoulder. I go on to Rachmaninoy whose brilliant chords resound in the restaurant. When I started playing a concerto of Tchaikovsky, someone called me.
"'Hello, Tom! How are you?”
I turn around. It is my friend Hank Miller, Chief of
the U.S.I.S. in Vientiane with his excellent wife Annie.
‘Tve never seen you in such condition, Tom. Hank
said. 'What is wrong?”
“I told him everything. He looked at me and said:
Tom, I know why you are going back to the United
States. I’m going to tell you the truth. The tumor that was
removed by Dr. Van Valin had a melanoma of the second
degree.
“Tumor .. melanoma. Those words flashed to my
mind. I did not think of anything and I was not afraid.
When I came back to myself I felt almost relieved. Yes, I
know the truth. As a doctor I know that melanoma is one
of the most rapid-growing and the most insidious kinds of


tumors. But I am extremely calm.
'On Thursday, August 20, I arrived in New York. Dr.
Commanduras came to meet me at the airport. How good it
was to see him! That night we talked of many things. It was
strange that in talking to them about myself I felt as though
I were discussing the sickness of another person, not myself
at all.
On the third day my doctor came to see me and said:
Tom, all these tests have proven negative for extension
of the cancer. It seems that the melanoma involves only the
chest wall and the local nymph nodes. Tomorrow we will
do an extensive removal of all the skin muscles, nodes, veins,
nerves and tissue of the right side of your chest and axilla.
We can graft skin from your legs to put on the bare chest
wall. We’ll operate tomorrow."
‘I addressed a little prayer to heaven.
"All right, I said. 'I am ready.
“He smiled and said, 'Good. Chin up, boy!'
“Early the next morning a priest brought me Holy
Communion. I was calmer and felt stronger. I am in the
hands of God! I asked myself: 'How can one live without
faith?
“A few hours later they gave me my premedication
hypo. At noon I would be operated on. I woke up full of
confidence. I knew that this horrible cancer had not pene

trated farther than my liver. No cancer can destroy my
courage. The Lord gave me enough of it. The time left for
me to live, though it be one or ten years, should be the best
period of my life.
"My doctor was very surprised when I told him about
my plans. As soon as I go out of the hospital I would go to
Hawaii for my convalescence. Then I would give conferences in order to raise funds for our organization MEDICO
and by Christmas I would return to Laos.
'Well,’ he said, 'if all dressings are finished and if the
graft does not slough off and if all goes well, I suppose
there is really no reason that you can’t.
“I had no intention to lie in a hospital bed and wither
away. There was too much to do in this world. I must fill
each minute full of sixty seconds’ worth of distance run.


After eight days he started a very tiring trip of six
weeks of conferences including 48 talks in 37 different
cities. But his cancer very soon obliged him to put an ironcast around his breast.
God has been good to me,” he said. "He has given me
the cancer at a very young age. He was 32 years old then.
“It is a gift of God for the good of all people. Thousands of
people who know me consider me as a fair man. That I have
24


the cancer does not matter. What matters is how I react to
it.
“Thousands of women who have a breast-cancer think
that they can no more work, that they can no more bear
children, that they can no more live long. As a doctor I
know this.
Tom Dooley showed the world what one can do with
the help of others. They travelled by foot from daybreak to
night and they worked for the miserable people in their
little hospital. He and his helpers had an enormous influence
on the people.
He had a life of a hero in the jungle of Laos and the
Laotians considered him as one coming from Mars.
Dr. Dooley did not preach: he went to help the sick
because they were sick. He could be the patron of the modern apostles. In his hospital the Cross was the focus of his
attention and he always carried a rosary in his pocket. All
his actions proclaimed the Christian message to all those
who needed to see in order to believe.


His charity was reciprocated marvelously: the whole
world wanted to help him. A taxi driver who brought him
to the airport in New York refused his five dollars telling,
“That is my contribution for a sick child.” A business firm
in the States took care of the transport expenses. The Junior
Chamber of his home city, St. Louis, and the hotel keeper
Conrad Hilton gave him a two-motored plane to help him
on his trips in Laos.
Dr. Dooley achieved in a few years the work of a whole
life. But just the same he said, "It’s a pity that this cancer
is taking away my time, but it has taught me something. I
have spoken with people who also had cancer and who were
always thinking of the months and the years left for them
to live. That is wrong. My religion tells me what I have to
think of . . . that which I can do every minute.
In November, 1960, during a tour in Hongkong, Tom
Dooley was overworked. Soon he had to return to the United
States for his cancer continued its work.
On the evening before his death — it was his birthday
— one of his loving friends went to visit him and said,
assure you that in 34 years you have done what very few
have done in the allotted scriptural life span." That was
Cardinal Spellman.
Tom Dooley died on January 18, 1961. He was 34 years
old.
Unto the end Tom Dooley was courageous on his hospital bed. Unto the end he hoped to continue his hard work.
Unto the end he gave himself totally in the hands of Our
Lord.


26


IN 1965
MORE THAN 100 YOUNG MEN
FLOCKED INTO THE C.I. C. M
SEMINARIES
FOR THE FIRST TIME.
IF YOU HAVE A SIMILAR PLAN
FOR NEXT YEAR.
HURRY!
ACCOMMODATIONS ARE LIMITED


GET IN CONTACT WITH:
REV. PROMOTER OF VOCATIONS
P.O. BOX 1323
MANILA


27


CROSS EACH OF THE LETTERS BELOW WITH THE NAME
OF A SAINT WHOSE FEASTDAY FALLS ON OCTOBER


1. Bishop of Jerusalem in c.
222?, lived to be at least
116.
2. “Healer of God."
3. Archbishop of Cologne,
brother of Otto the Great.
4. Tells us what is right.
5. Saw the corpse of Empress
Isabella of Granada.
6. Lamb of God
7. Patron St, of the Missionaries


8. Widow, Duchess of Sllesia
9. Spread the public devotion
to the Sacred Heart
10. Pope who held the Apostolic Chair for only eight
months and 20 days.
11. Apostle, “the zealot"
12. Patriarch of Constantinopole, son of a Byzantine
Emperor.
13. Archbishop of Rheims at
22, Apostle of the Franks.
Answers on inside back cover


Work becomes more and more difficult for the missionaries. They are caught between the hammer and sickle.
Some missions are destroyed and plundered. Some priests
live a nomadic existence, wandering from one community to
another.
The Christian Brothers have founded an Association of
Catholic Education in defence of christian instruction. 203
schools have joined the movement.
Half an hour of radio-broadcasting has been allowed to
Catholics by the Department of Information. Catholics are
on the air every Sunday from 9:15-9:40.
The archbishop of Saigon and four other Vietnamese
bishops have participated in the 4th Centennial Celebration
in Cebu. Two of the bishops present had previously studied
at the University of Sto. Tomas.
Vietnam’s Catholic bishops have established a Central
Committee to Aid the Victims of War. The committee will
provide funds, food and clothing for the victims in all dioceses
of Vietnam.


Near the end of the first half of 1965, a few dioceses
in Northeast Congo were still under complete rebel control. Others were partly liberated..


29


By the end of May, 22 Assumptionist Fathers had returned to Kivu and were received with greot joy by the
christions. Only half of the classes could be re-opened
because many teachers from Belgium had not returned.
Most of the schoolbuildings were either destroyed or badly damaged.
Almost at the same time, the White Fathers were back
in Albertville. The year before, two of the Fathers were
killed and 20 others were seriously maltreated by the
Simbas.
Twenty-three native sisters who had their former
residence in Buta ore now working in the diocese of Lisalo.
Last December, 1964, they walked day and night, covering 490 kilometers in 10 days to escape the Simbos.


The lapanese author Thomas Shigeyaki, who entered the
Franciscan Monastery at the age of 69, recently published his
14th book under the title “The Life of a Rose. He published
it on the occasion of the centennial anniversary of the restoration of the Catholic Church in Japan and the SOth anniversary
of his baptism.
Last March 27, Senator Kokichi Nadao, who has been
four times minister of Public Instruction, gave a reception in
honor of Father Frederic Barbaro, a Salesian priest, who translated the Bible into Japanese. The first edition was sold out
in a few months’ time. A second edition will soon appear.
Television has allotted to the priest a one-hour rendition on
the theme "Holy Scripture in Palestine.
Two Japanese, a Christian and a Buddhist, were invited
to observe the Council in Rome. They are Ariga Tetsutato,
member of the Japanese Christian Conference and Rev. Iwano
Nikyo, the head of the Rissho Kosei Kai with its headquarters
in Tokyo.


Rev. Frank L. Cuttriss, rector of St. James' Anglican
Church in Sydney, has been chosen as Australio’s first
non-cotholic observer at Vatican Council III.
30


K.C. Chacko, principal of the engineering college of
Trivandrum, India, has been appointed as an observer of the
council. He is the first Indian Catholic lay observer.


On the opening day of the Vatican Council’s fourth
session, more thon 1,500 Romon Catholic Prelates had
a morch of penance from the Church of the Holy Cross
to the Basilico of St. John Lateron, hdlf o mile away. Pope
Paul VI, clothed in red cope and corrying a crucifix
having three tiny relics of the cross on which Christ died.
walked at the rear of the procession. The prelates wore
red and violet vestments and the venerable fathers who
were not physicolly fit for the half-mile walk were discreetly excused.
The procession is o symbol of what the Secono Vaticon
Council has become. Albert Outler o Protestant theologian who is an observer af Vatican II, summed it up as a
"Reformation, Romon-style. It is a reformation of attifudes, not of acts, ond it aims at the reconciliarion of the
Church with other foiths and with the modern world.
This month, His Holiness will fly to New York to address
the U.N. General Assembly on the subject of peace. He
will then be the first Pontiff to cross the Atlontic and to
see the U.S.
Pope Paul had issued his third Encyclicol, Mysterium
Fidei (Mystery of Foith).
After the Council His Holiness plons to create a synod
of bishops. The members will be elected and they will
be colled periodically to advise him on the governing of
the Church.


Among the 325,000 Chinese living in the Philippines.
74.000 are catholics. Msgr. Jean Velasco, exiled bishop of
Amoy in China, is their bishop. In 28 localities missions were
opened to take care of their religious needs.
31


KLM passengers
IOrr
Oh
when they fravel Firsf Class


MORE prvacy fo work or rest
MORE legroom fo unwind' or sleep
MORE luggage leeway—50X greater free baggage
allowance than in Economy or Tovrist Class
MORE spectacular meals— cockioils, wines and
whiskies on the house"


These are just some of the reasons why more and more
experienced travellers in the Philippines and around the
world are travelling First Class vio KLM — the world’s
most relioble girline.


NLM ROYAL DUTCH AIRLINES
PHILAMLIFE BUILDING
UNITED NATIONS AVENUE
MANILA


Answers


to the


Puzzle


of the


Month



EE
22 APOSTLE
Vo
E

E
P. O. BOX 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
(Entered as second class mail matter at 4
the Baguio City Post Office on
t
January 3, 1950
Oct., 1965
vOL. XXXV, No. I
A monthly mission magazine published
by the Immaculate Heart of Mary A
Missionaries in the Philippines.

EDITOR
C.I.C.M.
ASSOCIATE EDITOR
REV. Fr. GASTON NOLLET
BUSINESS MANAGER
MR. MARIANO SIMEON, JR.
ADVERTISING MANAGER
REV. FR. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:
Life .......... . . . . . . . . . P50.00
Foreign ................ $ 3.00
One Year.............. ₱ 4.00
Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PRESS.
BAGUIO
Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission



1. Narcissus
2. Raphael
3. Bruno
4. Guardian Angel
5. Francis Borgia
G. Christ the King
7. Little Flower


8. Hedwig
9. Margaret Mary
10. Mark
11. Simon
12. Ignatius
13. Remigius


CRe APOSTIE


THE Oikoumene SIGN IS USED MOST
OFTEN BY PROTESTANT AND ORTHODOX
CHURCHES. ONE CAN FIND IT FOR INSTANCE ON THE CHURCH OF THE UNITED
CHURCH OF CHRIST ALONG EPIFANTO
DE LOS SANTOS AVENUE, QUEZON CITY
THE WORLD-COUNCIL OF CHURCHES ALSO USES IT.
MRS. EW. PRENTICE OF THE INFORMATION SERVICE IN GENEVA HAS THE FOLLOWING TO SAY ABOUTIT:


During the Second World
Var, a group of Christans in Germany
drew it and passed it on to each other. It
was a sign of the solidarity that breaks
through all borders in a true obedience to
Christ. It is an old symbol Christian of
the militant Church on the sea, which this
world is. OIKOUMENE is the New
Testament term for whole mankind."
THAT TOO, IS THE MEANING OF THE
CATHOLIC "UNA SANCTA" MOVEMENT.


PRAY
that all may be one"


1


It is extremely difficult to draw a map of the different
religions in the world. The indications as found on this map
are necessarily schematic, and sometimes contestable. It is
not a course in religious gcography, but we just try to "locate" a bit the presence of Christians.
The areas of Africa and Asia in gray represent the parts


of the world, where the biggest number of non-Christians
(Moslems, Buddhisis and Hinduists) live.
The black doued line which goes down into Africa, goes
up again and crosses Asia, fixes approximately the zone where
the influence of the Orthodox is found. Such influence is
also found in America, India and Australia.


530 million baptized


CathoHes


Protestants
Angliooos


50 million They occupl
the Catholics and th
British Queen is the "
Church of England"


Lutherans


70 million. The most 8
among the ProtestantsaThe
represented in Germane
vian countrico


50 million Originally in Switzeadand. They
are in big number among the French Protestants The American Puritans of the
XVII century were of this denomination.
Baplists

24 million They come from the federation
ol several secis in 1813. Their baptismi is
celebrated by immersion and remains feserved to adulis


Orthod
200 million. In matters
ily is with the lathers


aith, all authorhe Church and


4


There ag


Monophysites
18 million. Found mosily in Ethiopia, they
have the samewaith as the Orthodox but


they recog
son of Chi


are Three Billion people
ere are a billion christians (by
understand all men baptized
name of the Father and of
df the Holy Spirit"),
Hians or not.
a
are our brothers
billion “belicvers"
eloma tosa kuown religion).


 are our brothers


on people "without
our own brothers


DE


C

2



o litingr about unity, Aust
 t mako os qoort is a lode t
difficing VOPLt Bur EHTEO
don t mats: ANHEN  T
uatlers is to go upalogo
ANC ho(se ot-oud
PAMIOTI



A
E


 E
E



2


E
a aa


PONTIFICAL INTENTIONS


General Intention:
That all Christians, increasingly open to the
will of God, may work wholeheartedly for
the perfecting of Christian unity.


Mission Intention:
That Christian works of charity may witness
to the truth of the Gospel.


Answers to the Contest


of the month of November,


"Who is Who, Which is Which


Winner:



1.


A Raisin in the Sun


Ma. Rosalina Geronimo


2.


Eichmann


2756 Juan Luna


3.


Breakfast at Tiffany’s


Gagalangin, Tondo


4.


Gagarin



Manila





3


: a sign of our time
a center of ecumenical activity


Roger Schutz, founder and
brother prior of the Protestant
Community of monks at Taize,
France, is the personification of
the nostalgia of the Christian
for unity. He is one of the most
remarkable non-Catholic observers in Rome.


Who are Roger Schutz and his brothers?


- August 1940. Roger Schutz, 25 years old, chooses Taize,
France as the place for his future community and remains there alone for 2 years.
1942. First vocations. Start of a community-life, but
outside Taize on account of circumstances.
— 1944. Back to Taize. 4 brothers.
— 1948. Easter: 5 brothers. The brothers celebrated the
Office of the Community for the first time in the small
Catholie Church of Taize thanks to the "Simultaneum"
(ie., permission to make use of the chureh for both catholic
and protestant services, accorded by Msgr. Lebrun, bishop
of Autun, and Msgr. Roncalli, Papal Nuncio in Paris).
Easter 1949. 7 brothers. All commit themselves definitely through the vows of celibacy, poverty and obedience.
— 1952. First experience of fraternity, as mission-work,
outside of Taize.
- 1952-1953. The rule of Taize is drawn up by the Prior.
— November 1958. First encounter with John XXIII.
— February 1962, First encounter with Putriarch Athenagoras.
August 1962. Inauguration of the Church of the Reconciliation.
1964. Communitg: 65 brothers, coming not only from
different countries, but also from different protestant
churches.
11


Manual work is not looked down upon in the
community of Taize.


Their main concern
remains "Unity of all
Christians in work
prayer and meetin
with Catholics, Prot
tants and Orthod


God’s Word Today
The Leper Sanatorium of Polambakkam
(South India) has now a staff of 60 people,
most of them Indians.
Dr. Hemelryckx, the founder, passed on the
direction to Dr. Claire Vellut of the AFI
(International Catholic Lay Helpers).


Is the care for Lepers just
an "occasion to show love to
God? After all, is true charity
possible at all without love and
care for the most valuable in
man, his being-loved-by-God?
He whose love is really unselish and pure should encounter
the Lord in his neighbor!
For I have given you an example,
The
that you also should do as I have
Lord done you. Truly, truly, I say to you,
he who receives anyone whom I send
says: receives me; and he who receives
me receives him who sent me.
John 13, 15 and 20


14


The Poor Sisters of St. Clare of Rabat (Morocco) from France
since some time celebrate the liturgy in the Arabic Language according to the Byzantic Rite. Thus, praying in the language and in
the name of the Moroccans, they want to continue Christ’s redemptive
act of becoming man among men.


A pious Utopia? Just a tactical approach? Or does it
mean a deep faith in their own special vocation: to be as
pure as humanly possible a sign of God’s love? Didn’t God,
without being of this world, become man?


The "As thou didst send me into the world, so I have sent them
Lord into the world. I in them and thou in me, that they may
says: become perfecily one so that the world may know that thou
hast sent me and hast loved them even as thou hast loved me."
John 17, 18 and 23


Love the "Beatles
...Dul watch your hares


Beduty is nof to be boughf ...
It can only grow and blossom from within.


NEW YORK
Immediately after his address to the General Assembly
of the United Nations, the Holy Father met the representatives of Catholic, Protestant and Jewish organizations
maintaining contacts with the U.N.
The Pope said in part:
“We have great admiration for you and for your dedicated labours. You are worthy of honor and your efforts
merit the grateful prayers of all mankind. We urge you with
all our hearts to work even more strenuously for the cause
of peace — a peace based on the fatherhood of God and the
brotherhood of all men. This is the measure of Our Divine
Saviour, the Prince of Peace; this is the message we wish
to leave you today.
“This message we intend not only for the Catholic
organizations represented at the United Nations; but we
likewise extend it to all of you here present, representing
various Frotestant and Jewish organizations accredited
with the various organizations of the United Nations.


17


Tojeurd an “Ecimenical Bible"


This is not just a new idea; it is the old dream of a
common bible for the great Christian creeds. Last May the
Holy Office granted permission for the Catholic edition of
the famous "Revised Standard Version" of the Bible of the
American Council of Protestant Churches. It has the imprimatur of Msgr. Gordon J. Gray, archbishop of St. Andrew
and Edinburgh, the diocese of publisher Thomas Nelson
and Son.
This plan is old. The Catholic Biblical Association of
England gave the first push to it 11 years ago with the benevolent permission of Cardinal Griffin, Archbishop of
Westminster. Later on the Benedictine Fathers Reginald
Fuller and Bernard Orchard, the animators of the association, stumbled on some resistance of Cardinal Godfrey.
The ecumenical breakthrough under John XXIIl and
the appointment of Msgr. Heenan to the See of Westminster gave them the opportunity to push determinedly their
work.
prietor of the copyright of the “Revised Standard Version,"
agreed to allow changes in the Catholic Edition. But not so
many seemed necessary. They were indicated by footnotes
and consolidated at the end of the book. The Protestant
publishers also agreed to present the Apocryph books in a
manner acceptable to the Catholics. Adding to these a
special general introduction by Fuller, the Holy Office
granted the permission.
When the news about the publishers of Edinburgh became known, another plan already existed: a common bible,
not only for Catholics and Protestants, but also for the
Orthodox; not an adaptation or copy of an existing edition,
but a completely new translation in cooperation..


18


The possibility to accomplish this project belongs now
to reality and the hard work of biblical experts
In America, the Anchor-Bible (only a few books have
been translated and published as of now) is a great success.
Some thirty Catholic, Protestant and Jewish biblical experts
are cooperating towards that goal under the guidance of
Dr. Freedman, Presbyterian, and of Dr. Allright, Methodist,
for Doubleday publications.
In Germany the same cooperation has gotten underway
a fully new translation of the Bible. Cooperation between
Catholic and Protestant missionaries will bring about common translation in Ceylonese, Indonesian, Swahili, Zoulou
and Japanese languages.
Many Protestant Churches are using now the excellent
“Bible of Jerusalem," translated by the Dominican Fathers,
Roland de Vaux, Pierre Benoit and other experts of the
Bible-School of Jerusalem.


ITALY


Forty Catholic and Protestant theologians and laymen
met here for a three-day informal ecumenical study conference on the training of the laity.
The meeting was co-sponsored by the Permanent Committee fer International Congresses of the Lay Apostolate
and the World Council of Churches department on the laity.
It was the second meeting of its kind. The first was held at
Gilon, Switzerland, last year.
The meeting was organized with the cooperation of
Father Jerome Hamer, O.P., consultant of the Vatican Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity; Martin Work,
executive director of the National Council of Catholic Men,
Washington; and Dr. lan Fraser, general secretary of the
Scottish Council of Churches. Among the speakers were
Lutheran, Catholic, Syrian, Orthodox, and Swiss Reformed
clergymen, and lay people.
19


Father Peter: Mr. Reyes, have
you got some pets?
Mr. Reyes: How can 1? There’s
a cobra in the house.
Wife: “Well, what excuse have
you got for coming home at this
hour of the night?
Husband: “Well, my dear, I
was play ing golf with some
friends.
Wife: "What! At 2 A.M.?
Husband: “Sure. We were
using night clubs.
"I say, Dad, do you remember
telling me about the time you were
expelled from school?”
Do 1? Ha! Ha! Great days!”
Well, I’m telling you.
Pat: “Have any of your child
hood hopes been realized:
Mat: “Yes, when mother used
to comb my hair I wished I didn’t
have any.





20


DuRING the first years of our marriage, my wife found
it hard to say "no" to door-to-door salesmen, and after she
had inescapably committed herself to one such unnecessary
but major expense, I criticized her. An argument followed
— the first one in two years of married bliss.
Tempers soon cooled, and I thought all was forgiven
and forgotten until I returned from work the following day
and found this sign posted on the front door:
SALESMEN: BEWARE OF VICIOUS HUSBAND!!!


“My son went abroad ten years
ago to make his fortune.
"And what is he worth now?
“The New York police are offering $20,000 for information
about him.


VOU VEAN VOU RAN
AWAY TO SEE THE WORLD
KNOWING YOUD HAVE TO

BE HOME AND IN BED
BY EIGHT OCCLOCK?)


21


This is everyone’s duty:
a parent to a child
a student to a friend


Ii’s a privilege to listen to God’s word.
many believe — more don't


YOU
to a
NEIGHBOR


In this school 97 classes get a catechist 2x a week.


Millions over
the world
see none


of these.


li's infinitely
sublime to
speak it —


few dare to spread it.
some just keep quiet -


To bring God’s message to others
is an apostolate of teaching, daily
sacrifice, prayer and LOVE. Call
not yourself a Christian if you have
not done any of these to one of His
least."


COMPLIMENTS OF


STCOC.SCA


Editor’s Note:
Congratulations and thank yon STCOC-SCA
members, for your derotion to your task of
spreading the truth!


CHALLENGE. . . . . . . . BOYS?2
Are there any of you from a Bovs'
School or a group of boys who dare
do the same? Proud to publish about
your Catholie Action deeds? If von do
accepl this challenge, face it squarely:
send in your pictorial article to:
The Aposile
P.O. Box 12
Baguio City
23


C.lL....


ramily News


Having acquired his Master’s degree in
Catechetics after two years of study at the
Catholic University in Washington, Rev.
Fr. Wilfred Gepts, 28, came to the Philippines en November 11.


Fr. Gepts


Rev. Fr. Milanes of Tubao, La Union,
Rev. Fr. George Beleta of Bayombong.
Nueva Vizcaya and Rev. Fr. Gerard Peeters, one-time Assistant parish priest of La
Trinidad, Benguet and professor at the Guadalupe Seminary left for Brazil last Dec.
18. Their first 2 years stay there will be
devoted to pursuing further studies. They
will serve as missionaries in said South
American country.


POINTERS for JANUARY


HAPPY NEW YEAR!
Same to vou. Don’t look for me. I am
invisible... behind a pile of presents. They
are so nicely wrapped that I'll not open them.
Fll just pass them on to others next Yule time.
That is planning.


I acknowledge with emotion the good will
and the love wrapped -in with the various ashtrays and nylon socks... or stockings? A new
year a new government, a new calendar—all
really new. New resolutions, new hopes and
illusions—new, but the same as last year.
The Three Kings went to adore the new king
Fll try not to lose sight of their star.
That newborn King has not been very lucky
with us. He tried to bring peace. We are
quarelling about Him.
Now we pray that He may make us ONE;
that is what the Unity Octave is for. Ill close
my uindow and shut out the winter chill.
The poor are coughing and I pity them. I
wonder if that pity will clear my table of some
of those 'Maligayang Pasko' packages. At
the entrance of the house Brod's star shows
already its bamboo frame. It will never take
February.
I hope the star of Bethlehem will fare better:
with me and with you.


So long, Farewelll


25


If I Were Your
BENTA


and I found out that vou
had trouble with one of these
habitual sins... Td burst out
laughing. That s really nuts
to me.
Fdlake care thal you wouldn't
talk to vour Father Confessor about it becanse he could
easily indicate my trick. And
if vou planned to talk about
il anvway Ud advise von:
Whal will he think of vou?
Avery efficient trick for
vour age'
Meanwhile Fil shut up
vour imagination within the
cirele of my exaggerations:
not for one moment will I
allow those acts to flee from
your mind. Ull make them
an obsession to vou. Of
course Ull not allow von to
talk to anvone about it: the
real works for a devil!
This way the impression
that vour case is really peculiar and that vour troubles
are unconquerable will increase. That s exacily what 
want: to discourage von, The
moment vou are discouraged.
von re mine'
Finally Eil dissuade all
efforts: You can't break the
habit anymore' Thats the
way vou are. Yon don t have
a bit of will power
Perhaps voull become
desperale and start doubting
God’s merev. That will be my
full victory.


26


Give a TITLE to this photo.
Send in entries not later
than January 31. 1966.


Send in entries to:
The Apostle
P. O. Box 42
Baguio City


WAA.
BATLD
MARAA
The following
story — if youmay call it a
story — is really
nothing much.
Under the title
“The Evening
Mass, "it appearedin Kortars, a
well-known lite -
rary magazine in
Hungary. Ii
gives us the opinion of a young
comminist —on
the life ofa Hungarian priest in
the rural area.
As it was said:
it is nothing
much. Or maybe
it is much.


We were on a field-trip, my friend
and I. After our daily round we decided to pass the night at the house of
my friend in a hamlet of the next town.
On the road to the hamlet, our car got
stuck in the mud.
Later that evening we got a ride
on the cart of the collective farm. The
horses pulled it through the inud. The
rain kept on and the wind was very
cold. We talked about the director,
the expert and other officials of the
collective farm who had a car or at
least a horse at their disposal.
At long last we got to the house
and its warm kitchen got us quickly
over all the trouble. We were introduced to a young man.
We had never met him before; he didn t
belong to the family He was a strong,
well-built fellow with a friendly face.
“Chaplain N., my friend' s mother
introduced bim to us.


The young priest had come from the next town to
celebrate the evening mass here. He, followed by the
women, left the kitchen. We, men, stayed, talked and
drank during the time of the mass.
I always feel like pitying those young, healthy, intelligent people, who are in the service of the Church. Twenty year)
ago this would not have impressed me at all: that way many
youngsters from poor fumilies got a chance to study and to
choose an intellectual's profession. But now?
Wbat in hell can draw a young intelligent fellow to the
priesthood! There must be some secrer. There must he something peculiar.
We pitied the young chaptain.
After the mass, the women returned and set the table. The
priest joined us at the table. Modest and happy. The looks
of a feacher, an engineer or maybe a skilled gardener. We enjoyed the delicious meal. The young chaplain ate only moderately. All at once, he excused bimself and was ready to leave.
Won t yon stay here for the night?"
"Sorry, If's impossible. I bave to wake up eurly.
What time?'
Well... It looked as if he preferred not to talk about
bimself. " At four o clock I have to celebrate mass in the next
bamlet. He gave its name. That is * kms, away from the
town, but the other way out; and along a muddy road, too.
Yon got a car!
"No. Ill walk. Anyway, I know very well the roads.
We accompanied bim ontside. The rain hadn t stopped
yet He went away, in a raincoat and boots. In one hand the
amall bag, a flasblight in the other. The small, dancing light
could be seen for a long time.
He studied at the university, and he walks through the
mud ro celebrate mass for some eight or ten women. Free, genflemen, no charge!” one man remurked.
He tried to luugh but his words sounded ont of place here.
Nobody anawered. Then he filled the glasses and drank.


29


ME
ASH WEDNESDAY
February 23, 1966
WHAT HAVE YOU GOT foT ...
TANT...
During Lent each of us tries to bring
about some kind of effort for a return to the
Lord. Usually, if we are sincere, all it amounts
to is an individual try for a few days (or possibly wecks). We smoke less, we eat less candies, we are less talkative, we are ... well, at
least we tried. This trying is definitely very
much appreciated but.. each of us wants to do
more than just this. With the 1966 Lenten
campaign, we offer the individual, the family, the class, and the group, an excellent
means to try this return to the Lord as a community, as the people of God.
CROSS for the children of 7
EVI
EVERY DAY
TE
to 12 years:
ONE
OUR PRAYERS
S
For each child, there is a
paper cross with a gummed

E
R
sheet showing on one side 40
colorful stones and crosses, and
NA
N
on the other side 40 suggestions
for each day in Lent. The perEE
formance of a daily prayer and
a good turn for the day means a
stone placed on its corresponding number on the cross. The

set contains also a cross for the
whole group or class.
EO



2 yo
No yon
ne Son o
havo a
umnaan


MISSAL MARKERS
for the 13-15 years:


mam
tungr
thay s


Attractive
missal markers with suggestions for
cach day of
the weck,and
short prayer.


ON THE WAY" for Adults:
A booklet for the young
adults or the over-16's .. who
arc on the way to life. It contains striking thoughts for every day of Lent based on concrete
problems of daily life.


CATHOLIC SCHOOL PRESS STORES
Available at:
and all stores carrying catcchetical Aids.
Prices:
65 y — On The Way
50 y — Missal Markers
408 — Cross


E APOSTLE


P. O. BOx 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on
January 3, 1950


VOL. XXXV. No. 4
Jan., 1966
EDITOR
C.I.C.M.
ASSOCIATE EDITOR
Rev. FR. GASTON NOLLET
BUSINESS MANAGER
MR. MARIANO SIMEON, JR.
ADVERTISING MANAGER
Rev. FR. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:


Life .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P50.00
Foreign ............... . $ 3.00
One Year .............. ₱ 4.00


Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PRESS
BAGUIO
Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


That all may be one ........................... 1
Fontifical Intentions ......................... 7
Taize .. 8
God’s Word Today ..................... . . . . .. 14
Beauty Hints ..... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
The Church in the World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Keep Smiling ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Spread the Truth .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
CICM Family News ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .24
Pointers for January ....... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
If I Were the DEVIL .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Photo Contest . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
What Drives Him? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
What Have You Got For Lent? ....... .. . .. ..... 29


Hap


Az
Uear!!


is the church
like a lantern of bygone days
old-fashioned, ornamental and extinci?
How can she become fox this new sitl
the light bf Christ
the light fof hope
and welfare?


littation to.








N


There's a PARTI
When? NON
Wherer HERE
Attire? AS Yo
Who? YO0


I was put into this world without my asking. As a baby I enjoyed whar I could get from it,
without questioning anything.
But now if my mother buys me a
pair of shoes without consulting
me...... I am no longer willing
to take anything. She doesn t
understand.
The world has been created for
man, for me. God invites me to
the party of life, with two hands
I clutch the ticket that gives me
the right to enter, to discover for
myselt the world: the water, the
sky the earth, the plants and the
animals. But no discovery equals
this most thrilling discovery of
myself and the others.
I have a strong appetite for this
created universe. How I like it!
It looks strange. Others shudder
at it and don’t dare to pioneer
They turn down the ivitation. It
is so comfortable, they think, to
cover the eyes and stay on the bed
of childhood.


I like parties, but especially this
party of life, because it makes me
fully human. I artend it enthusiastically, maybe with greed.
Won’t there be another party?
Did God extend me another invitation? I don t want to miss one of
these parties!


3


Unless God is around all the time,
the party of life won’t be a great success.
But God is around. He invites me to
His personal party. We call it baptism
and it brings Christ into my life.
If I live up to the invitation of my
baptism, I surely will learn how to welcome and entertain my friends with a
little bit of Christ's humility and warmth,
with something of His mercy and understanding. If I open up for God’s love
and live accordingly, He will do the smiling and talking for me in His unique and
irresistible way; and the distant glitter of
His eyes will be reflecting in mine showing my friends the way to Him.
At baptism I was ordained to be a
humble sign for others. Together with
the others and for the others I am called
to level the hilly approaches and to beautify the rocky shoulders along the way
He is. Together we are invited to make
this world more beautiful and better.
Time and again, however, I have to
remind myself of the special character of
the Lord’s party. It is not just for me,
because He wants me to invite the others.
An invitation to His party never
comes alone. Somehow I should answer
this invitation.


THE


4





LORD'S PARTY


MY PARTY IS


EVERIBODTS PARTY


I have made up my mind. I’ll accept God’s invitation
with both hands. I am going to make my life fully
beautiful.
A challenge? Sure! If I invite the others to the
party of my life their likes and dislikes will never
give me a quiet moment. They will even stand between God and me.
Why not keep it a private affair between God and
me?
“I was hungry, and you did not give me to eat.
Your Word!! Well, no way to get away from You
and my fellowmen.
I am scared to death. Somehow I feel it must be
killing to get always out of myself looking for my fellowmen and sharing with them whatever I got.
"Whoever tries to save his life will lose it.
All right, no other way to stay alive but to share
my life with others.
Deep down in my heart a voice tells me that I shall
be happy only to the extent that I make others happy;
not with big promises and sophisticated statements,
but in the down-to-earth concreteness of my money
and time.
I realize that this party of life is not only for my
family and friends, but also for strangers and passers-by,
and for my enemies as well. As long as the Lord sends
people to my door—it does not matter whether it be
before dawn or late at night—I have to open.
A challenge? Yes! My answer? Ill have to find
Christ and talk it over with Him.
Fine! I will do it right now.


7


I was walking along the paths of small gardens
and it seemed as if all things had come to greet me.
There were dahlias, zinnias and daisies; roses and
rosals, carnations and yellowbells, gladioli and snapdragons, violets and bachelor’s buttons.
I do not consider flowers like an artist or an herbalist. I am just looking at them as associated with
my life.
They are natural. They are thirsty. They are
sensitive. They are alive. Because they are dying,
they become identified with the passing day and with
mortal man. We can see ourselves in them. They tell
us our own story in terms of beauty.
What seems to be their weakness is, in fact, their
glory and their value. Once they have been cut and
sold out, they can neither be used twice nor passed from
hand to hand.
They are a symbol of fidelity, of friendship, of
vocation. That is their response to the call of their
being: to become what they are.
It is the truthfulness to be found in the cool groves
and the call of the birds under the greenwood trees. It
is the enchanting response of orchards in spring. The
response of the humble vegetable garden which works
day and night to supply onions, cabbages, salads and
parsley. The response of the flower beds which do
not care whether they are looked at or cut up. There
is also the response of that spontancous vegetationwe call it a weed because it did not ask our permission
to grow.
This is the vocation of all things: to be according
to the very straight line of their nature.
Ought man to be that way too? It is a great paradox to be rooted to the earth and to have to rise to
heaven. Or, is it because man is often a stranger to
himself?


8





M


JUST TO BE


CONTEST of the MONTH
Submit the shortest and yet sensible comment on
these cartoons not later than March 5, 1966 to:


The Apostle
P.O. Box 42
Baguio City


MAN AND WOMAN


'In the Philippines, we have onc priest for some seven thousand Catholics, 3% of whom belong to families in which everybody practises his religion regularly, 15% of whom belong
to families in which the women practise and the men do not, and
82% of whom belong to familics in which nobody goes regularly
to mass on Sundays.
Most familics that belong to the last two groups have done so
for several generations now and have retained very little knowledge
Ct their faith.
The clergy is barcly sufficient to administer the sacraments, to
educate, and to attend spiritually to the small grours of practising
familics. They are insufticient in number to re-convert and to
instruct the masses that have been allowed to grow outside the
Church.
Let us hope that you, reader, don’t belong anymore to the
class of people who desperarcly blurt out at reading the above statements: "It is impossible. It cannot be truc. It is not true."
But why these statements here? Are they nor the problems
of the pricsts, the sisters, the brothers, in short the Church? Yes,
they are. That is exactly why these statements are here.
It is the problem of the Church in the Philippines. Laymen
and women, priests, sisters, brothers—are they the Church or arc
they not?
The growth of decline of the Church in the Philippines will
depend for the greater part on the activity of " man and woman,
the family, -because the clergy—brothers, sisters and pricsts arc
clcarly insufficient to even touch part of the work.
Many iniriarives in and for the Philippines will have to be
taken; instructing and re-converting the masses will be puton their
shculders. . . . . . . and the family should supply vecarions—many
more vecations than in the past. And many more vocations will
grow only cut ct the apostolic-gencrous familics.
And then, these statements—hard and jolting us out of our
casy-chain, we hope—will not be truc.


12


SISTERS


You don’t leap over the walls these days. There are none.
Rather, today, Holy Mother Church asks the Sisters to go to the
world and witness for Christ!
Let us get some things straight. When I left the so-called
world ro enter the convent, it was a most romantic thing. In the
first place, I ran away.
As soon as the headiness of the news had passed (cveryone was surprised; they had predicted a dazzling future for me, etc.),
a funcral gloom descended on the gang, on my professors and most
of all, on my family. Why, everyone thought I had buried myself, and that it was also the end of my talents, etc., etc.
Everyone should take a new look on the religious life. All
that was plain bosh. So I died, and when the gang came for
my Clothing and later the Profession Ceremonics, it was indeed
most true, especially when the black pall descended on us. The
choir intoned the " De Profundis and we were proclaimed dead
to the world. Incidentally, these ceremonics are outdated since
four years ago because, as everyone found out, it gave the wrong
idea.
So here I am, a Sister, in this part of the world, in this fabulous 60’s. When I think of all the sighing done at my departure I can only say that it was a waste of, shall we say, air? Because I have done more living since my supposed death!
I thank God daily that my Congregation is what it is, so
clear about the needs of the times. We are supposed to be advanced (some look with very highly lifted eycbrows at our new
look) but when you consider everything all together, it is not
only most healthy; it is, indeed, most wise. Every year, most of
our convents in the provinces are depleted with the Sisters going
to summer school to get much needed M.A. s or other courses.
Right now, several of our not-so-young Sisters are enthusiastically
tackling the new Math, the new Physics, and please God, when
the Missionaries will be asked to go to the Moon, who do you
think will be there?
The nun in this modern world is out to witness for Christ
and win souls for Christ. In a world which is more out of touch
than in touch with the Divine, the last remnants of links to the
cast-off theories of the past should be prudently done away with
and new ones wisely adopted and adapted, lest, the terrific responsibility given to the religious of this 20th century be lost.
After all, it is not the habit that makes a religious. She is the
religious.


15


 ICAA
riest
Od When The parisn 
e PAMORENISPIeOf De Lord, he leads the corin
the GICA A HNOg O ThankgwVing
FeCCIVES REW ChpiSanS nto the Church. He reco
sinners to God by hig absolution. As God’s w
he umon mman and wfe. He visits his sick pan
God s healng powery and apoints them.
Es love fonmen takes shape thrdugh his efforts to bri
o the ponke to the workers, to, the squatters, and Ei
He is the living sign of God’s ifirst and second com


He
hered
es ress, he
social
e pri

P


EE



BROTHERS


Like the Armed Forces of the Philippines, which
is made up of four departments, each having a special
function to fulfill in the service of the country, the
Church is composed of departments, each fulfilling a
special function for the service of the Mystical Body.
One of these departments is the Brotherhood. Its
function is to educate according to Christ’s teaching
and aid those who are working directly in the Ministry: the priests and bishops. The Brothers consist
of the Teaching Brothers who are engaged in teaching
and the Lay Brothers who are devoted to manual work.
Since education is a necessity for the perfection of
man and the development of the nation, the function
of a teaching Brother is a necessity and of great importance to the Church and the country.
The Brothers engaged in Manual Work, too, contribute an invaluable worth to the Church and mankind. Besides giving witness to the excellence and
dignity of work, these men contribute to the technical
and scientific advancement of the country. The
Church needs men like these just as She needs men to
spread Her work universally.
But most of all, the Brothers' dignity and need in
the Church lie in the fact that they are Religious consecrated to God by their vows of poverty, chastity
and obedience. First and foremost, the value of the
Brother’s vocation is that he is a living witness, here
and now, of Christ’s life; and secondarily, that he
renders invaluable service to the Church and society
through Education and Work.


18


In the old days, the missionary needed to be a man
of superior health. If he were not, his days were numbered the moment he set foot on foreign shores. But
now even in the heart of Africa, medical care is available; and unless one is really negligent he will live a
normal span of life.
In the old days the missionary had to know many
things, he had to be skillful with his hands and
sprewd with his mind. He faced all situations. He
had to solve many problems and hardly found the time
or opportunity to stay in touch with progress and civilization. Today, newspapers and magazines, radio and
in many places, television, give the missionary living
contact with the world he left behind. Or rather, he
no longer leaves that world, because right now the
jungle and the bush have become part of the world.
All that is asked of the missionary is to be "witness
of Christ somewhere on this globe. To be witness of
God’s love and concern with those who do not know
Him or who know Him only a little. This is the missionary vocation in its very essence.
More than a foreign service officer more than
somcone on an overseas mission to alleviate physical
distress, the missionary is a "messenger.” He is a
living and concrete symbol of an undeniably supernatural reality which is too often forgotten.
God is the one for whom the missionary lives and
toils and works. But no one has ever seen God. We
were told by Christ that we must find Him in our fellow man. That’s what a missionary does.
There is a deep satisfaction, or rather a pure joy,
that comes with giving of self to the man who wears
rags instead of clothes, to the sick child who has no
medicine, to the kids who roam around without any
future.
A missionary is building his heaven while building a better world for his poorest brothers and sisters.


20


MISSIONA
LS


E


a

If I Were Your


DEVIL...


and if I knew that the Lord calls you to the life of a
religious or a priest, Id brace myself for an all-out attack!
First of all, Id try to mess up your prayers. Afterwards,
Id make you doubt: are you really worthy of such a vocation!
-That way you'd forget that it is first of all God who
freely calls you and bestows grace upon you. Contingously Id
make your past sins and your restless imagination work on
yon. As soon as you d lose your courage, Id show yon as
in a fairy-tale mirror that, though in the world, you
could help as much your fellowmen without having to give up
the comfort and pleasures of the world! Meanwhile Td order my companions to work on your parents, especially their
selfishness, so that they d ask you to postpone your entrance
into that new life for a year or two...
Now if all this were to prove unsuccessful, one last chance
would be left: to seduce you to pride! Because if I d be able to
make you see that the life of a religious is a means to cut
a figure among your companions, to make them talk about yon,
to become a VIP to make a career then after all, Id beat
you and the Lord to it!


22


Perhaps the title sounds a bit arrogant, sensational ...
but we think that it represents in a good way two important aspects of our modern life. Radio, newspapers and ads shoot
daily their "flashes" at us. Eaoh magazine bulges with sparkling "slogans" which are being strewn like "stones" throughout the world!
Among all those, we live day after day, and we have to
make our choice, though perhaps, we would like to remain indifferent. A city on top of the mountain can’t remain hidden
and ostrichism doesn’t help us. So we receive scattered
sounds in the world of youth ... and we try to think together,
as a group. These flashes, then, are an invitation to a dialoque. Lend us your personal ideas, to make our "searching
together a going-together.


The lonely seldom feels like laughing. (Sartre)
Experience must have taught us this long
lime ago. But try to discover this around
you and try to help by a well-chosen hearty
word or just something nice.
God is the heart of silence; who looks for
silence, finds Him.
We know the silence of the dead body, the
silence of the living spirit, the inner silence,
the silence that grows in you, in proportion
with your body and senses becoming senseorgans of spirit-organs. Through the silence
all sound becomes word of The Word, Who
made everything. And life becomes a prayer.


23


God’s Word Today
Two students at the Lenin University in Moscow were baptized in the Church of St. Louis. One of them, V. Krutekov,
was destined for the job of political instruction to the members of the Communist Youth Movement, the "Komsomol."
Both were sent away from the University.
—We ofientimes and eagerly talk abont
Christian ideals! What do we mean, anvway? Does our Christian sense of commitment and responsibility to this world stand
firm, if our human relationships socially
and politically get considered as worthless
and despicable?
And yon will be hated by all for my name s sake. But
The
Lord he who endures to the end will be saved. When they
says: persecute you in one town, flee to the next; for truly,
I say to you, you will not have gone through all the
towns of Israel, before the Son of Man comes.
A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant
above bis master.
Matt. 10, 22-24


24


Last September 1 an organization was established in
Puerto Rico to form lay people as deacons for the Church in
Latin-America. Its name: St. Stephen association. 40 men
are being instructed and formed; 1,500 others are awaiting
their turn.


—We like to hear about service to the people. But do we still understand why some
are called to the service of God’s word and
power? Only Christian service reveals to
us the full and real meaning of service.
"So we are ambassadors for Christ God making
St.
His appeal through us. We beseech you on bebalf
Paul
writes: of Christ, be reconciled to God. For our sake he made


2 Cor. 5, 20-21


him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we
might become the righteousness of God.


Vocations to the priesthood and the religious life are so prolific in Yugoslavia today that many seminaries and convents are
turning applicants away. The superiors of one convent in the
Sibenik diocese in Dalmatia, for instance, have said that they
could train " hundreds and hundreds" of Sisters for the missions if
they only had enough space. But they have no money to enlarge
the convent.


Six months after the election victory of the coalition headed
by Mr. Dudley Senanayake in Ceylon against Mrs. Sirimavo
Bandaranaike, members of the minority races and religions in this
country began to relax.
During the term of Mrs. Bandaranaike, the Ceylonese state
having threc-fifths Buddhists of its 10 million population deprived
minorities of their rights, especially the country's 800,000 Catholics. Alf but a few of the Catholic Schools were narionalized.
Missionary pricsts and nuns were expelled from the country, and
Catholics everywhere were politically suspected.
When the Senanayake coalition won a majority of the legislative seats, the new Prime Minister immediately announced
that all religious rights would be respected, and to symbolizthe new era, a Catholic was elected speaker of the House of Representatives. There have been since other indications that the
mood is changing.


26


Cardinal Zoungrana, Archbishop of Ouagadougou, Upper
Volta, Africa, discussed the Missionary Problems of Today during
a press conference held recently in Rome.
Certain sectors, with their criticism of missionaries, have
been responsible for a decrease in the number of missionary vocations, he said.
He elaborated further on the problems of the missionaries
today.
“It is evident that certain missionary methods are now outdated, either because of the increase in the number of bishops and
the clergy, or because of new circumstances in States which have
just become independent. Missionary institutes will certainly
have to adapt themselves to this new state of affairs.
T
this adaptation involves something not merely exterior,
but rather a change in vicwpoint.
"A problem that is causing much concern is that of secking out
an elite. It is true that qualified persons are becoming more numerous but it is also true that these are being subjected to pressure
from within the country and from abroad. Their religious training is not always up to the standards demanded by their responsibilities. Hence the necessity of decpening their formation in the
light of the social doctrine of the Church.
"We are also hampered by the multiplicity of dialect languages. Scientific studies have been undertaken in this regard and
this has greatly aided our biblico-liturgical translations.
*
'In the same way the Director of Catechists' Schools are
drawing up a Ritual intended for Catechists, whose task is most
important.
*
"A special Catechism is being prepared which would be
adapted to the nceds and the special mentality of the children,
but oftentimes, ir is impossible to reach many individuals because
of the differences of language. This points up the necessity of
various Catechisms according to the different languages in use in
the country."


27


LENT
February 23, 1966
ASH WEDNESDAY


While the joy of love, Valentine's Day and vocation
gives a bright, warm glow to this issue, we think it is also
opportune and necessary to include a little bit on something,
which seems to many of us a gloomy, sad affair: Lent.
Of course, we know it is not that! Christ does not want
us to be sad or gloomy. He likes a really joyful Christian,
t.e., who keeps himself turned to Christ in happiness and
sadness; who never turns away from the real and only
hope: Christ.
If Lent could only achieve this tiny bit in us, namely,
that we try to live a little like Christ, our wish to each — a
happy and holy Lent — would be materialized and Christ's
presence among us would have increased a bit more.
“Yes, Lord, I will try to live a litrle bit like You during
this Lenten Season. I know my friends will be surprised at
that; some will laugh, others will shrug their shoulders and
just drop me ...
Well, that's what happened to you too! Why not to me?
Don't you expect me to be like you? Help me, Lord."
Lord, I know that if I try to live a little like you,
I shall be condemned.
I am afraid.
They are already singling me out.
Some smile at me, others laugh, some are shocked,
and several of my friends are about to drop me.
I am afraid to stop,
I am afraid to listen to man’s wisdom.
It whispers: you must go forward little by little,
everything can’t be taken literally.
it’s better to come to terms with the adversary ...
And yet, Lord, I know that you are right.
Help me to fight.
Help me to speak,
Help me to live your Gospel,
To the end.
To the folly of the Cross.
(Prayers of Life, M. Quoist)


29


POINTERS FOR FEBRUARY
3 44
2
Twenty-sight days only. February
14
seems too short to give it a start; but
Pthere is no choice.
The gift-troubles of New Year are hardly
10
over and here we are again: shopping for
270
Valentine Cards. I am longing for the day
that only one card will do. But for the
time baing a few more will be needed. I
don t want trouble and it is hard to disappoint anybody.
Happy Valentine to all of you, and no need
to wish me the same!
LENT begins on the 23rd.
A few fishy days for those who prefer meat and have the
moncy to buy it.
The sermons will sound gloomy again and the booklets will look
sad, cven when they tell us to offer with a smile. I belicve it,
but I can’t do it yet. No escape, however.
If you want to become president, you have to spend hard and
campaign hard. If you want ro arrive in heaven somaday, it
costs an effort.
Lent is the time for effort — condensed.
Nowadays, sacrifices are modernized: smile at your encmy,
listen to Lola, dance with Lilia-not-so-pretty. (I didn't send her
a Valentine Card.) Mama says: less candy, less cigarettes, less
movies; more masses, more prayers.
I hope you'll lind pep cnough to combine old and new. Anyway,
there are still 23 days of it .... after February.
Try to survive it,
if possible, with a smile.


30


BEAUTY HINT
Don't frown and make a wrinkle;
smile instead and make a dimplel


Father Alfonso was giving Paul
some sage advice about controlling
his temper "Whencver you feel
yourself gerting mad at another boy,
he advised, just count to ten.
And after I count to ton, Paul
cagerly wanted to know "will it bo
all right to hit him one when I say
clevon'?'
2
I can jump as high as that trec,
boasted joe to Bobby.
So what!" answered Bobby quira
rremptly, "everybody knows a trec
can't jump!"


The teacher asked the boy in the
first row an arithmetic problem. If
you had iwo apples and your brother
gave you onc, how many would vou
have?"
Two, the boy answered.
You don’'t know your arithmetic,
said the teacher.
You don’t know my brother,"
said the boy.


Warching the shoemaker at work, a
small boy asked, "Whats leather
made of?"
"Hide, said the shocmaker.
"What?"
Hide. The cow’s ourside.
Why hide? Iim not afraid of cows.


Winning Title: CONFIDENTIAL
Winner: Miss Casilda R. Martinez
St. Theresa s College
Cebu City
Prize:
Catholic Bible Stories
(Full Color Illustration)


P O. Box 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on
January 3, 1950


Feb., 1966
VOL. XXXV No. 5
EDITOR
C.I.C.M.
ASSOCIATE EDITOR
Rev. Fr. GASTON NOLLET
BUSINESS MANAGER
MR. MARIANO SIMEON, JR.
ADVERTISING MANAGER
REv. Fr. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:


Life .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . P50.00
Forcign ................ $ 3.00
One Year .............. ₱ 4.00


Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PRESS
BAGUIO
Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


Sister Hilde


by Mercedes Austria, Grade 3-3


Sister Hilde is kind, nice,
tall and strict.
I hope she likes people
who are very good.
Because she is a sister.
And I think she will go
to Heaven.
Because she teaches
persons about God.
And she has made a


sacrifice by being a teacher
and sister.
For you know, some
people are married because
they cannot endure being a sister
So, it means that Sister
Hilde can make a sacrifice
for our Lord Jesus.
That is ahy I like her.


Lord Jesus.
my divine Friend,
many are they
who ask for a quiet life
I ask for a life
worthwhile being lived.


You are the Way
I have to follow
and the Life
that gives happiness.


You gave me
sirong hands and a young
I dedicate them to You.


Teach me
how to propagate Your so
how to he a wilness for You


Grant me the courage
to open my heart to Your Cmlmpo


ANI"





SIT!


R
LIBRAR'
APR 2 S IBBE


PRRKAS
T A
Thirst for Knowledge
quenched


PA


  


VOL. XXXV, No. 7
April, 1966


In APRIL


we pray......
That we may regard
every man as our ncighbor.


For the Church in the
Philippines.


Come Summer Time ...1
"Work a Summer ....2
God’s Word Today ...6
Bagay Ba? ..........7
A Light in the Blight ..8
If I Were Your Devil...11
Contest of the Month..12


A Summer Campers
Diary ..........13
Teacher in
Tanganyika ......18
Flash-Stones-inDialogue
......21
The Old CICM Priests 23
The Church in the
World ......... .24
Pointers . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Kecp Smiling .......27
Beauty Hint ........28
Ten Rules Against
Pakikisama ......29


The Egg and Easter...30


Summer time - vacation time
-is always much awaited
and welcomed by kids and
teen-agers. It opens a lot
of wonder.
For many this would mean
having and enjoying all the
time for themselves, vacationing in a friend’s place,
movies, hiking, camping,
parties, fun with the gang
and well, just passing away
the time fruitlessly and aimlessly.
To others, vacation would
mean satisfying the thirst for
more knowledge and skill,
reading, intelligent talks and
deeper study
For some, vacation would be
used to earn money for the
expenses of the next schoolyear.
But how many ever use their
vacation time not for themselves but for children, for
pcople who are in a great
need of temporal and spiritual help? Just a handful may

be?


On the following pages, we
present to you the vacation
activities engaged in by students of different schools.
Students who were willing
to give their time generously
to those who needed a helping hand.


HURA A SURAEA


Parish-consciousness is encouraged among the
students of St. Joseph College by their superiors. During the vacation, those who went home to the provinces joined the parish organizations and reported to
their parish priests to ask what was there to be done:
cleaning the church and fixing the altar especially during the festivities.
Those who were in Manila grouped themselves
and went on slumand hospital-visitations. During
week-ends, they gathered stray children and played
and sang with them. Stories were related. Solicited
prizes were given to deserving kids at the end of these
summer camps.
Some students of the College of the Holy Spirit
joined the Manila Youth Center to teach Reading,
Writing and Arithmetic to children in some selected
arcas in Manila. Others joined the Catholic Youth
Organization to teach catechism to children and to engage them in recreational activities.
A few went to Mindoro to teach in the Institute
for Catechists. They also taught catechism and hygiene to the Mangyans.
From June 1 to July 3, the high school students of
Stella Maris College, together with the Atenco boys,
offered special classes in Catechism, Mathematics,
English-Grammar Phil. History and Character Education to public school children from Grade I to VI at
the Cubao Elementary School.
Their aim was to prepare the pupils for the coming schoolyear. Such voluntary activity on the part
of these Stella Maris and Ateneo students who were


2


academically proficient, zealous workers and had an
understanding of the kids, was a response to the invitation of the SVP (School Volunteer Program). Playtime Hours were offered to children whose ages were
from 5-6.
At the end of the course, there was the closing
exercises at Stella Maris College. This was attended
by the parents of the children. Awards were given to
deserving pupils.
The members of the Srella Maris Cathechetical
Center taught Catechism, visited the slums, encouraged
parents to have their babies baptized, gave rations
3


to more than 300 people who went to the college' campus every weekend.
Ten boys from De La Salle College joined the JOB
(Junior Operations Brotherhood) last summer. They
went to Sapang Palay together with girls and boys
from different schools to engage in social work. The
girls taught handicraft while the boys went censustaking and helped in the construction of latrines, etc.
outside the houses. Ramon C. Tangco, coordinator
of the JOB, was responsible for this vacation activity.
Tondo and San Miguel were the places where the
San Sebastian College boys engaged in vacation activities.
From house to house, they gathered children and
taught them catechism and prepared them for First
Holy Communion.
A civic organization was formed for the teen-agers.
There were social activities like acquaintance parties,
chess clubs and basketball tournaments.
Married couples who weren’t married in the Church
were persuaded to be married in the Church. In this
case, the parish priests helped. Twenty-three couples
were married in the Church by the time the summer
vacation ended.
A group of San Beda boys went to give monetary
aid, food, clothing and medicine to the people of Sapang Palay last summer.
Two students, together with those of U.P., Ateneo and Araneta University went to the South for their
vacation activities. The group was divided into three,
each going to different places.
The San Beda boys and their companions befriended the people of Impasugong, Bukidnon and taught
them Catechism. They helped the parish priest


4


record the culture of the people and accompanied him
in his hikes to the barrios. In those barrios, programs
and amateur nights were held. Dances were presented by the people themselves. This "Work a Summer
is an activity of the Vacation League sponsored by the
Jesuit Fathers.
Some 35 boys and girls from different member
schools of the NUS jomed the summer camp at JalaJala, Rizal last summer. They aided the barrio folks
i building houses and sanitation facilities. Lectures
on improving the Cooperatives and on the Land Reform
Bill were given.


God’s Word Today


Some 500 Turkish laborers celebrated the end of
their fasting, the "ramadan, in the Cathedral of Koln.
Kneeling towards Mecca, they recited and listened to
Koran-verses. The Islam belicf in onc God made it
possible to grant the permission for this celebration in
a Catholic church.
Accommodation among different religions
should - and may - neither be a diplomatic
move nor relatively attributed to one’s conviction. Acconmodation may -and should
-he a considerate care and a humble
respect for one another


Peter "As each has received a gift, employ it for one ansays: otber, as good stewards of God’s varied grace: whoever speaks, as one who utters oracles of God; whoever
renders service, as one who renders it by the strength
which God supplies; in order that in everything God
may be glorified through Jesus Cbrist. To Him
belong glory and dominion for ever and ever.
1 Peter 4, 10-11


During the annual convention of the labor-community of Catholic women in Paderborn, Cardinal
T
Jager said: The Church herself is unable to control
the social structures, but She can still animate them in
a spirit of Christian seivice.
How many of us can find it practical or advantagcous to give only a little bit of our free
time to that kind of service? Who does his
share in the development of our country in
that spirit? Vatican Council II stressed so
much the role of the laity... what am I doing
aboutit in my office, class, factory, gang, etc.?
The "It is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took
Lord and sowed in his garden; and it grew and became a
says: tree, and the birds of the air made nests in its branches.
* 4
It is like leaven which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, till it was all leavened."
Luke 13. 19 and 21


BAGAY BA!
courage is olten equal to


have got to:


A ngnt in Tne omignt
“May I never walk selfishly in the light when I might be
leading someone through the dark."
Not only does Anna Beck believe this, but she practises it. Because Miss Beck was concerned about children in the poor and congested districts of St. Louis, she
rolled up her sleeves and did something about it. She
is a member of her city's Community Center.
The chief purpose of the Center is to teach children
the love of God and the way to salvation. Learning
about their Savior helps the children to want to live a
better life. They learn skills and crafts which they can
take into their homes and share with their parents. The
Center also provides wholesome recreation.
Summer camp is eagerly anticipated at either Camp
Wyman, Sherwood Forest, River Cliff, or Derricotte.
Children are given this wonderful opportunity to live
in the great outdoors through the generosity of many
friends.
Each child at camp receives a letter from the Center
and of course, Miss Beck answers all the letters the children write to her.
Those children not attending camp are busy with
various activities in and around the Center. They engage in crafts, play games, and study parts of the Bible.
Movies are shown every Wednesday, and field trips are
taken on Fridays. Children with perfect attendance
during the week are allowed to go on field trips in places
like The Soldiers Memorial, the Jefferson Memorial,
Forest Park, the Riverfront, the Old Cathedral and the
ZoO.
Crafts at the Center vary from the very simple paperwork done by the smallest children to the making of
skirts and blouses by the older girls and the woodwork
of the boys.


8


Teen-age groups meet at the Center from 6-9 every
Friday evening. The evening is spent in participating
in sports and table games. This is followed by a business meeting, discussion of current events, spelling sessions and devotions. The evening is usually made complete with cookies and cocoa or koolade.
Entertainment of an educational nature includes
attending the Philharmonic Concerts, the Audubon Society Screen Tours, the Municipal Opera, etc.
Movies are shown to the children at various times
during the year and weekly during the summer program,
also on special occasions. A religious movie is included each time.


During the devotional periods much emphasis is
placed on singing. They are encouraged to talk to
the Lord in their own language. This is how one little
boy poured out his heart to his heavenly Father:
Dear Lord, bless me, my teacher, and parents.
I thank you for my bread and water. I thank
you for my food and clothing. I thank you for
all the things you have given me. I wish I could
find out who stole my bike. Please, Lord, help
me to find the person who took it. I thank you
for letting me live as long as I have. I wish I
could live about 40 years longer. I hope that
my pup can grow into a fine dog by your help.
Amen.
We try to teach the children practical living,
Miss Beck explained. "If they take along into their
homes only 10 per cent of what they have learned at the
center, our program will be well worthwhile. We want
to keep the children off the streets, to provide a place
for them where they can feel at home. In some cases
the workers at the center are their only friends, the only
ones to whom they can come with their problems.


10


If I Were Your


DEVIL...


Td surely cash in on your first falling in love—or ler's
call it—your first puppy-love.
Of course, I had not to tell you that this is just a normal
flapper-phenomenon. Id tahe pains not to let you in on the
truth that such first love brings along a lot of blindness and
idealization. This blindness is my most clever accomplice,
yon know. This way you'll fall more in love with.. an ideal
delusion!
I d make you play this game in sober earnest. All your
thoughts should run and run around only one " loved one.
Id make you go nuts! No rest for you till you mix up your
dream with reality, till you have to get it off your chest and
make one of the world' s greatest declarations of love Y our
partner—well, Id try to make him believe these brittle buds
of love are full-ripe fruits on the tree
That s the moment to make you two get alone together, to
make you forget all sense of reality! The world by this time
should have vanished: just you two exist, and—most important
your emotions, too. Id make you rebel against all that
binders this intimacy: study, parents, Catholic Action, God...
So Id push you on to this dead-end-street. There Id
wait for you!


11


What does Pussy
CONTEST of the MONTH
say to herself in
each of these photos? Send entries
not later than
May 15, 1966.


To: The APOSTLE
PO. Box 42
Baguio City


12


June 2, 1965
Dear Diary,
Today, Sister Directress announced the invitation of Mrs.
Constantino Guerrero to open a summer camp in Pandacan.
Hurrab! That means we Il have something to do at least for
sometime. Vacation can be boring you know. No less than
8 Sisters and 10 High School girls signed up for the project.
June 4, 1965
Dear Diary,
Today, we started preparing jor our Pandacan venture.
The CCD corner was ransacked for portable blackboards, lesson
plans, visual aids, etc. And supplies were not the only problems either. For who would teach sports to the boys? Sister,
can you teach basketball?" "Who, me! Well, I know the
rules... Who will teach painting, handicraft, dancing,
erc.?


June 5, 1965
Dear Diary,
Today, early in the morning, Sisters Mary Jobn, Salvacion and Pia paid a visit to De La Salle. OBJECTIVE:
To recruit some basketball teachers! They left with Brother
Andrew s assurance that he would help out. Now the ball
tan start rolling! Pandacan, here we go!


13


June 7 1965


Dear Diar,
June 7 smiled down on us with its blue sky and bright
sun. With a song in our hearts, we went to Bagong Barangay
for the opening ceremonies of the Summer Camp. By 830
children started pouring in, cheaper by the hundred, thanks
to the efforts of Father Jesas Arcellana. The parish organization heads and the members brought the children personally
for enrollment. Nobody had the heart to refuse any child that
morning. Somebody must have been quoting our Lord' s " Suffer the little children to come unto me. The enrollment was
closed at 3440. But ifs carnest work ahead of us, anyone
could see that.
Jane 11, 1965
Dear Dian,
Please forgive me for not having written for so long. The
first few days were rather frantic, to put it mildly. Hmmm,
.. .let me see now, here s what we did today.
The first period from 8:30 to 9:20 was devoted exclusively
to religion classes. It was touching to see all the wide-eyed
listeners.
Added to the daily catechism lessons were classes in handicraft. Projects made were plastic headbands, fruit bowl
made of shells and flowers. The latter part of the morning
saw the little boys in high spirits. For some it meant meeting
their tall basketball teachers; for others it meant ping-pong,
ring-toss, wrestling, etc. The girls had a chance of joining
cither the glee club or the dancing team.
June 19, 1965
Dear Diary,
What started off as a 2-school affair has become an interschool project. Aside from the SSC Sisters and High School
girls, as well as the De La Salle boys, there were some from
San Beda, Assumption College, College of the Holy Spirit and
Paco Catholic School.


14


Six schools are proving that two and more are better than
just one when it comes to putting up a project like Operations
Tambakan. Here are bigh hopes of ecumenism among schools
in keeping with our times.


Jane 20, 1965
Dear Diary,
The closing program took place today at the Bagong Barangay Social Hall.
An appreciation program for parents and teachers followed. A special treat during the program were the many
prizes given out for the drawing contest and the Catechism
contest. Donor prizes were also given out with two honor
guests picking out the names of the lucky winners.
June 23, 1965
Dear Diary,
The climax came today when Father Arcellana celebrated
the closing Mass for the children. It was a last get-together
for catechists and children, at least for summer. The camp
was an affair to remember and everybody, we are sure, left Pandacan with a heavy heart that day.
This afternoon SSC gave in turn an appreciation party
for all the summer camp Catechists. The party was something
of an " honors assembly, since every catechist was pinned
with a tiny golden mission cross. During the party, Mother
Prioress came for a friendly chat with the catechists. She
quietly challenged them to do something worthwhile with their
lives. Indeed, after a job well done, who wouldn' t hope for
more in the future. There are still many areas waiting to be
visited, hundreds of children waiting for someone to teach them
about our Father in heaven. Let s have more summer camps!
Your tired Pandacan campers
15


Children came pouring in, cheaper by


the hundred.


A touching scene.. wide-cyed children crammed up in the ro


The later part of the morning saw the little boys in high spirits.


TEACEIA A
IANGARAIRA


Picture story of Canadian Mass Lillian
Ho hm missionary in
Africa and principal of
the Ashira Girls School,
located on the slopes of
Mount Kilimanjaro.


To go to the store or other
posts she travels over
jungle trails.


These seniors of the Ashira Girls School have made
their own dresses in the classroom and are now ready
for the examincrs. A white kerchicf is a part of the
uniform.


Netball is a favorite sport among the girls, and they play with enthusiasm. African girls have little time for recreation. Miss Hohm
sometimes takes part.


First aid is important. To stir
flagging interest, highly regarded Lillian allows herself to ba
bandaged in class. This invariably focuses carcful attention on the demonstration.


Singing in Chagga along with
teachers and teachers -in-training. She has been at the Ashira
Girls School for five years and
has been school principal for
one ycar.


Flash-Stones-in-Dialog


He knew what had to be done!
He chose to be poor. In order to
arouse in the poor faith and trust,
one has to resemble them, to share
their worries. To be taken seriously
by the rich, one need not resemble
them; you'd better not! All that
He did to save them!


A flag is a sign that speaks to us. It signifies a
presence. Our life is like a flag in this world today.
Through us Christ wants to be present in this world.
And we fear the resistance, don’t we? Remember the
flag in the head-wind!


To flirt means to seek a superficial and hollow
pleasure in something great, to reduce a great value of
something to cheap pleasure, without thinking in the
least of a total own commitment. Don t we often try
to reduce God’s immense reality to owe our own cheap
measure: our consolation, our success, our vanity....?


21


Rev. Jorge Vromant
San Carlos Seminary
Makati. Rizal
56 years oj service
as of 1965


Where have all the young men gone, long time ago.
Where have all the young men gone....


Rev. Jorge Gicbens
Immaculate Heart Missions
P.O. Box 1323, Manila
57 years of service
as of 1965


Rev. Mauricio Van Overbergh
Missies van Scheut, Belgium
56 years of service
as of 1965


Rev. Leo Quintelier
Bontoc, Mr. Province
56 years of service
as of 1965


AAIDDIO
THE
CIUn
La
Due to the expansion of our projects and to the retirement of some of our oldtimers as well, we have to
offer some vacancies here in the Philippines.
These men have worked together for almost 500
years in the mission; only 25 years more are needed to
make 500. Now we are just looking for somebody
who will stand for those 25 years.
Young men who are interested to stand for these 25
ycars may send their names to or ask for particulars
from: THE DIRECTOR OF VOCATIONS
57 Burgos St, or P.O. Box 1323 or P.O. Box 3
Bacolod City
Baguio City
Manila


23


Amsterdam, HOLLAND


Three prominent Dutch Capuchin friars have shaved their
beards, donned civilian clothes and moved to a small house in a
working class district to experiment in adapting religious life to
modern needs.
Chosen by the provincial council of the order for their expcrience, they are dropping the use of their religious names and of
such titles as "Father" and reverend. Two are taking jobs as
workers; the third is to do the housework and to concentrate on
study and contemplation.
In a related expcrience, three other Capuchins have rented
a little house in Waalwijk in the diocese of 's Hertogenbosch, where
they will try to aid the 10,000 Sisters and 4,500 Brothers of the diocese in their post-conciliar adaptation.
According to Fr. Lconardus of Helmond, O.F.M. Cap., lcader
of the Amsterdam experiment, the purpose of these experiments is
not only to adapt the ideals of St. Francis of Assisi to the demands
of the modern world, but also to show workers that religious life
is something ordinary. They also plan to help where they can.
If we take jobs as everybody else, we can more casily be
accepted as belonging to them, he said. " By joining their working life we hope to get a better understanding of their joys and troubles.


24


Radio Veritas envisioned by the bishops of Asia at a meeting
in 1958, will be on the air by July this year.
The station, financed largcly by the German Government,
and warmly supported by Pope Paul VI, will be under the direct
supervision of Cardinal Santos of Manila.
Three transmitters are now being set up in Malolos, about
40 miles north of Manila — two shorr-wave broadcasts to the countries of Asia, and one medium-wave for the Philippines. Each
transmitter has a power of 100,000 watts — the strongest signal in
the Far East after the Red Chincse radio station in Peking and the
Voice of America, Manila.
Radio Veritas will be heard in 17 languages, in the south as
far as Australia, in the north as far as Korca and Alaska, in the west
through all the countries of Asia as far as Jerusalem.
It will act as relay station for Vatican Radio. A permanent
studio will be located at the Pius XII Catholic Centre, Manila.
Father James B. Reuter, S.J., who has studied radio and TV
techniques in Hollywood, will be the programme director and acting gencral manager of Radio Veritas.


Catholic churches in Germany may henceforth make use of
jazz music during services, but not during the celebration of Mass.
The norms governing the use of jazz in churches have been
drafted by a committee of liturgical music experts. Previously,
Cardinal Frings of Cologne forbade jazz in churches of his archdiocese. Other dioceses, however, did not follow his example.
In the future, jazz may ba used during prayer services or Bible
vigils, including services held jointly by Catholics and Protestants.


Argentine Catholics may now fulfill their Sunday Mass obligation on the afternoon or evening of Saturday. Permission for
this was asked last October to meet emergency conditions in this
pricst-short nation.


POINTERS TOR APRI


Contentment is something
that depends a little on
position but a lot on disposition.


There are 57 rules for success. The first is to deliver
the goods. Never mind the
rest.


Theres no failure save in
giving up.





To stay young, mix with
young people. To age in a
hurry try keeping up with
them.


Cosmetics are beauty products used by teen-agers to
make them look older sooner, and by their mothers
to make them look younger.


All it takes to become a
gossip is a good sense of rumor.


One way to save face:
keep the lower part of it
shut.


"Doctor, said the pale-faced man to
his physician, "Im a nervous wreck.
Every time the phone rings, I almost
jumpoutof my skin. The doorbell gives
me such a start that I almost faint. If
I see a strangcr coming up the drive, I
panic. Im even afraid to look at the
morning paper. What’s come over me
anyway?
4.
There, there, old man, said the doctor sympathcrically. "I know what
you're going through. My teen-agc son
just got his driver’s license, too.
*YN
On a bus onc cvening a woman was
bothering the driver every few minutes
to remind him when she wanted ro get
off. How will I know when we get to
my strece” she asked.
You'll be able to tell,” he told her,
“by the big smile on my facc.
**
Apsychiarrist opened his norebook and
told a patient, "Im ready to hear what
you were dreaming about last night."
Tm sorry, Doctor, said the patient,
"but I slept like a log. I didu t have
a dream all nighi."
The psychiarrist shur his notebook
angrily. "How will I ever be able to
help you, he grumbled, if you don t
do your homework?"
**Y
An expectant father who'd been
pacing up and down the hospital corridor was finally given the news by a
nurse. "Everything went just finc,
she said. "I know you wanted a girl
but you have a finc-looking son.
Thars all right, gulped the man,
a boy was my second choice anyway.


BEAUTY HINT
from Romy Schncider


"A happy face and lots of good mood."
28


The RonE
AUANGA MARARASARA
1. Assure yourself that you are definitely right. You are always
right. Although you are wrong, don’t concede. If you are
really right, please make the other know and feel that.
2. Always talk about yourself and your interests. Of course, the
other is not interested in those!
3. If you are compelled to listen to somcone, don’t stop thinking
of what you will say next. Take the first opportunity to start
talking.
4. Always look for the defects in the other. Qualitics are always
hidden. Kecp them so. Kccp people away from cach other
by their defects.
5. Never use a person’s name in addressing him. Forget that
name, especially the first name. Just fail to pronounce it correcrly. Very effective.
6. Argue a lot. Kcep a distance between your opinion and his.
Look for the difference, never for agreement.
7. Never admit your mistake. Defend your mistaka by hook or
by crook. Never defend the mistakes of others; please point
them out.
8. Tell the complainant to shut up! Never try to understand the
rcasonableness of his complaint. Don't giva him an opportunity to get it out off his chest. He might feel better after
that.
9. Boast of your acquaintances. Forgct at once who his acquaintances arc. And then exaggcrate a lot: him and her you know
very well, though you saw them only from quite a distance.
10. Anybody who mects another person within living memory
feels: I am much better than he is. Kecp it that way! You
are always better than the other. And if you do happen to be
less good or inexperienced in something, you are really of
slender build, straightforward and temperamental.


29


Ane ngg ano saster
The egg is widely associated with Easter because it
is the symbol of new life and is therefore significant at
the commemoration of the resurrection. The egg-giving custom (not customary in the Philippines) can be
traced back to the ancient Egyptians, and the custom
was prevalent among the ancient Hebrews.
For hundreds of years eggs have been dyed and exchanged as tokens of affection and peace, and youngsters today find this a suitable time to take their small,
egg-filled baskets to their teachers and very special
friends. It is a friendly custom with a religious significance behind it, and wise parents tell their children
how the tradition came into being.
It is interesting to realize the number of countries
that have associated the egg with the Easter season
and to consider the traditions the different nations have
regarding it. In Germany, the Easter hare is supposed
to bring the eggs, but only if the children have been
good, truthful, and kind. Then and only then will the
hare steal into their homes on Easter Eve and hide co

30


lored eggs while the youngsters sleep. This myth is
the one behind the Easter bunny in the U.S. When
the hare idea reached the United States, and it was discovered how rare the hare was, his close relative, the
rabbit, was adopted. So the Easter bunny, as carrier
of Easter eggs, became part of American mythology.
Originally the hare was accepted by the Egyptians.
In their legends he was the symbol of the moon. The
date of Easter is determined by the moon. In 325 A.D.
it was decided that Easter should fall on the first Sunday
after the first full moon after the spring equinox, which
is the 21st of March.
In the 18th century egg races were the main event
of the Easter fete in many parts of France, and these
races and other egg games are still popular there.
In the northern shires of England eggs are saved
throughout Holy Week; then on Easter Day the annual
egg rolling takes place. This isn t much different from
the White House egg rolling enjoyed by the American
31


smallsters.
The children of Bohemia roll their colored eggs on
tracks made of sticks, and in Ireland the eggs are caten
at dawn to break the Lenten fast. Scotch boys and
girls play a kind of ball game with their eggs, and in
the Austrian Tyrol the children carry baskets and torches
on the night before Easter and go from farmhouse to
farmhouse. At each place they are given highly colored eggs, which they put in their baskets. The women
who dye the eggs vie with one another to see who can
make the most elaborate decorations; some even laboriously print names and mottoes on the dyed shells.
Children of Mesopotamia gather as many eggs as
they can during the 40 days before Easter. They sell
them in the market place on Easter morning. Belgian
youngsters make nests of hay, hide the nests in the grass
the day before Easter, knowing fully well that on Easter
morning the nests will be filled with gaily colored eggs,
sometimes with candy replicas.
Italian mothers often have eggs as the main dish
on Easter. The eggs are put in the center of the table,
and everything, from silver to other foods, is arranged
around this centerpiece symbolic of the day. There are
often as many as 200 eggs, colored bright red, purple,
and gold, and visitors to the homes never refuse an egg,
which is called the food of the resurrection.
Research brings to light that the first colored eggs
were more often red than any other color. One theory
is that this was because red is the color which expresses
joy. According to another theory prevalent in Christian countries, red is the symbol of the blood shed at
Calvary.
Behind all this traditional custom of giving egg
is the spirit of love and friendliness and the symbolism
of life, which gives the egg a relationship with the
meaning of Easter.


32


Winning Comment
“I like passing the buck!"
Winner
Mr Jose R. Martinez
92 V Ranudo Street
Cebu City
Prize
Modeling Clay Set


P. O. Box 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on


January 3, 1950
VOL. XXXV, No. 7
April, 1966

EDITOR
C.I.C.M.
BUSINESS MANAGER
Rev. FR. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:


Life ............ .. . . . . P50.00
Foreign ............. $ 3.00
One Year ............ ₱ 4.00


Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PRESS
BAGUIO
Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


elcome
G
Dang


2


E





Aa a 
*

*
*













AERASSAE
Vol. XXXV, No. 8
July, 1966


IN JULY
we pray
That both clergy and
faithful alike may be
increasingly aware of
their vocation to holiness.
That radio, television
and the press may spread
knowledge of the faith
in Asia.


The Beginning of the


Schoolyear ...... I
The Beginning of
Flowers ... 2
The Beginning of
Love ........... 3
A Baby ........... 5
A Successful
Career . 6
The End ... 9
God’s Word Today .. 12
Bagay Ba. .. . . . . . . 13
No Time for
Tomorrow ...... 14
If I Were Your
Devil ........... 17
Contest of the
Month .. . . . . . . . . 18
Danny and Liza .... 19
Beauty Hints ...... 22
Pointers for July ... 24
Flash-Stones-inDialogue .. . . . . . . 25
The Church in the
World . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Keep Smiling ...... 28


A Happy Home .... 30


NING
THE BEGIL
of the schoolyear


.. is the start of the long grind towards a higher level
of thinking.
Tots are thrilled at the first taste of school life not realizing
that they are stepping one foot forward on the stairway of
education. Teen-agers get excited at the thought of "new
adventures,” fully unaware of the responsibility they have
to bear on their shoulders as they steadily move towards
the unexplored fields of knowledge. Adults exert endless
efforts and sacrifices in their task of approaching the portals of higher learning.
Aims, goals, ambitions. Yes, these are set before the minds
of those who go to school at the beginning of the new schoolyear: the beginning of new achievements.


THE SCHOOLYEAR HAS ITS BEGINNING.


S0 HAVE FLOWERS...
S0 HAS LOVE..



YO


E


*
N


A


4


EN


A BABY


There is a time at the beginning when your baby is very
close to you, never going far from your side. This is the time
when, completely innocent, he asks only to love and to be
loved. This is the time when he reaches jovfully toward
a smile and a touch. This is the time when a baby goes naked.
And he asks you to put on nothing, to be just what you really
are. Nothing can be hidden from the soft eyes of a baby.
Everything must be out in the open between you two.


This is a time of first looking, of first wandering, of
streiching high, searching, sniffing and discovering the
wonder of the world. This is the time when small fingers
touch lightly, delicately raising beauty to young lips.
This is the time for careful looking, for happy surprises,
for revelry in the newness of things, when all the world is
fresh and its freshness brings only joy. This is the time of
yearming for a friend, to be close, so very close to him.


5


A SUCCESSFUL CAREER


A diploia, a toga. With these a student triumphantly
leaves the stage, the university. His face shines with happiness, his smile heams with joy and his countenance radiates
determination to go on and on. As he walks away, people
wonder what his future will be. Will it he a failure? Will
it be a success?


6


A blank wall with a big question mark confronts him
as the thrill and excitement of graduation fade. Then what?
Then a goal he has to set:


to be a successful doctor
to be a successful educator
to be a successful businessman
to be a successful lawyer
to be a successful engineer
to be a successful scientist
to be a successful writer
He then knocks on the doors of offices or writes letters
of application; is interviewed and given tests for qualification; waits anxiously and patiently for results; heaves a
sigh of acquiescence as he tastes the first pangs of failure,
as he realizes that success seems to be so far away yet
could be reached surely but slowly and steadily.
When admission to a job finally comes, he braces up
himself, rolls up his sleeves and sits down to work. Yes, and
it really means work.
And does it end there? Oh, no! He keeps on hoping,
dreaming and planning. He encounters countless difficulties
but faces them courageously. Obstacles come and go but he
tries to overcome them. Sure, there are moments when he
throws out his hands in desperation, when there seems not
to be any ray of hope any longer, when failure is inevitable.
But he can’t say—and doesn’t say—it’s no use trying, it’s
no use hoping, it’s no use praying. On the contrary he
works harder, leaving everything confidently in the hands
of the Lord.
here comes reward, here comes
Then finally
triumph, here comes SUCCESS. His goal, actions, sacrifices, faith and determination didn’t fail him after all. He has
made indeed a successful career.


8


Death, be not proud, though some have called thee
Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so;
For those whom thou think’st thou dost overthrow
Die not, poor Death, nor yet canst thou kill me.
From rest and sleep, which but thy pictures be,
Much pleasure; then from thee much more must flow,
And soonest our best men with thee do go,
Rest of their bones, and soul’s delivery.
Thou art slave to fate, chance, kings, and desperate men,
And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell;
And poppy or charms can make us sleep as well
And better than thy stroke, why swell’st thou then?
One short sleep past, we wake eternally,
And death shall be no more; Death, thou shalt die.


John Donne.


 


The sun sets in the west to herald the end of the day yet
the same sun throws its rays in the early hours of the morning
to signal the beginning of another day. This gives us the
thought of death: the end of earthly life yet the beginning of
life in eternity. This end must not be faced with fear and
anxiety; rather it must be faced with love and longing, for
love is stronger than death..... as Tony shows us on his
last journey to his eternal home.


10


Tony is a surgeon and is a victim of cancer. In November, 1964, he was told by his colleague that the cancer had
invaded his brain. He knew his days were numbered but
this made few changes in his life. If anything, he worked
harder—to accomplish as much as possible in what little
time was left for him. He lectured to his students, wrote his
medical papers and treated his patients. Toward his family,
he showed a heightened awareness of the joy of being
together and to lose none of his simple pleasures.
But as the months went by, he knew that his end was
beginning. Frequently there were depths of weakness so
exhausting that it was worse than pain. There was the humiliating loss of speech which made his brilliant brain capable only of an agonized and frustrated gibberish; the useless, paralyzed arm, which meant he had to be fed and
bathed and dressed; the dragging leg which made movement impossible.
There was no fear in his eyes. Instead there was an
abiding peace. He had subjugated man’s most primitive instinct: survival. He had willingly accepted death with all
its pains. Dumb, wasted and worn, he asked for no drugs.
He neither asked nor took the easy way, but consciously
went on paying his debt to God, with the greatness of his
spirit shining through his ravaged body.
In the middle of May, death came to knock on his door.
The blessed candles flickered on either side of his bed in the
warm twilight air. His family who had nursed him devotedly
knelt around his bed. Kneeling also in the room, and stretching all along a wide corridor, were his friends. Together
they prayed for his soul, poised in flight between this world
and the next. That sending forth was the sublime moment
—the moment to which all of life leads, and perhaps the
only one which truly counts.


11


God’s Word Today
Without a single centavo three Benedictine monks started a
new monk’s life at Bouricos, some deserted place in Landes,
France. Monks without a cloister: an old farm, farming,
mortification and prayer. The Congregation of “Our Lady
of the Poor" is growing ...
How about that? Does your mind grasp
a thing like that? Lei’s hope your heart
does just a little bit! Or do you doubt
whether God can ask his cooperators to
make present among us the communion
of saints? A sign of the living God.
Mark And while he was at Bethany in the house of
Simon the leper, as he sat at table, a woman came
narrates: with an alabaster jar of ointment of pure nard,
very costly, and she broke the jar and poured it
over his head. But there were some who said to
themselves indignantly, "Why was the ointment
thus wasted? For this ointment might have been
sold for more than three hundred denarii, and
given to the poor.” And they reproached her.
Mark 14, 3-5


12


“South Africa needs a crusade for re-education in order to
create a moral atmosphere which it needs for a political
change.” These were the words of Msgr. D. Hurtley, archbishop of Durban, when he addressed the South African Institute of Race Relations.


As long as reciprocal prejudice, fear and
distrust remain, no solution will be found.
Only the love which wants of a crucifying
failure will become fertile in the long run.
With immense sacrifices! Not only in
South Africa! What about me and the
others?
The
“So if you are offering your gift at the altar, and
Lord
there remember that your brother has something
says:
against you, leave your gift there before the altar
and go; first be reconciled to your brother and
then come and offer your gift."
Matt. 5, 23-24


There were three of them. Daeng, who was the oldest,
and Prasop and Chatri. They came from Fingernail Creek,
a village in northeast Thailand. The three of them—all
Buddhists, had run off with Catholic girls.
As far as the Catholic priest and the rest of the village
were concerned, they were living in public sin.
“But, Father, said Daeng, "what does sin mean to a
Buddhist?” The missionary had to admit that eternal right
and wrong might be a hard notion to grasp if they don't
know about an eternal heaven and hell.
“It will turn out well in the end, Father.” Daeng was
young, hopeful.
The priest wasn’t sure.
Then came Prasop’s night. It was the rainy season.
Prasop and Bupha were living in a makeshift hut outside
the town. During the rains many villagers did the same, so
that they could get a faster start on the sprouting rice in
their fields when the morning came. Wani, Bupha’s elevenyear-old niece, was staying with them.
They had all gone to bed rather early. Everyone was
tired from bending over rice plants all day long. They curled
up close together under the scanty protection of their little
hut.
About eleven-fifteen Prasop thought he heard Bupha
turning restlessly in her sleep. He opened his eyes to discover that it was only the old mongrel, Khaw, jumping over
him and running off to chase something in the field. Five
minutes later a furry, soft-footed creature came padding
into the hut and brushed against Prasop.


14


"I'll fix that Khaw for waking me up," Prasop told
himself. He struck out his hand and landed a hard blow on
the mouth of the animal.
Before he could spit out a Buddhist curse, Prasop knew
that it wasn’t Khaw he had hit, and he knew very well why
the dog had run so fast off across the field. Prasop had hit
a tiger!
The tiger clawed Prasop savagely. He didn’t seem much
worried about Bupha and Wani who had joined Prasop in
the fight. Bupha had got hold of the tiger’s tail and was
desperately trying to pull it away from Prasop. Little Wani
had snatched a short piece of bamboo and was jabbing wildly at the tiger in an attempt to gouge its eyes out. But the
tiger wasn’t much interested in the women. He never so
much as touched Wani and only struck once at Bupha,
leaving a deep gash in her left arm. Prasop was his prey.
The struggle didn’t last long. The tiger mangled Prasop, ripping the frightened man into pieces. Then he picked
up his victim and dragged him off into the darkness.
They found Prasop’s body next morning in a little
thicket not far from the hut.
“Let us bury him on the spot," said Daeng. It was an
old Buddhist superstition. “Otherwise the tiger may root
through the cemetery and dig up all the graves.
Chatri complained his feelings one particular rainy
evening to his woman. She sat quietly listening to his troubled thoughts. When he asked for a glass of rice wine she


15


hurried to pour him some. She sipped it herself first. It was
the custom for a woman not to pass her lord something before testing it.
He only laughed. Rice wine in Fingernail Creek was
seldom sour.
"Do you want to die of sour wine?” she insisted. His
only answer was that if he died, he wanted to die happy.
“Come, my lovely one,” he coaxed. "Your lord is thirsty."
Fifteen minutes later Chatri slumped over his chair.
He was dead.
“It could not have been from sour wine," said Daeng
staring blankly at his friend’s cold body.
"No,” someone agreed, stretching out a hand to calm
the shaken young man. But every villager knew what was
going on in Daeng’s mind. He was thinking of two friends
dead now, two friends who had one thing in common with
(
him. "Sin,” Catholics called it. Maybe he had a little better
idea what it meant now.
Daeng turned slowly and left the villagers to bury his
friend. He sought out the Catholic priest.
"Father,” he said, "I am a worried man. For now I see
about your right and wrong. It is not good to live my way.
I want to give up my ways and take on yours. I want to become a Catholic, Father, and marry my woman in your
Church as is right.”
The priest smiled gently this time. Daeng read on his
face the unhurried expression he himself had given the
priest a few weeks earlier.
“No, Father. There is no time for tomorrow. You must
start with my instructions now.”
Daeng’s learning was neither fast nor slow; one instruction a day for something more than two months.
In time Daeng was received into the Church; his marriage was blessed by the priest.
16


If I Were Yous
DEVIL...


Pd try to make you jealous about the talents and qualities
the others possess. It’s not difficult at all to do just that.
The background: the problem and the big question mark of
your future. Against that I'd place on one side of the stage
your limitations ... not just place them there; Id make
you feel them. On the other side I’d place the splendid qualities of others . . . not just place them there; I’d give them
all the most impressive lights I could find in town.
Id make you forget yourself in daydreaming, not about your
own future, but in hallucinations about the future of Raul
(if I had his knack for Algebra) or Rosemarie (she’s got
such a beautiful house) or Luis (every vacation his parents
let him spend it abroad) or Mary (her attractive face makes
it easy to be friends with everybody).
Pll arouse this jealousy day after day to make you forget
your own vocation and talents ... finally Ell make you
dump them. In the meantime I won't neglect to ask you to
develop in a special way the talent and the qualities of daydreaming. You see I just turn the whole thing upside-down.
As yon are so naive, you will go to work enthusiastically towards your own unhappiness! And that's my victory, because you'll undoubtedly get bitter.


17


CONTEST OF THE MONTH


Give a one-word description of the puppy in the photo.
Send in entries not later than July 30, 1966 to:
  
P.O. Box 42, Baguio City


18


DANNY AND LIZA


This new series of the APOSTLE will feature the wonderful new world two young people discover within themselves as they begin to wake up to the mystery of love, so
strong and so exciting, so wonderful in every way; yet so
mystifying that even lovers can’t understand it. LOVE is
the word, the great spiritual energy that makes the world
tick. Love is a world in itself round and red and sweet as an
apple, but vast and boundless as the sky. Two young people
find out the meaning of love and discover that it has its
own laws and to love truly is to keep, to heed its laws no
matter how wildly the heart may beat. The APOSTLE will
bring you a delightful love story not through the gaudy
movie screen, nor through the colorful pages of fiction, but
through the heart-to-heart talk of two young lovers as unfolded in their letters.


19


Dear Liza
Liza, you gave me a very fine day that time your brother
introduced me to you. I had never known a day like it before, and perhaps never after. Or, may I hope for lovelier
days in the future? Liza, what else shall I say? It seems my
heart is too full to be able to write in words what I feel. But
Pll try what I can, for I believe I love you, Liza.
I should blush to tell you this secret warmth of my soul,
for I’m afraid even to tell myself that I’m in love. When
you smiled, I saw some sudden light upon your cheeks, and I
knew that a new day was coming up for me. Your eyes spoke
a purer language than the morning star. I seemed to hear a
prophecy deep in my heart. And I couldn’t keep it to myself.
I must have betrayed myself somehow by some word or
movement at that time. I was too bold to the point of being
almost discourteous. I beg you, Liza, forgive me that. I didn’t
mean to embarrass anyone—I simply meant to love someone:
Liza.
While I’m writing down my thoughts on this page, I’m
bothered by fears. I’m just too naive to know how to say
what I have to say. I don’t have the polished courtesy of
others more experienced in this affair. But I think Pll be
more sincere this way. I write what my heart tells me to,
and my poor heart means just what it feels honestly. Forgive
my lack of sophistication if such be a virtue. My affections
are as simple and pure as I am true. And if occasionally, my
youthful fancy carries me away to dreamland, I know that it
will be only you who perhaps can and will be willing to bring
me back to the sunlight.
I have been rather apologetic in my previous lines, and
if such be a breach of social finesse, I know you will forgive.
I know you understand the heart of a man like me: a man
suddenly awakened from the dreams of childhood to the
realities of manhood. I love you Liza. I can’t decorate my
words further. I mean just that, and all that it means. Im
forgetful of all things else. My thoughts are too full of Liza.
And I must wait, wait I must! Liza shall be a “dream" in
my mind until Liza will be by my side.
Very sincerely yours,
Danny


Dear Danny,
You did betray yourself that time we came to know each
other for the first time. But you need not fear. You were
pleasant in every way. You don’t have to trouble yourself
with those “fears” you mentioned in your letter. To love isn't
a crime to be ashamed of. It is the most natural perfection
we can expect of ourselves as we grow up. You’re not the
first young man Ive met, and perhaps Ive observed more
men than you, and others behave more awkwardly. But there
is nothing to despise in that. I found in you what I would expect from a gentleman. And you are a fine man, I must confess. You perhaps expected too much from yourself. It isn’t
necessary. I admire a man more for being just what he is,
than for trying to appear more than what he is. Danny, just
be what you are: gentle, simple, true, modest, and perfectly
humble. But be realistic. A dreamer I believe, is hardly a
lover. Love isn’t a dream.
You might have seen a “dream" in my eyes, but I must
say that I am perfectly practical in this matter. Danny,
you're an admirable man. You can become an excellent friend.
That’s what I want you to be. I’ve met a few of your kind,
and Ive understood them—young, impulsive, and overflowing with what they think is “love.” But are you sure it’s
love? Danny, think it over once again. And perhaps after
giving a second thought to our feelings, we may come to
know ourselves better.
I do not know much about you. You're my brother’s
friend, and more than that, you can’t expect me to know. My
brother hasn’t talked much about you, and I thought it modest not to go for more information about you even after I had
received your letter. You are a fine acquaintance, and perhaps a superb friend. But to more than friendship I can’t
commit myself. We can be friends in much the same manner
as you and my brother are friends Your Liza can think of
you as her friend, but don’t expect her now to be "by your
side."
You’re perhaps too good a man to find a girl cheap
enough to be won by a mere wink and a whistle. I’ll give you
a simple advice: Danny, keep yourself.
Yours very truly,
Lizo


BEAUTY HINTS


“Natural beauty" is the girl who trades on her wholesomeness and good looks to create her beauty type. She
holds admiring glances long after the more exotic and glamorous types have been noticed, ogled at and passed over. Why
so? She pays utmost attention to details of good grooming
and beauty care.


Cleanliness is the secret of her good looks.
—
Clear, shiny hair is the trademark of the
"Natural Beauty."
. She washes it at least once a week,
often if necessary, and brushes it 100
times a night.
. Her hair style compliments her face,
figure and personality.
— Make-up:
 sets up her mirror next to the window in order to apply her make-up
in daylight, for artificial light can be
deceiving.
 applies liquid make-up or compressed
powder smoothly on her face, bringing the cosmetic up to her hairline
and down to her chin, so there’s no
line of demarkation.
 keeps her lip line clean and sharp:
applies her lipstick carefully and blots
2 or 3 times on a tissue to prevent
smearing and running.
- applies the eye-brow pencil directly to
the hairs, not to the skin.


23


Fear less, hope more; eat less, chew more;
whine less, breathe more; hate less, love more
and all good things are yours.
When wealth is lost, nothing is lost.
When health is lost, much is lost.
When character is lost, all is lost.
Success comes in cans; failure in can’ts.
There’s just one discouraging thing about the rules for
success. They won’t work unless we do.


The ladder of success:


100 7 I did!
90 6% I will.
80% I can.
70 % I think I can.
60 % Maybe I will.
50 25 I think I might.
40 2 What is it?
30 2 I wish I could.
20 % I don't know how.
10 % I can't.
02% I won't.


24


POINTERS FOR JULY


You have the Light. What are you doing
with it?
A teen-ager who was visiting a palatial residence asked
her hostess where she could find a Catholic Church in the
neighborhood. “There is a wretched little chapel three miles
away,” was the reply, "but YOU can’t go there. Only servants and waiters attend services there.” The teen-ager
tossed her ponytail and quietly said: "Well, that is where
I shall go; for the religion to which I belong began in a
stable—and I don’t care if it ends in one !"
Your children are not your children.
A mother and father, parents of one child, went to a
doctor to seek the abortion of another. Concealing his anger,
the doctor went into the anteroom of his office, and led
their only child into the room to confront its parents. Holding a poisoned knife in his hand, he exclaimed: "Now which
child shall I kill?
Could peace not bloom in this world
once more?
Our century has discovered interplanetary space, but it
has hardly explored the space which separates men from
each other. Our century has thrown gigantic bridges from
people to people to join one to the other. Our century has
discovered nuclear energy, but it has yet to discover the
creative energy of peace and concord which embodies the
simple act of love and of mutual understanding.


25


E


Marilyn Morheuser, 41, a former Catholic nun and an outspoken
advocate of school integration, has begun a 30-day goal sentence
rather than pay a fine of $100 for a disorderly conviction.
In 1963 Miss Morheuser was released from her vows in the Sisters of Loretto at the Foot of the Cross in order to participate in civil
rights efforts. She is now executive-co-coordinator of the Milwaukee
United School Integration Committee (MUSIC), which had sponsored
a three-day school boycott to protest against the construction of new
schools in Negro neighborhoods, alleging they foster racial segregation.
She was found guilty on charges that she tried to chain another
demonstrator to a forklift truck at a school construction site. She
originally asked for sentencing rather than accept a judge’s proposal
of probation if she would refrain from further “unlawful demonstrations."


The most sought-after snake catcher in Nagpur, India, is a priest
of St. Charles Seminary, Father Zacharias Mundattuchundavil, 31,
who has caught more than 600 snakes. Not once has he been bitten.
Whenever a poisonous snake is spotted anywhere in the region,
the people send for him. Some snakes he sends to the Haffkine Institute in Bombay and to colleges and schools. He is planning to do research work with the poison of snakes caught since 1957.


26


Twenty-two Canadian bishops returned to school to be taught the
fine points of television and radio by experts in the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. They spent three days of intense instruction at
the CBC studios, often under the glare of television lights.
Their special course, believed to have been the first of its kind
in the world, was arranged by the special commission of the Canadian
Catholic Conference dealing with mass media.
Their curriculum included the techniques of making full use of
the microphone and television presentations, how to give an interview, and participation in panel discussions and press conferences.


A new youth corps for the missions is being developed here in
response to a plea made by Cardinal Heenan of Westminster in his
Lenten pastoral.
The pastoral urged “those who have no domestic ties and are
willing to suffer hardship” to volunteer for service in developing
countries. Young men and women who have just finished their studies
or have learned a trade could offer their services before settling down
at home to a career, he said.
The cardinal has been making a list of priests willing to volunteer for missionary projects in Africa, South America, and Asia. Now
laymen are also needed, he said. The Council has told us that this is
our problem as much as anyone else’s. "What is happening to the
Church anywhere is the concern of Catholics everywhere. The Church
is a missionary and we are all called to be apostles."


Only 174 young men are now studying theology in preparation
for their ordination to the priesthood in Crechoslovakia, according to
KNA, German Catholic News Agency.
The Catholic Church in Czechoslovakia is permitted to operate
only two theological schools, one in Litomerice, with 85 students, the
other in Bratislava with 89 students.
According to KNA, 20 men applied to the Litomerice seminary
this year, but the number admitted was trimmed to 15 by the government.


27


Wife (looking up from her newspaper) “I see a great explorer
writes that there are some places
near the South Pole where one cannot open one’s mouth without the
danger of being frozen to death.
Husband: “Now I understand."
Wife: “Understand what?
Husband: “Why women never
join polar expeditions.
LANG
A


Teacher: “A fool can ask more
questions than a wise man can answer.
Johnny: “No wonder I flunked."
Bob: "Im not going back to
school tomorrow"
Mother: "Why? What do you
mean?"
Bob: “Because on Monday the
teacher said 4--4—8. On Tuesday
she said 2--6—8. Today she said
7-1—8 and I’m not going back
till she makes up her mind."


Edna: “Sometimes I’m afraid
I’m getting vain, Father.
Father: "What makes you
think that, Edna?'
Edna: “Everytime I look into
the mirror I think of how beautiful I am.
“That’s not being
Father:
vain. That’s only a mistake!"


28


"SOMEDAY, TIL BE LIKE YOU!"
WINNER
Mr. Raymundo Bulosan, Jr.
Immaculate Conception Major Seminary
Vigan, Ilocos Sur


29


A happy home; this is what
we all dream of, whether we
be children or parents; in the
peaceful country life or in the
busy city life. With this issue
  
staris devoting a few pages to
aids, hints and suggestions towards the realization of this
dream.


0


DO YOU HAVE A HAPPY HOME?


‘No, I don't.”
—Mother and Dad don’t understand me as a teenager.
—They do nothing but cuss all the time at
home.
—There’s too much drinking at home.
—We never do anything together.
My parents find fault with everything I do.
-My father is too strict and lets his temper go.
-We have no family worship or church life.
—My mother is always looking for something to
complain about.
-Everyone is always arguing at home.
Mother doesn’t have time to fix much of a
breakfast.
-Mom and Dad ofien rush off in the evening.


These heart-tugging remarks of teen-agers clearly mirror the kind of home and family they come from. It is teenagers who come from such homes that have a lot of adjusting on their own to make up for the lack of right attitudes
on the part of parents who don’t often recognize their need
for love, companionship and understanding, as well as their
need for food, clothes and a place to live. It is this very
thing that leads to a searching for these things outside of


31


the home—finding it in the wrong places and with the
wrong people. As such children and young people try to find
the answers of life on their own, they have to learn them
often “the hard way,” through heartbreaking trial-anderror experiences.
Rudy’s home life is the type of home life that should be
the birthright of every child, causing them to experience
God’s "mercy and love” through parental love and right
training, instead of His wrath because of parental "iniquities, neglect and indifference.
“You must have a happy home, Rudy?” he was asked.
“I do!” Rudy said with an air of assurance and pride.
"And why shouldn't I?”
Well, there are a lot of teen-agers who don’t seem
very happy about their homes.”
“Yes, I know. Some of them are my friends, and I feel
very sorry for them. We aren’t rich, and our home is not
fancy and modern—but I love it!"
“It sounds like a real home and not just a house.
"It is!” Rudy exclaimed, beaming with satisfaction.
“Mom works hard to keep the house going while Dad works,
but she’s always ready to help us if we need her. Mom and
Dad are our best friends. They treat each other like friends,
too."
"Are your folks strict?”
“We have to mind and share jobs around the house, if
that’s what you mean. It just seems like the right thing to
do. Mom and Dad make us feel like it’s our duty to help run
the place, and I think they’re right.”
‘That’s the way it should be all right. Do you like
school?”
“Oh, yes, very much! And why shouldn’t 1? My sister
and I are both on the honor roll. My folks have taught us
that it’s fun to learn and to know things. During school
nights, we usually spend the evening at home. Lots of time


32


we listen to the radio together, play games or read.”
4
"Do you go to church?
"Of course!” Rudy said, as though he couldn’t imagine
anybody not going.
"And we have family devotions, and prayer before and
after meals, he continued matter-of-factly.
"Do your folks go out much?'
‘Not much. I guess they give us most of their time.”
With a foundation like that, children can’t lose.


P O. Box 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on


January 3, 1950
July 1966
VOL.. XXXV, No. 8
EDITOR
C.I.C.M.
BUSINESS MANAGER
Rev. Fr. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:


Life ........ . . . . . . . . . . P50.00
Forcign ................ S 3.00
One Year.............. ₱ 4.00


Printer: Catholic Senool Press
BAGUIO
Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


GSRe APOSTLE


finst principle of education is


to educate oneself
and to be a model.


74


SIO PALLN.


MODERN PRATER OF YOUTH
by: fr. john m. murphy


Give me a clean spirit and clean speech, clean eyes and clean
hands.
Let me cherish cleanness, and recognize that it brings happiness.
Let me appreciate that in purity all good things grow.
Give me a gift for kindness so that I may never hurt another
youth. Teach me to control my temper and my tongue,
so they do not become the instrument of cruelty.
know my own importance, Lord; but let me never fail
to see that others have importance, too.
Give me strength of spirit to defeat self-pity. If I am lonesome,
lead me to the knowledge that to be loved I must be lovable; that I will have no real friends until I carn them.
Give me that bigness I will need to be cheerfully obedient.
Remove from my personality a sullen spirit. Teach me to
take others, so that someday I will know to give them
reasonably.
Give me zest and drive to conquer laziness. Never let me feel that
I can be served without serving, or get without giving.
Instruct my heart in the love of work, so that I may know
the joy of rest.
Give me that peace of mind which comes from knowing that
I will never lead another to sin. By your grace may no one
be cheapened because he kept my company. Let all who
love me learn to love you more.


Give me finally, such brightness, laughter, and grace, that You
will find in me a temper which will please You as Mary
pleased You. Amen.


PES APOSAAN


Vol. XXXV, No. 9
August, 1966


E


IN AUGUST
we pray


That the laity who live
in non-Christian or dechristianized mili eus,
may fulfill their role as
witnesses to the faith.
That the people of India
may find a way to Christ
in the social teaching of
the Gospel.


TABLE OF CONTENT


Men ... Boys .....
In the World of
Politics ........ 4
In the World of
Science ........ 6
In the World of
Sports ........ 8
In the World of
Sanctity ....... 10
God’s Word Today .. 12
Bagay Ba. .... . . . . . 13
Why Want to be


Mopheads" like
the Beatles. ... 14
“He's My Man .... 15
This is the C.I.C.M.'s


Seminary ..... 16
Flash-Stones-inDialogue ...... 18
Contest of the Month 19
Danny and Liza .... 20
Keep Smiling ...... 22
A Happy Home ..... 24
The Church in the
World . . . . . . . . 26
Slave and Scholar ... 28
Pointers for August.. 30
Easy Tricks can
produce good
pictures .. . .... 31


Undisputedly,


the masculine sex


is more superior than the feminine sex.


Are they


just different.


A closer look


will not do


any harm.


There are 123 countries the head of the state of which is a
man. There are only two countries the head of the state of
which is a woman: The Netherlands under Queen Juliana
and The United Kingdom under Queen Elizabeth II. There
is only one country where a woman holds the political power: India, the Prime Minister of which is Indira Gandhi.


In the
World
of Politics
Here is John F.
Kennedy, a shining
example of a man
in the world of politics.
“Kennedy should be judged by his times and his contemporaries—it should be obvious from the crowds he attracts,
the applause he stimulates, the devotion of his followers,
and the electricity he has created across the country that he
combines extraordinary qualities of strong leadership and
intellectual brilliance with an uncanny sense of public relations and the public moods.


The number of male recipients of the NOBEL PRIZE
AWARD in the fields of Physics, Chemistry and Physiology-Medicine clearly shows us that man is superior over
woman. Look at the figures.
1941-1964
1901-1940


Man


Woman


Man


Woman


PHYSICS
45


30


CHEMISTRY 38


2


29


PHYSIO-MED. 42


43


1


In the


World


of Science


On the opposite


page is a portion of
his precious and
notable last will
and testament.
Alfred Bernhard Nobel, the great man from Stockholm who
bequeathed to humanity the NOBEL PRIZE AWARD, was
a master of material things as well as a delver into the abstract and the aesthetic. He perfected the dynamite in 1866
and wrote a story in verse “Brothers and Sisters,” a novel
in the Swedish language “In Lightest Africa, and an unfinished tragedy during his last illness "Nemesis.


6


“I, the undersigned, Alfred Bernhard Nobel,
do hereby, upon mature consideration, declare my
last will in regard to such property as I shall be
able to leave at the time of-my death to be as follows: (After disposing of smaller legacies the
testament continues:)
ter
The entire remainder of my realizable property is to be disposed of in the following manner:
“The capital, which is to be invested by the
executors in reliable securities, is to form a fund,
the interest of which, is year by year to be distributed in the form of prizes among those who
have, within the respective twelvemonth successfully elapsed, rendered the greatest service to
mankind.
toTi
Tne interest shall be divided into five equal
portions and shall be allotted in the following
way: one part to be given to him who has made
the most important chemical invention or improvement, — one part to him who has made the
most important discovery in the realm of physiology-medicine, — one part to him whose achievement has been most excellent in the idealistic
sense in the realm of literature, — and one part
to him who has striven most or best for the peoples, and for the abolition or diminution of standing armies, as also for the inception and improvement of peace congresses .................. "


Dated: “Paris, November 27th, 1895
Signed: "Alfred Bernhard Nobel”


Unquestionably, there are more male athletes than female
athletes. Men participate in all fields of sports; women do
no: and simply can not. A comparison of the speed and
agility between the two sexes is shown below. Who do you
think is more superior?


TRACK & FIELD
100-meter dash
200-meter dash
400-meter dash 45 min.: 1 sec.
800-meter dash
High jump
SWIMMING
400-meter freestyle
200- breaststroke
Springboard diving


Man
10 minutes
20 min.: 3 sec.
1hr.: 45 min.: 1 sec.
7 ft.: 194 in
4:12.2
2:27.8
159.90 pts.


Woman
11 min.: 4 sec.
23 minutes
52 minutes
2 hr.: 52 min.
6 ft.: 294 in.
4:43.0
2:46.4
145 pts.


In the
World
of Sports


Focus of attention here is Abebe Bikila, Olympic gold medalist, who has brought to world attention Ethiopians’ endurance and fleetness of foot. He covered, during the Tokyo
Olympiad, 42.195-kilometer distance marathon in two hours,
22 minutes and 55.8 seconds.


8


There are more "santos” than "santas.” To verify this fact,
you need not look into records nor dig into the past. Just
count their names on the Catholic Calendar or in your daily
missal. The month of August alone gives us the proof. During this month we celebrate the feastday of 42 "santos? and
only 5 "santas.
In the
World
of Sanctily


We feature here St. Stanislaus Kostka, the boy saint, worthy
of imitation for his sanctity. He was a young Polish nobleman who was brought up in the court. At an early age it
made him ill to hear men say nasty and unpleasant things.
In school, his big brother who was a bully treated him so
badly that there was nothing to do but run away. On his
journey to Rome, he stopped by an empty church where he
longed so much to receive Holy Communion. No priest was
there to give it but an angel did. He walked and begged all
the way to his destination but the Blessed Virgin who appeared to him told him she would take care of him. He became a Jesuit novice and from the start he showed he was a
saint. He was very pure and loved to pray. On the feast of
the Assumption, Mother Mary came for him and took him
with her to heaven.


10


God’s Word Today


While on a walk one day, I was surprised to see a man hoeing his garden while sitting on a chair. "What laziness!”I
thought. But suddenly I saw, leaning against his chair, a
pair of crutches. The man was at work despite his handicap.
Do we do this too -judging others just
at mere sight and from a very personal
point of view without even trying to
understand their side? Lei’s sometimes
put our feet into the shocs of others.


"Judge not, and you will not be judged; condemn
Luke
not and you will not be condemned; forgive and
narrates: you will be forgiven; give and it will be given to
to you; good measure, pressed down, shaken together running over will be put into your lap.
For the measure you give will be the measure you
get back.
Luke 6, 37-38


12


Comprehending the marvelous universe, Thomas A. Edison
once declared that “There is a Great Engineer behind it all.”
And on his deathbed, this wizard who gave us light, opening
his eyes, exclaimed: “It is very beautiful over there."
Most often, people forget the Hand that
provides comfort to this world. Their
vision is so obstructed hy the glitters
of everything material that they hardly
can see anything that is spiritual.
Luke
“It is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
narkingdom. Sell your possessions, and give alms;
provide yourselves with purses that do not grow
rates:
old, with a treasure in the heavens that does not
fail, where no thief approaches and no moth destroys. For where your treasure is, there will
you heart be also.


Luke 12, 32-34


Phy Want to ne
mopneaas nge
the BLA--S.


To be the Beatles of the Philippines?
Come on, don’t be silly. You can’t be
the Beatles by merely having the
same “hairdo" as theirs. To look different? Oh sure, you are different.
So different that strangers have to
look twice to be sure of your sex.
But it’s the fad! Agreed—so let’s
face the facts: Time was when only
girls concerned themselves with hair
styles. But today young fellows seem
to be wrapped up in them too. And
some boys fuss and do almost everything but wear rollers in their hair.
Have a long hair but remember: the
back of your neck should not be covered with a thick mat that disappears
under your shirt collar. Nor should
your hairline abruptly end on your
bare neck as if two mis-mated parts
of a puzzle had been fitted together.
If you like a bit of wave in the front,
that’s all right too—but it should not
look as if you’re hiding a basketball
under your hair. Your hair belongs
to your head, not tumbling down to
the vicinity of your eyebrows. About
your curly locks: keep them combed,
but don’t comb in public!


“He's my man"


Once upon a time the qualities most sought for in a
boy—a prospective husband at that! — were good health,
presentable appearance, good character, a sense of dignity,
honesty, willingness to work, solid Faith and, lastly, almost
as an afterthought wealth.
Today, things have changed: first of all, is the husband
rich? If the answer is yes, everything is all right from the
beginning. What about good health? Oh, with money everything may be remedied! What about a sense of dignity?
Honesty? Willingness to work? Oh, life, after all, is not to
be taken seriously.
So you see? Today, it’s the other way round. The least
important qualities in a boy come first rather than the good
ones. Sometimes one wonders how many girls are still sensible enough and sincere enough in answering this question:
What does a girl look for in a boy? A wise girl demands of
her boy certain qualities. She looks for the man:
Who does not become crazy over her at first sight.
Who does not ask her to "go along."
Who does not agree too easily to all she says.
Who speaks respectfully about his parents.
Who presents her to his parents and relatives.
Who does not expect payment in return for dates.
Who does not dream about her too often.
Who would not “die” for her.
Who considers religious matters as important as his girl.
Who respects her religious beliefs and her standards of life.
Who will make an exemplary father for her children.
Such a young man is very pleasing to a wise girl, because he is one that does not fall for a coat of many colors.


15


This is the
C.I.C.M.'s Maryhurst Seminary


. . a "little domain" in the heart of the woods. Just a
few minutes ride from the center of Baguio City, this seminary served as a kind host to a group of tots from St. Theresa’s College, Baguio, last March 11, 1966.
In grateful appreciation for the gracious hospitality of the
C.I.C.M. priests and seminarians, the Third Grade Boys
write them here an open letter of thanks.


16


St. Theresa's College
Baguio City
March 15, 1966
Dear Rev. Fathers and Seminarians,
Thank you very much for your kindness in letting us
enjoy in your seminary last March 11. We appreciate the
way you entertained us. You allowed us to listen to the
chiming of your tall clock. Its sound was musical. You did
not scold us when we showed our interest about the novitiatus by peeping through the keyhole. When the seminarians
went out they seemed to like passing between the two lines
that we made for them. They smiled at us. They answered
our greeting cheerfully. Some of them even joked us. At
the basketball court they welcomed us to play with them.
We had much fun with them.
We enjoyed watching the monkeys, chickens, and huge
pigs, too.
We had a good time in your garden. We looked at the
beautiful blossoms and smelled their scent. It was very nice
to climb the hills and see the views around.
But above all we like to remember that the first place
you brought us to was the chapel. You helped us to begin
our enjoyment with God. At noon when we went again to
the chapel we saw the seminarians praying reverently. We
hope we did not disturb them. We cannot pray as well as
they.
Thank you again, dear Reverend Fathers and Seminarians for all your goodness to us.
Gratefully yours,
The Third Grade Boys


17


Does not your love for your little ones
rebuke you?
A poor, hard-working woman was walking along a road
in the outskirts of Berlin, when a passing driver set the
brakes on his powerful auto. Looking up and down the road
to see that he was not observed, he addressed her: "Woman,
I believe you have a kind heart. Here in this bundle is a
newborn baby. My wife refuses to keep it. We would be disgraced if we were not to place it in an asylum. Here are ten
thousand francs. Take it and bring it up as one of your
own.”
“Sir," replied the woman, "though I have five children
of my own and live in poverty, I must refuse.
"What!" exclaimed the man, “Refuse to take this
child?"
“Sir, I do not refuse the child. I refuse the money.”


I forgive but I cannot forget.
How often we hear that! Certainly we cannot forgive
everything we would like to. But we must strip our remembrance of every grudge. If our remembrance remains bitter,
it is a sign that we have not truly forgiven. Forgiveness is
the surest testimony of true love and authentic charity. Few
things make us more like God than forgiveness.


18


CONTEST of the MONTH
Give a one-word description of this bird. Send in entries not
later than Aug. 30, 1966 to   ,
P.O. Box 42, Baguio City.


19


Dearest Liza,
You told me to “keep” myself when you wrote me last. And I
think I’m really keeping myself, if I understood you right. Ask me to
be anything, and that I will be. I’ll do anything for you, Liza, be it
unpleasant. But be kind to me. I don’t mean, of course, that you have
been unkind, or will ever be unkind to me or to anyone ... I think
you get what I mean. The tragedy of it is that you have never been a
boy or a man like me, and you have never nor will ever understand
entirely what my heart feels towards you, Liza.
You are my “friend" now, you told me so. But what does that
mean? How shall I understand friendship? Love letters . .. can they
make friendship? I’m puzzled. I told you before I am so ignorant of
life. You must have thought that boys are smart and know more about
matters of the heart, but Im afraid that in my case it is not true. All
I know is that I’m in love with you—my heart tells me so.
You have not been the only lady I ever met. Ive met many others
before; and many of them I admired, and even thought I loved. But
after a while, they left me cold, or to be more specific, I always found
myself the same man unchanged even after I had come to know them
as personal friends. But when I met you for the first time, I felt
there was something new in my life. The feeling, though it made me
suffer, made me happy, too. I couldn’t understand what the matter
was with me, but I felt attracted to you most strongly. I was being
driven to a point where I could no longer keep my thoughts and feelings to myself. So I wrote you.
I was not very certain about myself when I told you I love you.
Liza, but what else could that blissful feeling be? 1 believed it was
love, and I told you so. It was a new experience, and it changed me
quite completely.
I hate to stop telling you the numberless thoughts and feelings I
have for you, but I must end my warbling somehow. Love is a song
without end, but letters must. But Liza, permit me yet to quote your
letter last time. ... but don’t expect her now to be by your side.”
Yes, Ill be patient. I’ll be hopeful. I shouldn’t expect you now
(though it hurts me), to be by my side. But does that mean that I can
hope for a day when we shall be more than friends? Ill play no further words. I’ll just be true.
Very sincerely yours,
Danny


Danny and liza


Dear Danny,
... .I like the way you put your thoughts across, Danny. You're a
marvelous man. You’re a great lover, I must admit, and there is no
questioning your sincerity. But Danny, there is something more than
being "marvelous.” I think that one can’t live in this world by simply
being admirable. One has to be lovable if one wants to be loved. And
I’m convinced that you are very lovable, Your clear nature, your simple tongue, your childlike sincerity—what lady can refuse to accept
a man as you? And yet there is something less than wise for a lady
giving her heart too easily.
Danny, when I met you the other day, I understood your eyes. I
knew you wanted me to answer you as soon as I could (or if possible,
before I could). I felt the way you felt; my heart was beating just as
nervously as your heart was, I suppose, I felt you wanted to say more
than the occasion allowed. But Danny, be patient. It is true, I have
never been, nor will ever be a man to experience the pains that a
man’s heart can feel, but you will agree with me too, if I tell you that
you will never be a lady to feel and love the way a lady does. It is not
easier to be a lady—to be a woman. However, there is a common
ground where we can stand: human nature. That is why we can hope
to understand each other perfectly.
Let us avoid superlatives, Danny. You were the sweetest liar
when you told me you can do everything I ask you to do, or be anything I want you to be. Let us be practical. You cannot possibly be
everything a woman can want you to be. If you try to, aside from its
impossibility, you'll be making a slave of yourself. And I don’t want
to have a slave friend. The heart of a woman looks for a master to
own it and protect it with his love. It does not seek to rule, but rather, it secks to inspire her ruler.
Moreover, love isn’t born out of the winds. It is born of Ged, and
the human heart. Ive never been convinced of "love at first sight."
Love grows out of pure and living knowledge.
We are uncertain of ourselves at the moment, but God will show
us His will in His own good time. We will not love each other less for
loving each other late, if only to be sure we make no erring step.
Danny, cheer up. I keep you in my heart.
Very sincerely,
Liza


KEEP
LING
SN


Beauty expert: one interested in the latest wrinkle
Holy Wheelers: people who attend church only in a baby
carriage, a bridal car, or a hearse.
Feminine bachelor: a lady-in-waiting.
She looked at him as if, he were a side dish she didn’t order.
His vacation was an alcoholiday.
He walked into the bar optimistically and left misty optically.
* * * * *
Tommy: “Gee, he’s dumber than me.”
Teacher: “No, Tommy; he’s dumber than I.”
Tommy: "All right then, he’s dumber than both of us.


Little Joan, 3 years old, came home and began telling her
mother about her first instructions from the Sisters. "Sister told us about the beginning of the world, and, mother,
in the beginning of the world was all dark, then God said,
"'Lectric light,' and it was light.”
* * * * *
Six-year-old Rosemarie liked egg yolks but scorned the
whites. Her father eventually laid down the law. “Rosemarie,” he said, "you must eat everything on your plate. When
I buy eggs, I pay for the whites as well as the yolks.
“Oh,” said Rosemarie, "don’t you pay for the shells, too?”


22


"How highi


Ler's try lu


Thar's Rr


CONTEST OF THE MONTH OF APRIL
What does Pussy say to herself in each of these photos?


winner
Mr. Ramon R. Martinez
San Carlos University (High School)
Mango Avenue, Cebu City


23


A
happy
nome


. depends
upon a successful marriage. And a
happy marriage depends
u pon the
favorable
factors surrounding it.
A "success
forecast,
adapted from
one by Lee
G. Burchinal
of the U.S.
Office of
Educa tion,
shows how
the circumstances can
affect the
outcome.


Poor chance of
Success


AGE


both 17 or under


EDUCATION


both dropouts


PREGNANCY


premarital


LENGTH OF
ACQUAINTANCE


less than 6 months,
no engagement
period


DATING
EXPERIENCE


limited, went steady,
almost right away


PERSONALITY


Immature, limited
interests, poor social life


REASON FOR
MARRYING


pregnancy, impulse,
wanted to'


PARENTS


both low in income
and education


PARENTS"
NTET
ALLITUDE


strongly opposed


MONEY


dependent on relatives


RESIDENCE


live with in-laws or
relatives


24


Maybe


Best chance of
Success


she 17, he at least 20


she at least 18, he 20 or over


she a dropout, he a high
school graduate


both high school graduates;
he has post-graduate training


immediately after marriage


at least a year after marriage


at least a year, with 6
months engagement or "understanding"


several years with 6 months
engagement or "understanding"


some before meeting mate


played the field, went steady
before


mixed


mature, competent, lots of
friends


she preferred marriage to
career: previously both may
have had plans to go with
education


no post high school ambitions, marriage and family
really desired, want independence
--


mixed


middle class or above


resigned acceptance or mild
opposition


backed the marriage once
decision made, help offered
without strings attached


even independent, if hardship level


enough income to stay


live part of the time with
relatives


above hardship level; have
own place


25


The Communist leaders of East Europe are worried about their
birth rate problems: too few babies are being born.
The three basic reasons for the low birth rates are, according to
Radio Free Europe: East European nations have more women than
men in their populations; abortions are legal; the use of contraceptives is becoming widespread. The baby shortage is most acute in
Hungary, East Germany and Czechoslovakia.
In Hungary, which has the lowest annual birth rate in the whole
world, 180,000 abortions were performed last year. An article in the
Hungarian Communist party daily Nepszabadsag has recommended a
central institute to inaugurate a new, forward-looking scheme for
encouraging young married couples to have children.
It also recommends an expansion of maternity leaves to one year,
special allowances until the children are three years old, increased
taxes on childless couples, and the promotion of open discussion to
encourage childbirth.
In East Germany women outnumber men by 1.9 million in a total
population of slightly more than 17 million. East Germany has also
the problems of the aged. Many young people have fled to the West.
and there has been a shortage of men of marital age since the World
War II. East Germany is said to be the only East European country
that does not freely allow abortions. Last summer, however, it became
the first Communist country to market birth-control pills.
Czechoslovakia followed Germany in the mass production and
marketing of birth-control pills. Officials hope that the pills will help
reduce the number of abortions. Women outnumber men over 300,000


26


in a total population just over 14 million. In 1962, the birth rate was
the third lowest in the world, higher than those of Sweden and Hungary.


A condemnation of wife-buying and of any form of discrimination based on sex, race, or color, was issued by the bishops of Cameroun at their recent general assembly.
Such discriminations exist, the bishops said, if the woman is not
free to choose her husband or her state of life.
They renewed their condemnation of the dowry as it is practised
in this country; the dowry, the price of a human being created to the
image of God. has a sinful and dishonorable character, they said.


A violent Flemish protest against the decision of the Belgian
bishops to continue instruction in French as well as in Flemish at
the Catholic University of Louvain forced the university to terminate
its academic year eleven days before the normal date. The city of
Louvain was placed under martial law.
The bishops, who are the trustees of the 541-year-old university,
issued a statement on May 15 rejecting agitation by Flemish nationalists for withdrawal of French-speaking students and professors
from the Louvain campus. The Flemings demanded that a separate
campus be established somewhere in the French-speaking Walloon
area in the southern part of Belgium.
On hearing of the bishops' declaration, Flemish student leaders
called on their fellow students from Flanders to boycott classes for
the rest of the academic year, which was to end on May 31.
The Flemish boycott and accompanying street demonstrations
were so effective that the university authorities on May 20 acknowledged that they were unable to control the situation and declared
the academic year closed.
Some political leaders jumped into the dispute. It was suggested
that the national subsidy to the university—estimated at 957% of its
operating costs—should be withdrawn unless the university conforms
to the general social, linguistic and demographic pattern—meaning
unless French-speaking students were removed from Flanders.


27


As befitted a 16th century Spanish grandee, the young
Duke de Sesa arrived at the University of Granada in Spain
accompanied by a slave carrying his books. If students
turned to stare at them, it was not only because they were a
strikingly handsome pair, both attired in the height of genteel elegance, but because of the unusual relationship that
seemed to exist between the two, one black, the other white.
And when the duke and his slave began to attend classes
together, the whole university buzzed with excitement.
His fellow students knew the colored man as Juan de
Sesa, property of the grandson of one of Spain’s greatest
explorers, Capt. Fernandez Gonzalo de Cordoba, explorer of
Yucatan.
They watched Juan excel in arts and sciences, marveled
as he outdistanced his noble master. And they cheered when,
because of his brilliance as a Latin scholar, he finally won
himself the name Latino.
When Juan Latino received his bachelor’s degree in
1546, the archbishop and the elite of Granada’s gentry witnessed the ceremony. This was the climax of the fabulous
career of the little black boy who had been bought in a slave
market and rose to a position of honor, the teacher and idol
of hundreds of students who followed him through the
streets of the city.
Mother and son were purchased by Dona Elvira, daughter of the famous Capt. de Cordoba. She brought the two
slaves to her big estate at Baena and gave the little Negro
lad to her son, Gonzalo Fernandez, third Duke de Sesa. The
boys were of about the same age. With the manorial estate
as their playground, the two boys became inseparable companions. When Dona Elvira’s husband died, she moved her
family including the 14-year-old Juanito to Granada.
The move proved to be the turning point in the life of
Juan, for Granada, once the proud and independent kingdom of the Moors, was now a major center of Spanish culture. The young Duke de Sesa was given an education suit

28


able to young noblemen.
Delighted at the thought of having his playmate for a
classmate as well, the young duke arranged for Juan to
study with him. Under Fernandez' tutor, the Negro soaked
learning like a dry sponge. The first phase of their education completed, the boys entered the Cathedral school, where
Juan’s first literary efforts won admiration. Next, the two
enrolled at the new University of Granada.
Juan Latino was nearly 30 when he received his first
degree. Although a slave, he was now a person of importance, and moved into the most exclusive circles. As tutor
for sons of Granada’s nobility, his services were in constant
demand. The president of the Royal Council granted Latino
2,000 ducats. The Duke de Sesa became a historical oddity
by giving his slave a liberal allowance.
But money and fame meant little to Juan Latino. His
mind had broken the bonds of ignorance, but his body was
still in slavery. The fact that he belonged to a man who
loved him as a friend and respected him as a scholar did not
make bondage less galling. He yearned for freedom, and
the desire grew into obsession when he fell in love with
Ana Carlobal, daughter of a Spanish nobleman.
Shortly after his marriage, he was given freedom, no
doubt as a wedding gift. From this union, there were four
daughters—each talented and beautiful.
Although Juan did not act as an official member of the
university staff until later years, he carried great influence
with the institution.
In 1556 Latino qualified for the teaching profession by
taking his licentiate degree and the greatest honor ever bestowed upon him came that same year when he was chosen
to deliver the Latin oration in the colorful ceremony that
inaugurated the academic year at the university. He became
blind in middle age, but continued to teach, and was still a
familiar figure along the streets of Granada. At 70, Latino
was forced to retire because of illness. He died in 1623.


29


57
N
POINTERS
78
14
V
4
FOR AUGUST
Ya
ARN
171
A
It keeps raining.
B0
18
Streets are flooded.
NAWASA relaxes.
People survive on
Medicol and Cortal.
ASSUMPTION DRAWS NEAR: MOTHER'S BIRTHDAY
That makes a kind of mother’s day in heaven and on earth
—a good combination. Mother is a bit of heaven, she really
is.
Mother of breakfast, dinner and lunch—thank you so
much. Mother of schoolfees, mother of our picnics—we are
more grateful than we are able to show. You, often our only
admirer—we admire you. You, sometimes our only defender—do not worry, nobody will ever attack you.
How sad for Joe and Jim and John to have no mother any
more. Is this why they drop in our place so often?
On the fifteen we are going to present mother with jeans,
so decided Lina, my sister. For picnics and watering plants
and to look modern. Dad, not too happy, said 'yes'. She will
join the technicolor parade of yellow, green and red—pretty
and young.
Mila, Lily, Mary Ann and the other girls . . . it is hard to
believe, but they will be 'mother’ one day. I hope like mine.
August 22: Feastday of the Immaculate Heart of Mary,
feast of the C.I. C.M. and the Apostle.
Greetings! Greetings! TO ALL.


30


Easy tricks can
produce good
picture
You don’t have to be a star
to take a good picture. All you
need is a few easy make-up
tricks and some simple tricks
on how to fall into the most
flattering pose. Here’s how you
do it.


IF YOUR FACE IS THIN
Use your usual make-up base on forehead, chin and throat only. Use
a base several shades lighter over the rest of your face, including the
earlobes.
IF YOUR FACE IS FULL.
Apply normal base as usual. Use a base several shades darker than
usual to shade the area of your underncath the cheekbones. If your
forchead is wide, use some darker make-up on each side of your
temples, leaving the center of your forehead lighter in tone.
EYES AND EYEBROWS
To make eyes seem larger, apply a slightly darker base to the upper
cyelids. Some white make-up blended in below the eyes will also
widen your eyes.
A heavy coating of mascara on the outermost edges makes eyes seem
wider apart.
NOSES
To shorten a long nose, shade the very tip with a base darker than
usual. A broad nose will seem thinner if you use a dark base down
the side of your nose and a thin line of light base down the center.
LIPS AND MOUTH
Make the lower lip seem fuller with a darker shade of lipstick than
the upper lip. Reverse the procedure to make the upper lip fuller.
FRECKLES AND SKIN BLEMISHES
If the freckles aren’t too dark, use a base the shade of the freckles.


31


For other blemishes or dark birth marks, take a small paint brush
(or lipstick brush) and carefully paint them with extra layers of
pancake base after the rest of your make-up is completed.


HOW TO POSE


The 34 angle is most flattering for most faces. To get it, turn your
face so that one side is aimed at the photographer but you can still
see him with both eyes. Lean forward a bit, as this improves the line
of your shoulders. When the photographer is ready, take a deep
breath. This straightens up any slumps.
Yoisten your lips. If your head feels rigid and light, shake it vigorously while the photographer is getting set. Last of all, to get a good
impression, think of something nice! What or who it is can be your
secret.


P. O. Box 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on


January 3, 1950


VOL MIV NO. S


Aug., 1966


EDITOR
C.I.C.M.


BUSINESS MANAGER
REv. Fr. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M.


SUBSCRIPTION RATES:
Life ............


₱50.00
$ 3.00
₱ 4.00


Foreign.
One Year


Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PrEss
BAGUIO


Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


32


REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
Department of Public Works and Communications
BUREAU OF POSTS
Manila
SWORN STATEMENT


(Required by Act No. 2580)
The undersigned Rev. Fr. James Leyssen, C.I.C.M.,
Business Manager of “The Apostle" of the Mountain Province,
published monthly in English at Baguio City, after having been
duly sworn in accordance with law, hereby submits the following statement of ownership, management, circulation, etc.,
which is required by Act 2580, as amended by Commonwealth
Act No. 201:
NAME
Post Office Address
Rev. Fr. Gaston Nollet, C.I.C.M. ........ P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Editor
Rev. Fr. James Leyssen, C.I.C.M. ...... P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Managing Editor
Rev. Fr. James Leyssen, C.I.C.M. ........ P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Business Manager
Owner: Immaculate Heart of Mary
Mission Society
.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Publisher: Catholic School Press ...... P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Printer: Catholic School Press ........ P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Office of Publication: Baguio ......... P.O. Box 42, Baguio
If publication is owned by a corporation, stockholders owning one per cent or more of the total amount of stocks: NONE
Bondholders, mortgagees, or other security holders owning
one per cent or more of the total amount of security: NONE
In case of publication other than daily total number of
copies printed and circulated of the last issue dated April, 1966.


1. Sent to paid subscribers . . . . . . . . . . . ...... 5,294
2. Sent to others than paid subscribers ........ 250
Total .................. . .... . ... . .. 5,544


(s) Rev. Fr. James Leyssen. C.l.C.M.. Business Manager
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 31st day of March,
1966 at Baguio City, the affiant exhibiting his Residence Certificate No. A-3637962 issued at Baguio on Jan. 18, 1966.
Page No. 41
Doc. No. 200
(s) Antonio Romero
Series of 1966
Notary Public
Book No. VI
Until Dec. 31, 1967


GRe APOSTIE


I like to see a man
PROUD
of the place in which he lives.
I like to see a man
LIVE
so that his place will be proud of him.


AL


BAA


TABLE OF CONTENTS


Girls .. Women.. 1
In The World of
Politics ........ 2
Science ........ 3
Sports ........ 5
Sanctity ....... 6
The Queen of Sherati 8
Maryhurst: C.I.C.M.
Seminary ..... 10
God’s Word Today .. 20
Bagay Ba. ..... . . . 21
The Church In The
World . . . . . . . . 22
Beauty Hints ...... 24
Contest of the Month 26
Pointers for
September ..... 27


Danny and Liza .... 28
Flash-Stones-InDialogue ...... 30


Keep Smiling ...... 31
A Happy Home ..... 32


In the World of Politics
The most powerful woman in the world today, the first
woman to hold the most important office in a major country, Indira Gandhi, 48, presides over the huge subcontinent
of India and its 480 million people at a crucial hour in history.
Slender and strikingly handsome, she is the daughter of
Jawaharlal Nehru who ruled India for nearly all its history
as an independent nation.
From the moment she became Prime Minister she has shown
signs of being equal to the demands of the office by handling her country’s problems with firmness and dispatch.
The naturalness in Indira Gandhi’s authority comes from
using, not alien abilities copied from men, but abilities that
are very much her own as a woman.
Her image as Prime Minister, is not Mother India, with its
connotation of helpless children. It is much more the takeover of the younger generation, something like the Kennedy
image, with its eagerness to break out of tired dilemmas
and make one’s frontiers.


2


in tne Worio
of Science


Marie Sklodowska Curie, the
only person ever to have received the Nobel Prize
Award in two subjects—Physics and Chemistry, proved
that women can make as
great a contribution to
science as men.
In 1903 she and her husband
Pierre, with Dr. Becquerel
received jointly the Award
for Physics for their work
in the discovery of radium.
Again in 1911 Marie Curie
received the Award in recognition of the services rendered by her to the development of Chemisty; by her
discovery of the nature of
radium and polonium, by her
determination of the nature
of radium and isolation of it
in a metallic state, and by
her investigations into the
compounds of this remarkable element.
Her service to mankind and
extreme sacrifices were recognized in the form of
awards of numerous prizes,
medals, decorations and honorary titles both in Europe
and in America.


  


In the World of Sports
Australia’s 27-year-old Dawn Fraser is a winner of
gold swimming medals in three Olympics. At the Tokyo Olympics she won the 100-meter freestyle for an
unprecedented third time with a record of 59.52 seconds.


In the World of Sanctity


“I cannot account for what I am enduring except by
my passionate desire to save souls . .. but I do not
regret having abandoned myself to love.” These were
some of the last words of St. Therese, the “child loved
by all the world," before she died in September 30,
1897 at the Carmel in Lisieux, France.
Within seventeen years after her death nearly a million
copies of her book were printed, and it was read in 35
languages. Today her statue is found in almost every
town and city in the world, great buildings and wooden huts have been constructed in her honor, and her
name is invoked by men, by women and children of
every race and color. It was invoked in the German
concentration-camps; it is venerated in the cities in
the western world, in the villages of China and on the
islands of the Pacific. Eskimo children bear her name,
and prayers go up to her from Thailand (Siam). Pilgrims pass before her tomb in an endless stream and
there is no moment in any day in which someone does
not turn to her.
She is the greatest saint of modern times, not because
of the world-wide acclaim she receives and the devotion
she inspires. She enjoys pre-eminence because she has
liberated sanctity and made it obviously accessible to
everyone. "Holiness is not a matter of this or that pious
practice; it consists of a disposition of the heart which
makes us small and humble in the arms of God, aware
of our weakness, yet confident—boldly confident—in
the goodness of our Father.


S1. Inisint of thi Cano es
IA. thice mocats bel


The Queen of Sherati
African Love Story


Adogo was the third wife of Nyatega, the king of Sherati, yet she was the queen of the land. She was Nyatega’s
favorite wife, and therefore, by custom, the queen. She was
beloved not only by the king but by his court and the people,
even beyond the region of Sherati. Adogo was: beautiful,
graceful, charming, and very happy. She worked hard. She
ruled the royal household efficiently, tactfully. She could
make things with her hands. She could make people near
her happy.
She could speak many languages. The queen was, indeed, an ornament in the king’s court.
Franciscus was a native Catholic. He was a catechist in
the land of Sherati. Franciscus taught the mysteries of
Christ, day in and day out, everyday of the year. Adogo,
coming from the market, listened to Franciscus. For two
years, she listened; then she asked for Baptism. The Fathers
at the mission answered, "Not yet.” Adogo asked again after
another year. "Not yet.” And another year. “Not yet.” Then
it occurred to her that, of all who had learned the mysteries
of Christ, she alone remained unbaptized. That made her
sad and it made her think. "Why have I not been baptized?”
she wondered.
Early one morning, the queen walked 28 miles to question the Fathers in Kowak. Since it was late when she arrived, she slept under the stars. As one of the priests walked
towards the catechumen school, after breakfast, Adogo
bowed to him, and greeted him.
“Father,” she said, "all who have studied with Franciscus have been baptized—all except one, the queen of Sherati.


I think, Father, I have not been baptized because I am not
the first wife of Nyatega, the king. The missioner answered, "Yes, Adogo, that is true!” "Father, I will no longer be queen of Sherati. I will leave the king.
Adogo did not return to Sherati. Near the mission
lived an old Catholic woman, a widow. Adogo asked if she
might make her home with the widow. The latter was glad
to have a companion, and readily agreed.
News travels fast in Africa. Nyatega rushed roaring to
the mission of Kowak. The Fathers called Adogo. The former queen stood before the king and said, "Never, never
will I consent to live as third wife.
Nyatega, more angry still, jumped from his chair, and
ran after the queen, to drag her back to his court. But she
ran like a leopard, and hid from his wrath.
In the eyes of the people of all the land, Adogo remained
the queen, the third wife of Nyatega. He had paid her dowry
of 20 cows to her father, had celebrated the marriage feast
with her. But she and the priests of the mission thought differently. Before long, she was baptized in Kowak. She took
the name Magdalena.
Sylvanus Ooko was a Catholic. He lived not far from
the mission. He met the new convert, talked with her and
fell in love with her. And soon Magdalena returned his affection. Sylvanus wished to marry her, but the elders and
the chiefs forbade the marriage. They feared the king.
The father of Sylvanus began cautious negotiations.
Surprisingly, he found that the royal rancor had cooled, and
that the offended ruler was not at all unwilling to receive a
dowry from his former queen. Upon delivery of 20 cows to
the king’s herd, Sylvanus and Magdalena were married at
the mission church at Kowak.
Now Sunday after Sunday Sylvanus and Magdalena
and their little family attend Mass and other devotions in
the mission church. There the former queen of Sherati bows
in humble homage to the King of Kings.


MANTAIAsTEO


Two roads diverged in a
wood, and I. .. I took the
one less travelled. And that
has made all the difference.
When I was still in high
school it took me some time
to see clearly what way God
wanted me to follow.
There was the attractive road
to a worldly career; there was
the road God seemed to show
me — I accepted His offer.
No one could have offered me
a greater challenge. Like every
young man, I was ever on the
search for something out of
the ordinary, something that
challenges my ability: I opened my heart to God.
You have called me, Lord,
See I am here.


11


I am now a junior
seminarian here in
the C.I.C.M. Maryhurst Seminary
the place where I
belong.
The master has
chosen the hard life
of a missionary
priest for me but
He never ceases to
be my Daily Helper.


At Study
One must have at
least average intelligence in the
mental department for he has
to lackle a batch
of notso-easy
subjecis.


13


14


rO


At Work


In Maryhurst, I live with a happy family of young, daring
men from everywhere — from the Mountain Province, Manila, Jakarta, Ilocos Provinces and Cavite. Men in pursuit
of the same goal. They are all brothers to me.


 I

FOREVER ON THE
REACH FOR THE HEIGHTS.


S


Les





Seminarians are not on their knees the whole day through
they are normal, healthy young men who have a great
love for sports: volleyball, basketball and football.


Visiting Day


God’s Word Today
The sight of 7- and 8-year-olds, so crippled by rickets that
they had to crawl instead of walk, left a lasting impression
on a little girl. Because of her determination to do something
practical to correct it, she eventually went to medical school
with the sole intention of preparing herself to do social work
with professional skill. She became Dr. Eleanor A. Campbell, founder and general director of the Judson Health Center, which has helped millions of diseased children through
the years.


We will do great things for the afflicted
once we see Christ Himself in each of
them. We will be fired with a sense of
purpose and perseverance that can be
obtained from no other source.


14
PeterTend the flock of God that is your charge, not by
constraint but willingly, not for shameful gain but
narrates: eagerly, not as domineering over those in your
charge but being examples to the flock."
1 Peter 5, 2-3


20


A young lady who works in a beauty saloon carries on a farreaching apostolate in a quiet but most effective way. While
massaging the well-fed bodies of women who enjoy eating
yet want to avoid showing results, she makes it her business
to say a fervent prayer for their souls. She prays that each
of them may show as much interest in her spiritual wellbeing as she does to the physical side of her life.
No matter how insignificant our position
in life may be, we can still do something
to reach the world—by prayer and by
work. We can make the world a bit better for our being in it.
John
“Beloved, it is a loyal thing you do when you render
narany service to the brethren, especially to strangers,
rates: who have testified to your love before the church.
You will do well to send them on their journey as
befits God’s service.
3 John, 5-6


A small windshield sticker bearing a white cross on a
blue-green background and the letters SOS is seen with
increasing frequency on European cars. It means the
driver is a Catholic and in case of accident wants a priest.


PHILIPPINES


There has been a "significant" increase in vocations to the missionary congregations in the Philippines, according to a study made
by the Divine Word Missionaries. In 1956, the 10 missionary congregations had only 249 seminarians. Today they have 1,136.
The study also showed that there are 23 Filipino missionary
priests serving overseas—in Indonesia, Taiwan, Brazil, Peru, Japan,
Hongkong, and Argentina.
There are 240 Filipina missionary Sisters working overseas.
Thirty-eight Dominican Sisters are serving in Taiwan, Japan, and the
U.S.A. The Daughters of St. Paul have 32 Sisters in Taiwan, North
Borneo, India, Pakistan, and Nigeria. There are three Filipina Benedictine nuns in Portugal.
Nine Religious of the Virgin Mary, an all-Philippines congregation, are serving in the U.S.A. at St. Viator’s parish in Las Vegas,
Nevada. This same congregation is now setting up a foundation in
Sacramento, California.


22


U.S.A.


Devotion to Mary is on the decline, but this trend is contrary to
the teachings of Vatican Council II, according to Fr. William G.
Most, president of the Mariologial Society of America. Speaking at
the University of Dayton, he said that Vatican Council II “did not call
for downgrading the honor of Mary," but “reaffirmed and strengthened" the Church’s previous teaching about her.
The decline in Marian devotion is due partly to "misleading"
press coverage of council debate on whether to discuss the Blessed
Virgin in a separate schema or in the schema on the Church, he said.
Moreover certain writers have “distorted” the Marian teaching of the
council and of modern popes.
Speaking of the decline in popular devotion to the Mother of
God, he cited the removal of statues of Mary—and the saints from
some churches, a practice in direct opposition to the Constitution on
the Sacred Liturgy.


VATICAN CITY


The Doctrinal Congregation has rules, with the Pope’s concurrence, that the Index of Forbidden Books "no longer has the force of
ecclesiastical law" but it “preserves its moral force insofar as it
teaches the conscience of the Christian faithful to avoid, as the natural law itself demands, those writings which can put faith and good
morals in danger."
The Doctrinal Congregation notice was signed by the pro-prefect.
Cardinal Ottaviani and the secretary, Archbishop Pietro Parente. It
was issued in reply to many bishops who had asked what status it
now holds.
In a decree issued on his initiative the motu propio Integrae Servandae of December 7, 1965, Pope Paul said the Doctrinal Congregation would examine and if necessary condemn books after consultation with the author. But he made no mention of the Index itself, a
list of books condemned for the most part without giving the author
a chance to defend his work or withdraw it.


23


“Cleanliness is next to Godliness.” It’s true! And it would
be great to greet each day feeling absolutely clean all over!
Therefore, everyday: give your face the good old soap and
water treatment first thing in the morning and try a daily
or every-other-day bath or shower, too, to help you keep your
head into the day all alert and really wide awake. Slip into
those clean clothes (from the skin on out, mind you), brush
and comb your clean hair and you’re all set for a brand new
day!


How’s your hair? Are you happy and at ease with your
hairdo? If not, have a styling session before your mirror.
To have that hair shine with a natural sheen, be sure to
brush 50 times in the morning and 50 times more at night to
keep those hair cells active and in top working order.
Brush one section at a time—up and away from the scalp.
Massage your scalp, too! Do this both morning and night
and always before shampooing.
Good grooming doesn’t stop at a clean face, well brushed
hair and clean smart attire! How you walk also affects the
way you appear to others. Learn to walk with short strides


(even in flats) and train yourself to stand tall, with your
stomach in, shoulders back and your chest high. Even the
most simple and inexpensive dress will look wonderful on a
girl who lets her walk tell the world that she is proud to be
herself. And in the smartest, most expensive outfit, the girl
who slumps and droops is like a girl you wouldn’t want to
get to know better.


24


In talking, be soft, gentle, and remember: to make a point,
it isn’t necessary to talk louder and faster. Watch the tone
of your voice. Never whimper. Never whine.
A smile, like the icing on the cake, does make a difference.
Add your own genuine sincere smile as the crowning touch.
And to top them all: for all the above-mentioned, apply a lot
of will power, instead of won't power!


25


Cine Aone vond deseripuof AfiNAven la la PRON
SCnGinGntenAo L G N SO VONN
THE ABOSTEE MAMAGAN L, A O. LONL DAGUO GILN


POINTERS FOR
SEPTEMBER


You know it —I sometimes teasingly refer to Cora, my
sister. Too teasingly in fact that I’ll try to make up for it
now.
Definitely, Cora is a nice girl. She works hard, too hard
that she is an honor student and I am not. At home we boys
do the pestering while she does the working. We rely on her.
“Cora, you know, there is a party. My pants are crumpled . . .” “Cora, the button sprang off . .. She is kind:
she soothes our neighbor’s baby, and what is more important—she soothes mom and dad.
Once in a while she dreams away. I don’t know about
whom. I don’t know about what. If we ask her “Cora, what
did you say?” she blushes or hits really hard. She may even
cry a little and run upstairs, slamming the door. Mother
scolds: "Leave her alone. She is a girl.” Dad is used to these
things but I feel sorry I am cruel and clumsy. The trouble
is you cannot just say “Cora, I’m sorry" or can you?
Joe and Jim and Tom come for me but they look at her.
They are lucky guys. That Cora, she is really nice. I am
looking for her in other girls but oftentimes I cannot find
her in them. I am afraid I am biased. I really feel sorry for
that.
Cora and yes, mother: these are girls!


27


liza an


Dear Danny,
It has been days and weeks since we wrote each other
fast. Anyway, those pleasant moments we spent together
with our friends have done more than letters can. I have
learned to love your company, and somehow, when I’m alone,
I long to have you with me. I feel proud of you, Danny. It’s
wonderful to be a friend to one like you.
Every time we are together, words seem to spring out of
me endlessly; I can sometimes feel "silly" to you. Danny,
forgive and forget, I’ll do better next time. I’m sorry for
what happened at Ely’s. I felt something went wrong,
though you showed no sign of annoyance. I first seemed unmindful of you, then later on I stole the show from you.
Danny, I beg you, forgive and forget.
I have been thinking over your invitation to a movie on
Sunday. It was very thoughtful of you, but I’m sorry I think
I can’t make it in the evening. Father will have visitors, and
Pll have to help at home. But I’ll be free in the morning, if
you don’t mind. I’m inviting you to attend the 8 o’clock mass
with me, and perhaps we can see a movie after mass. The
movie you suggested is surely erciting, it must be fun to see
that; but I think we can see a better one. I have a movie in
mind. You'll love it. I’d like to see it with nobody else but
you.


So long, Danny. I can say more, but I’ll have to wait for
Sunday morning. How I wish the days could roll on faster.


With love,
Liza


Dearest Liza,
Sunday seems so far away, Liza, but I’ll wait, Morning
or evening—it’s all the same to me, as long as I’m with you.
I promise you, I’ll go to church with you.
Im ever aware of the fact we’re just friends. We have
both come to learn to love each other’s company, yet you
have never given me your heart. My love burns me ever, but
hope sustains me. I know you will not fail me, but I must
deserve your love We are friends, but the word is gradually
losing its taste for me. I want to call you "Love," my Liza.
How I wish you could call me the same!
You reminded me of what happened at Ely’s place. No,
Liza, you didn’t steal the show from me But as you have
known, I'm very childish—forgive me my youth. I just felt
jealous of Lito. You enjoyed his company well, and I should
have been happy since you were happy. But it’s perhaps
human to feel that way. I felt left alone, I thought the world
was falling on my head. Forgive and forget, as you said. I
was rash. I did you wrong. Little trials like that seem only
to deepen our care for each other. I’ll do better next time.
Teach me how to love well.
Liza, fashion me according to the wisdom of your heart.
The warmth of a weman’s heart gave birth to me; the light
of a woman’s love will make a man of me.
If you have ever known the pain of a lonely heart, believe me a man can suffer more. Man’s loneliness can draw
from heaven God’s pity, for man’s loneliness is a “prayer.
If God was willing to answer the loneliness of Adam in Paradise, Liza, you who once told me you are not a "goddess,"
will you not answer my prayer? You will answer me, I know.
Pll wait in hope. Liza .. Liza.
Loving you,
Danny


How much value do you have?
A plain bar of iron is worth $5. This same bar when
made into a horseshoe is worth $10.50. If made into
needles it is worth $4,285. If turned into balance wheels
for watches it becomes worth $250,000. This is true of
another kind of material: YOU. Your value is determined by what you make of yourself.


It isn’t the colorit’s the stuff inside that makes it rise!
A little Negro boy stood watching the balloon man at
the county fair.
There were all shapes of balloons in all colors.
Suddenly a red balloon broke loose and soared high
into the air until it could scarcely be seen. So many
people were attracted by the sight that the vendor
thought it would be good business to let another go. He
let a bright yellow one slip free. Then he released a
white one.
The little Negro stood looking for a long time. Then he
asked, "Mister, if you sent the black one up, would it
go as high as the others?
The balloon man, with an understanding smile, slipped
the black one from its place and said, "Sonny, it isn’t
the color—it’s the stuff inside that makes it rise.”


30


AELP
SIVINMUNOS


Cynic: a man who looks both
ways before crossing a oneway street.
The teakettle cleared its throat
and began to whistle.
* * *
A father took his 8-year-old son to
see a performance by a famous
ballet company. During the first
number, as the beautifully costumed girls danced about on their
toes, the little fellow said to his
dad, “Why don’t they just get
some taller girls?"
* *
A Franciscan missioner traveling
through the jungle came suddenly
upon a lion. Flight was hopeless;
the missioner dropped quickly to
his knees in anxious prayer. Minutes later he was greatly comforted to note that the lion had
fallen on his knees beside him.
"Dear Brother Lion," exclaimed
the missioner in great relief. "How
good it is to see you joining me in
prayer! Only a minute ago I despaired for my life.
Quiet!" snapped the lion. "Im
saying my grace.


Knowing what you ought to know before
marriage is a salely valve to


Seek counsel from your parents and from your confessor.
Meet your sweetheart’s family for from them you can learn
much about his or her disposition.
Judge your prospective partner at home.
The length of courtship is measured not so much by days as
by opportunities to know "your" person.
General opinion puts the ideal age limit at 26 for men and
21 for the women.
Physical attraction usually brings a young man and a young
woman together but remember there has also to be suitability. The decision to make the suitability comes from the
will. All three elements have to be present for a love that
will be sufficient for marriage.
You have to be in good physical condition if you are to pass
health and vitality on to your youngsters.
Have compatibility which is nothing more than a spirit of
generosity, otherwise love will die in your home, and living
there will become a hell on earth.
Make all tests of unselfishness before marriage—not afterward.
A girl who is bubbling over with affection should never tie
herself to an unresponsive iceberg. Nor should a warmblooded young man give himself to a girl who becomes a
bundle of nerves at the least manifestation of tenderness.
There should be no air of suspicion. No secrets should he
kept from each other—except secrets of one’s conscience or
of one’s profession.
Respect for one another and self-control must be evident
from the very start of courtship, otherwise lust will be cultivated.
A husband has every right to expect intelligent and sympathetic understanding from his wife ... and she from him.
This will be impossible without some sort of intellectual
equality between them.


N
Husband and wife should have professional efficiency: he
as the breadwinner; she as a good and expert housekceper.
*
You should have a very honest discussion about money as
soon as your engagement has been agreed upon.
* Religion is the most important factor to be considered for it
cements two souls more solidly.
E:
When your wedding day comes God Himself will sanctify
your union in the sacrament of matrimony. Both of you will
obtain the right to the marital act, an equal right. For either
of you to refuse without grave and sufficient reasons the other's
reasonable request in this matter, will be an unjust violation of
the marriage contract. This great sacrament will be like an
insurance policy containing all the provisions to obviate the difficulties of your conjugal life.


APUSTLE


P. O. Box 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on
January 3, 1950


Sept., 1966
VOL IRAIV NO. 1O
EDITOR
C.I.C.M.


BUSINESS MANAGER
Rev. Fr. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:


Life ................ . . P50.00
Foreign ................ $ 3.00
One Year .............. ₱ 4.00


Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PRESS
BAGUIO
Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


a a analaig.
important As a woman, you — more
a aal.
dishonesty that threaten to undermine
the Christian standard of life. But you
can succeedonly by having anoble ideal
working toward it and defendingit puba aaa.
in schooladult you must begin now— af home and


Lord,


Look down upon your missioners,
priests, sisters and laity,
the witnesses of your word and love


all over the world.
Alleviate their worries,
guide their efforts,
comfort their hearts,
crown their labors
with spiritual blessings.


Let them not reach
for human success
or earthly goals;
but only for your victory
and the salvation of souls.


—POPE JOHN XXIII


That the Catholic Church
may be recognized by all
men today as “the pillar
and bulwark of the
truth.


That young people may
understand and participate in the missionary
work of the Church.


IN THIS ISSUE


The Missionary ..... 2
The Missionary
Brother ......... 5
The Missionary
Sister .......... 6
The Catechist ...... 8
Why I Should
Cooperate With
The Missionary. 11
Pointers for
October . . . . . . . . . 12
Photo Contest of the
Month . . . . . . . . . . 13
Mission Sunday .... 14
Pictorial ........... 16
The Result of the


Missionary Activity


in the Mt. Prov . 18
Flash-Stones-InDialogue ... .... . 22
Beauty Hints ...... 23
God’s Word Today .. 24
Bagay Ba. . . . . . . . . . 25
Danny and Liza .... 26
The Church in the
World . . . . . . . . . . 28
Keep Smiling ...... 30
A Happy Home .... 31


The Missionary


Whatever the work of the missionary, whatever the assignment given to him may be,
he must always, one hundred per cent, be at
the disposal of those entrusted to his care.
He must be everything for everyone.


According to the popular legend, a pelican is a symbol
of unselfish care and love of its young. It is said that, when
the young are suffering from hunger or cannot quench their
thirst, the pelican would not hesitate to open its breast with
its bill and give its own blood as food and drink.
This wonderful legend has made the pelican a symbolic
representation of Our Lord Jesus Christ, Who, on the cross,
shed His blood for mankind. Christ came into this world to
save men from eternal death by His bloody death on the
cross, and to give them the spiritual food and strength they
need to preserve the supernatural life of their souls.
Since the missionary is the envoy and the representative of Christ, who continues the redeeming work of Christ
on earth, he, too, can be fitly symbolized by the legendary


2


pelican.
The missionary is the personification and unconditioned love of God and love of neighbor. The missionary not
only dedicates his life to the service of God and the service
of his fellowmen, but he freely gives up a life of relative
comfort, the enjoyment of modern facilities and the use of
material property for himself. He leaves his family and
takes upon himself to new conditions of living (environment and people, climate, food, etc.). He has to acquaint himself with a new dialect and the customs and traditions of his
new home. Sometimes the missionary lives in loneliness and
isolation. Frequently he suffers poverty and deprivation.
The modern missionary has to make the sacrifice of continual study and intellectual exploring, because he must be


3


abreast of the evolution and progress in the field of study
and science and of modern techniques. The missionary has
either to travel from place to place, sometimes at the cost of
most strenuous efforts, or he has to confine himself to one
place and exert all his energy and apply all his talents, day
after day, in the fulfillment of his task.
Although the essential task of the missionary is to communicate to others the love and the goodness of Christ in
order to make them happy, we can say that in a two-fold
sense the missionary is a builder of the Church. He builds
first in a spiritual sense. He preaches the Gospel of salvation to the pagans and when they have been sufficiently
instructed in the faith, he administers the Sacrament of
Baptism. He makes them living stones in the temple of the
Church which is the Mystical Body of Christ.
He also builds in a more material sense. Often enough
he must construct the actual material edifice in which the
supreme act of Christian worship—the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass—is offered.
In many missions, however, much of charitable and
educational work must remain undone, in spite of glorious
possibilities because the available priests spend all their
time instructing the people, administering the Sacraments
and directing the building of material churches and rectories and schools. How they would welcome Brothers and Sisters to train catechists, build churches and teach the rising
generation the way of Christian truth.
4


Christ’s command to
Go and preach the Gospel to all nations" is
address ed, after the
priest, in a special way
to the Missionary Brother. He has a special mission to accomplish in
every wide field of action that ranges from
manual work to professional and intellectual
activity in laboratories,
schools, and even to more
direct cooperation with
the priest in his apostolate through catechetics
and catholic action in all
forms.
It is impossible to describe, even briefly, the
contribution made by the
Brother who is a craftsman or knows a trade.
There are builders, architects, printers, farmers, engineers, carpenters, electricians, tailors.
Sometimes a Brother
exercises several crafts
at the same time. Many
Brothers have become
experts in the use of the
new instruments of progress, and they often perform very important
services in connection
with printing, radio, ty
(where it exists) and
they take their share in
flying planes.
Missionary Brothers
are of invaluable help to
priests in their missions.


The Missionary
-rotner


The Missionary Sister


When a priest has won converts and has
achieved an elementary kind of parish organization, his first desire is to obtain the
help of Religious Sisters. And he finds them
ready to come, no matter how difficult the
region, no matter how poor the circumstances.


These are two ICM Missionary Sisters who are assigned
in one of the towns of the Mt, Province. The two sisters look
very much alike, although one is a Filipino and the other a
Belgian. They also share a common enthusiasm—love of the
natives who live deep in the interiors of this town.
They make frequent trips to the barrios to bring relief
goods to the impoverished people. They help them in their
difficulties and lend a willing ear to their problems. Best of
all, they impart religious instruction to them, and this bring
them closer to God and help them find strength and consolation in the Catholic Faith.
The trips to the interior are no pleasant jaunts—no junkets. They are rugged and rough, up and down steep and


narrow mountain trails. The sisters may begin their journey in a jeep ride, but mostly they walk. Although rugged
and rough the trips are rewarding. The people are receptive.
They eagerly listen to the catechetical instructions. They
are grateful for the spiritual, material, and medical help
the Sisters bring them.
The work of Missionary Sisters is of incalculable assistance in the spreading of the Kingdom of God. Their natural motherliness, their supernatural virtues, their character as Religious, their training in the art of teaching and
in the care of the weak and the sick—all these make them
capable of filling out the picture of charity, making it more
complete than a priest can do by himself.


7


The Catechist


The work of catechists in the long history
of the Catholic missions is an irreplaceable
help. The catechists' recruilment and their
most careful formation as being the most
important, points for the spread of the Gospel and define them as perhaps the most
classie examples of the lay apostolate.


A catechist is the legs, the lungs, the brain and the
heart of the missionary priest among the heathens. He is
the precursor and the apostle of the priest and is the Missionary as John and Peter were to Christ. He is a Missionary, minus the power of the priest, but a Missionary with
some power which a foreign priest lacks among pagans.
The catechist is trained by the priest in virtue and
knowledge of the doctrine he has to teach so as to touch the
heart and captivate the mind of the heathen. Next, he introduces the Father, then all the prejudices against the
minister of Christ disappears. Little by little the Father
may speak. They listen. But their unretentive memory soon
forgets the instruction when the Father is gone. But the
catechist remains. He repeats the words of the priest. First
he is John the Baptist, to announce the priest, then he con

8


-





tinues the work of Christ as Peter did when his Master was
gone to heaven. He gathers and instructs the catechumens,
prepares them for baptism and finally, thanks to his patience and perseverance, the catechumens can receive the
waters of baptism which make them chiidren of God.
Death accompanies the beginning of a baby’s life. But
before the first and last sleep closes its innocent eyes, the
catechist baptizes it and opens its way to heaven and eternal
happiness.
Illness brings one to the brink of eternity. The catechist
calls the priest; before death deprives the miserable sick
person of life, the catechist and the priest have assured his
pardon before God and his glorious resurrection for ever.
The recently baptized unknowingly celebrate some superstitious feast. The catechist shows them the futility of
their vain observances and informs the priest.
On the day when the missionary visits his neophytes
again, the catechist has prepared them for confession and
Communion, he presents the catechumens he instructed. He
takes care of the priest, adorns the altar, serves the Mass,
helps the Christians pray, presents the children he has instructed for the First Communion, and when the priest is
gone to some other field in God’s vineyard he repeats the
words, reminds the faithful of their duties, calls them
together on Sundays in the chapel or in the biggest house,
recites with them the rosary, gives the signal for morning
and evening prayers and... what does a good catechist
not do to double the priest’s activity, zeal and success?
Is it then any wonder that all Missionaries beg for
catechists?


10


Why I Should Cooperate
With The Missionary
The Christian faithful, members of a living organism, cannot remain shut up within themselves, nor can they believe
that it is enough to give thought and provision to their duties. Each one, instead, must for his own part contribute a
part to the increase and spread of the reign of God upon
earth.
I am a Christian. I have been regenerated by the waters
of Baptism. God could have created me a pagan or I could
have been among the millions who have never been baptized
and who will never be.
But God selected me from among the many to be baptized. And thru Baptism I received the sanctifying grace, I
became a child of God. God loves me! But as He loves me,
so does He wish to love all people.
Did not Jesus the Son of God die on the cross to save
all people, to make them all Christians? Did Jesus not shed
His blood for each living soul on earth? Who then can deseribe the desire of God to have pagans baptized? What a
pleasure it must be to Jesus to see the fruits of His passion
and death applied to a pagan soul through baptism.
I admire the missionary who says farewell to his family and all he loves on earth, to consecrate himself to the
redemption of pagans. And I, who received the benefit of
that salutary desire and the bloody sacrifice of Jesus, what
have I done till now to satisfy the heart of Jesus in its desire
for more and more souls? Can I refuse to help the missionary in his noble task? Can I refuse to try by the means I
have at hand to help the missionary to bring souls to the
cross of Calvary, to the heart of Jesus, to heavenly glory?
And if I pray for the conversion of pagans, if I offer my
alms, if I do my duties of state of life to the best of my
ability, am I not a missionary too?


11


Pointers
For October


THE MONTH OF THE MISSIONS
You know, I like missionaries—priests and brothers
and nuns. Big shots and small fry. One objection, however,
they are too humble. Or they think that to play hide and seek
is humility. I heard once that they learned this from the
monks. But they are no monks. They should take lessons
from Ford, Marlborough and the Cokes. Have something
and advertise it. Full blast! But they won’t. I know them.
There are many around here and I think, elsewhere, they
are just as good and as bad.
When we are going to fulfill our 4th centenary pledge
and send missionaries abroad, they will be the same kind of
suckers. It looks like they are ashamed of their article: The
Lord Jesus. To be honest, Jesus did not use Ford and Marlborough and Coke methods. Maybe that’s why.
Never mind. Let us proceed. We will work for the missions this month. Do you know what that means? We are
going to collect newspapers and bottles, used stamps, used
this and used that. The Lord will conquer the world on
basura.
A few years ago, we were told to respect the centavo.
I never heard about people playing mahjong for centavos
ever since, but when it comes to the missions—how we
respect the dear little centavo!


12


Contest Of The Month
This cat and mouse are engaged in a dialogue. What does
one say to the other? Send in answers — just one sentence
for each animal — not later than November 15, 1966 to
  , P.O. Box 42, Baguio City.


N.
Mission Sunday -October 23


- a day in which all Catholies are encouraged to assist the world-wide spread of
the faith in every way they can, generously
and wholeheartedly. Even the poorest among
us can be of assistance to the missions.
As St. Paul said, "Their very deep poverty
resulted in rich generosity. For they gave
according to their means — yes, and beyond
their means. The letter presented on these
pages reveals the life and needs of a missionary priest. To us, this is an indirect
appeal —an appeal for financial contributions
that would relieve him of some hardships.
Shall we remain deaf and stonchearted?


Rev. Fr. Jose Van de Zande
Catholic Mission
Cordon, Isabela
“If somebody were to ask me what is the greatest cross
for a missionary, I would answer him: the most painful
sacrifice for a missionary is that he has no home of his own.
At least that is what I experienced when I was appointed
here in Cordon, Isabela.
I spent more than two years in the beautiful place
called Bauko deep in the cool mountains of the Mt. Province.
14


There was entrusted to my young and unexperienced care a
legion of 12,000 souls scattered in a wide area, living in the
hamlets along the flanks of the mountains, in the curve of a
river and between the lines and planes of the many rice paddies. And it was with pain that I left that place so dear to
me, so alive with all remembrances of my too short a stay:
the tower I built in the barrio of Banao, where a big bomb
—a remnant of World War II—calls the Christians to our
chapel; the dormitory I made in Leseb to protect the girls
against a pagan and too early marriage; and finally the
beautiful chapel in Bagnen which I was able to construct
with the help of good and generous friends here and abroad.
Of Bauko I will remember the children and adults I baptized, the thousands of confessions I heard, the dying whom
I comforted on the brink of eternity, the young and the
old who knelt down to meet Our Lord in Holy Communion.
Yes, I will remember the tiresome trips to the barrios along
muddy trails in rain or sunshine.
And now I am in a new mission: Cordon, a town in the
warm lowlands. More people, more work, a new challenge,
a new responsibility on my young shoulders. Just imagine
24,000 souls for two priests and all these barrios around
without chapels, without regular visits from their priests.
We are also human and frail beings, we may not ask the
impossible of ourselves. You know that my health has always been weak from the time I was in the seminary. My
dream is to visit all my Christians regularly, not by keeping
myself artificially strong with vitamins, not by hiking along
the warm and stony roads, but with the help of a jeep. In
Jesus’ time there were no jeeps yet, but if ever there were
He would have said: "I was hungry and you gave me to eat;
I was thirsty and you gave me to drink; I was tired...
and you gave me a jeep; and the Kingdom of God is yours,
which is also the sincere wish for you and your friends,
from your brother in the priesthood."


15


The Appro


Souls
by the C.I.C.M. Missionary
Fathers in their priestly work
is -
the constant contact with the
people in their missions.
This requests of them a continual traveling since the
barrios are scattered in distant valleys or way up on the
mountain slopes. From the
moment of their arrival the
missionaries have been on
their apostolic travels.


17


The Result
Of The Missionary Activity
In The Mountain Province


When, in 1907, the first eight CICM missionaries arrived in the Mt. Province, they found there an almost entirely pagan population. The efforts the Spanish missionaries had exerted in the attempt to convert the various
tribes had left very few results. All they had obtained was
almost entirely erased: there were scarcely 500 Catholics
in this vast province (whose population was then estimated
to be 230,000 souls). Many districts of the province had
never been visited neither by missionaries nor government
officials.
Very soon the CICM missionaries organized the mission territory. The Fathers were assigned to the sub-province of Benguet and selected La Trinidad as the central
mission. Three missioners resided in Cervantes, one in Bontoc and one in Bauko. The following year new missionaries
arrived. From the central mission stations new places were
explored and visited. Church were built and here and there
a little school was established. In 1916, Ifugao received a
missionary, and Kiangan (where the Spaniards had been
before) became again a mission station.
In 1913, the Missionary Sisters of St. Augustine came
as a welcome help to the Mt. Province..


19


At the outbreak of the first world war there were already 10,000 Catholics in the Mt. Province missions. The
mission schools were attended by more than 500 pupils.
The Kalinga tribe had been visited by the missionaries
of the central mission of Bontoc since 1916. Lubuagan became the seat of the first resident priest. From there the
conquest of Kalinga was directed.
Kabugao became the center of the Apayao mission in
the same year. Meanwhile Baguio had become a center of
missionary activity and the summer capital of the Philippines.
In 1932, after 25 years of apostolic labor, Rome decided
to make the Mt. Province an Apostolic Prefecture. At that
time there were 23 missionaries, divided over 17 mission
stations and in charge of 11 schools. The number of Catholics had been raised to more or less 30,000.
Then came the outbreak of World War II in 1941. The
progress of the flourishing missionary work was interrupted. Now followed the darkest years in the history of the
CICM missions in the Philippines. After liberation it was
found that five CICM Fathers had been killed. In the Mt.
Province 22 churches and 20 conventos were completely
destroyed, while six churches and several conventos were
badly damaged.
With unbroken zeal and courage the work of rebuilding
was taken up. The years of World War II had been an occasion of wonderful expansion. A seminary where boys of
the Mt. Province are prepared for the priesthood had
been established. Churches, schools and barrios were now
being multiplied.
In 1948, the Mt. Province became an Apostolic Vicariate with a resident Bishop. The strenuous labors of the
pioneers came now to full bloom and multiple fruits were
harvested. Several sons of the Mt. Province were ordained
priests. A Congregation of native Sisters (The Servants of


20


the Immaculate Heart of Mary) was established. Catholic
schools and organizations were founded. Catholicism is
flourishing.
The Vicariate of the Mt. Province counts now 260,000
Catholics out of a total population of 470,000. There are 38
mission stations and parishes; 27 Catholic High Schools;
30 Catholic Elementary Schools; 1 Catholic college and 1
Catholic university. About 50 CICM missionary priests are
engaged in actual pastoral mission work, 17 secular priests
(among whom 15 are natives of the Mt. Province), and over
one hundred Missionary Sisters are engaged in various missionary, apostolic, educational and social activities in the
Vicariate of the Mt. Province.
In 59 years almost one-half of the Mt. Province has
been converted to Catholicism. We must go on!


21


To what purpose!
A few years ago, as I watched a graduation exercise, I
noticed the girl who won high honors in her class. There
was a loud applause. It seemed as though everyone admired
her. She rose gracefully and wore a proud smile as she approached the speaker. The perfect symbol of her class.
Yesterday her name stood out above all others. An article in the divorce columns. .. Although she was a perfect
scholar, she failed to be a saint.


That did it!


The soldier, bayonet fixed, eyes glaring with hatred,
rushed to kill the missionary-priest. Then Father Walsh did
a very strange thing—he smiled! Momentarily bewildered,
the soldier stopped and stared. He had expected resentment, hate, resistance. This was something new to him. He
looked intently at the priest and then boyishly began to
smile himself. Later when Father Walsh returned to his
room to gather his clothes for permanent internment he
found them all neatly packed and folded—by the soldier!
A smile had done it!


22


BERC MINIS


WALK WITH GRACE


Perhaps you have never thought that your
walk reveals you.
A woman who walks
carelessly is indeed lacking in grace, while the
woman who walks properly embodies the beauty
of motion, harmony of
poise and this reveals
both physical health and
grace.
Hold the upper part of
the body erect and balance it alternately on
each hip without undue
swaying.
When you take a step,
the weight of your body
should swing on the ball
of your foot. The strain
thus felt is shared both
by your head and the
toes.
In acquiring the proper movement, your walking will indeed be a
source of pleasure, better your health and promote a graceful carriage
and a beautiful figure.
Finally while walking
do not wear frowns on
your foreheads.


23


God’s Word Today


Miss Pamila, visiting the leper colony, noticed a Sister
dressing a leper’s sores. The sight both nauseated and impressed her. Turning to the nun, she exclaimed: "How can
you do that, Sister? I wouldn’t do it for a thousand dollars.
“Well, well, I wouldn’t do it for ten thousand!” Sister
replied calmly. Then holding out the crucifix of her rosary,
she added: “But I would do it for Him."
It is interesting to see what most of us will do
once we have our vision clear. When we have
seen our eternal destiny as our life’s objective, sacrifice for this objective becomes
comparatively easy. And the burden is not
heavy — loving others for the love of God.
The “Truly I say to you, as you did it to one of the least
Lord of these my brethren, you did it to me and as you did
says: it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to
me."


24


Matt. 24, 40 & 45


Bishop Sheen received a check for $150,000 for the missions.
The donor turned out to be a 21-year-old. She told him, “I
have just become a convert. In gratitude for the gift of
faith I wanted to give away my inheritance, so that people
in the rest of the world would have the same blessings I
have."
It is good that the faithful should support
within the limits of their possibilities their
churches, their institutions and the clergy
who have given themselves entirely to them.
It does not matter if this contribution cannot
be considerable; the important thing is that
it is the concrete testimony of a living Christian conscience.
Paul
“There are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit;
and there are varieties of service but the same Lord;
and there are varieties of working, but it is the
narsame God who inspires them all in every one. To
rates: each is given the manifestation of the Spirit for the
common good."
1 Corinthians 12, 4-7


Dear Liza,
Last Sunday’s movie was a prize, Liza. You do have exquisite taste for movies. And the story—it was wonderful,-
and I enjoyed every bit of it. And yet I believe you were the
light of it, the beauty and the life of it. Each time I held your
hands in mine, I knew you understood me, and I saw your
smile glow tenderly in the soft darkness. You may think
there was something wrong with my eyes! Probably not, Liza.
but there is something the matter with my heart. The heroine
was charming, wasu’t she? Her smile always reminded me of
you, Liza.
You caught me more than once looking at you when I
should be looking at the screen, but can I help it? There are
times when I tell myself I can spend eternity looking at your
lovely face (but I fear you're going to tell me I’m telling lies
again). Each time I look into your eyes, I feel both happy and
sad. For the mystery that lies deep in those dark eyes puzzles
me. What’s behind the lovely "brilliance" of those dark eyes?
I don't know, and I suffer the pain of ignorance and fear.
Liza, I don’t doubt you, but I can’t understand the meaning
of your looks. Your eyes, how eloquently they speak, yet I
can't understand their language. Teach me.
Something more bothers me. Do tell me, Liza, if I did
anything wrong. The morning had been unusually fine, and
me were enjoying the pleasure of each other’s company. But
why was there so sudden a silence? Your usual cheer left
you, and though I couldn’t find a trace of trouble on your
face, yet I “heard" your silence, and what wrong could I have
done to offend you? Please tell me, and I'll be sorry for it.
I'll not do it again. I know you will forgive me. Im a child at
heart, and I’m clumsy in manners. I will love you everlastingly.


Lovingly sincere.
Danny


and Miza


Dear Danny.
Don't worry yourself to death. Danny, thinking about me.
Isn’t it enough that you know I think of you all the time, and
that I nerer think ill of you? Of course I know the impatience
of lovers, but have a little more faith, and your love will be
more perfect. Of course it’s friendship, nothing more, that’s
between us: but Ill tell you a thing: when you begin to feel
true love, then will start the trials of love. And those tests
you must pass before you can say "I love."
Danny, the movie was enjoyable, indeed. And I agree
with you that the heroine was very lovable, But I didn't want
the hero. Ile was gallant, yes, and very smart; but that isn't
the man my heart can beat for. I can’t exactly tell you what
I didn’t like in him, but there was "something" that told me
Ididnu like him. The story itself—was it artistic!—and superb
art. I think Tre told you this that time, but I like telling you
again. I can't tre telling you my little joys. Danny. Share
them with me. The little blessed joys of friends multiply
twice cach time they are shared. Don't you think so?
I knew what you meant when yon took my hands, and
looked into my eyes. But must I tell you what I wanted to
say? O Danny, "your questioning eyes are sad: they seck to
know my meaning as the moon would fathom the sea!
Poetic, isn't it? But they aren't mine. I picked them up somewhere.
Don't you worry now about the silence you “heard." Fil
always forgive. But may I know who that pretty lady was
with whom you talked at the sidewalk? I must tell you frankly I didn't feel good at the moment I have no right to question you this way, but if only to ease the heart, tell me, and
Ill understand. I’m perhaps too humanly weak: I’ll yet have
to learn to be strong, and to be worthu of your friendship
ererlastingly.


Very sincerely.
Liza


At the first summer school for missionaries held here by the
Mission Secretariat, Fr. H. Van Pixteren, Mill Hill Father who was for
many years a missionary among the Masai tribe in Kenya, proposed
that missionary congregations and institutes should establish “labour
exchanges," for lay missionaries. They should also be asked to open
their doors to the laity, men and women, for training to work side by
side with the priests, Brothers, and Sisters in the mission fields, he
said.
Owing to the shortage of religious vocations, it is necessary to
bring the laity into the Church’s missionary work. The Council Decree
on Missionary Effort called for the work in that sphere of lay men
and women, married or single.
"We should be the first to promote this form of missionary life,"
he went on, "for missionary institutes to accept short or long term
lay missionaries, the constitutions would have to be adapted. We
should accept this as a way in which the Spirit of God is moving in
the Church.
"Lay missionaries would be very, very useful in the missions as
assistants to us. Lay people could give new life to our institutes.”
These lay missionaries would not take vows, but would undertake
to work under the superior. Service could be for a short period, or for
life. The institutes would undertake to care for lay missionaries auring
sickness.


28


Many of the laity are willing to serve, but do not know where to
go and what to do.


Fr. Mare Oraison, a French priest-psychiatrist who has written-a
number of books on sex and psychoanalysis, has been notified by his
bishop that he will not receive an Imprimatur for future publications.
This was stated in a communique by the national office of public
information here. It was confirmed that the refusal came from Cardinal Richaud of Bordeaux, Fr. Oraison’s ordinary.
It is also reported that the French hierarchy had been informed
that the Doctrinal Congregation at the Vatican, after “various reminders and warnings, to Fr. Oraison, has decided to ask the French
bishops not to allow him to speak on matters of moral theology in
ecclesiastical circles.
Fr. Oraison, a practising physician before ordination, first published his views on sexuality in his doctoral dissertation, Christian Life
and Problems of Seruality. It was reported to have been placed on the
now inactive Index of Forbidden Books some two years after publication.
Fr. Oraison’s other books, all on psychiatric or sexual subjecis.
have had large public sales but have been viewed with suspicion by
some Church authorities.


Legion of Mary members in rural areas here have launched a new
apostolate to the members of the itinerant tinker camps in the arca.
(Tinkers are nomads, living a gypsy-like life.)
The Legionaries are living in a four-bed caravan, during their
attempt to integrate the tinkers into the ordinary life of the area.
Members of the camps are invited to settle in permanent homes, their
children are given good clothes and are encouraged to play with local
youngsters and Church and civil facilities are extended to the tinkers.
The project, designed to extend the benefits of health and religion
to the tinkers, is part of a vast social service programme organized by
Bishop Peter Birch of Ossory.


20


KEEP


SMILING


"David, darling, mother asked
her little boy "Why are you making faces at that bulldog?
Well," replied the toddler defensively, “he started it!"


See you later!


Safo!


Take the flashlight, You'll need it!


A Happy Home
Every profession needs preparation. So do
successful marriagc. Here are a Iew quest
vou should try to answer carelully and hone
They will help to show whether or not yo
prepared for this state of life.


Have you been sure for six months or more that you
1.
have found the right partner?
2. Are you proud of your chosen partner—eager to introduce him to family and friends?
3. Do you feel free to tell him your opinions and feelings?
4. Do yon often volunteer to give up something you enjoy
in order to do something he enjoys more?
5. Do you share his interests and enjoy his activities?


31


6. Have both of you established a pleasant relation with
your future in-laws, even if you find them bores?
7. Are you able to make your salary or allowance last
until pay day?
8. Do you know how your body is constructed for childbearing?
9. Are you ready to give more than you get?
10. Are both you and your partner equally eager for children?
If you have answered "yes" to all of the preceding questions,
it would seem that you are really prepared for marriage.


P. O. Box 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on


January 3, 1950


Oct., 1966


Vol. XXXVI NO. 1


EDITOR
C.I.C.M.
BUSINESS MANAGER
Rev. Fr. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:
Life ............... . .. P50.00
Foreign ................ $ 3.00
One Year .............. ₱ 4.00
Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PREss
BAGUIO
Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


32


NOSY!'!
Contest of the month of July
Give a one-word description of the puppy in the photo.


winner ANONYMOUS


Ghe APOSTLE



N
PE
N
1.



IN THIS ISSUE
Eternal Rest Give
Unto Them, O
Lord ...........
Introduction to
Devotions ...... 3
Perpetual Novena.. 4
Riding on One’s
knees to the front
of the Church ...


Procession ....... 7
Pointers for
8
November.
Contest of the
9
Month ......
Flash-Stones-In10
Dialogue .....
God’s Word Today.. 12
Bagay Ba? ........ 13
Keep Smiling ..... 14
Pictorial .......... 15
To The Missions! .. 19
The Church in the
World .......... 24
Danny and Liza ... 26
Beauty Hints ...... 28
A Happy Home .... 29


ETERNAL REST GIVE UNTO THEM, O LORD
Remember. O Lord. Thy servants and handmaids, who
have gone before us with the sign of faith, and sleep of peace."
Yovember is set aside by the Church as the particular
month for the deceased faithful, when the Church Living should
make special sacrifices and redouble its offerings in behalf of
the departed souls to speed their passage through Purgatory and
help them join in Ilcaven with the Church Triumphant.
We are the Church Living. Ne must help the Church Suffering. the souls in Purgator..


Very many people will go to the cemetery on November I.
People don’t forget their deceased beloved ones... al Icast not
on November 1.
But what does it mean to people not to forget the dead?
Do they truly believe in the reality of the Church Suffering: in
the real relation and communication between the Church Living
and the Church Suffering? llow many people nill pray for their
deceased relatives and friends while visiting the cemetery? Do
we exaggerate when we say that more than half of the people will
not pray? There will be piles of flowers, a forest of candles, a
glamor of colors, a store of food and drinks and cigarettes (to be
placed on lombs) and, at night, a fairv-like clectrical illumination. All these will express the affection and love of the living
lowards their deceased.
Except the many superstitious practices, there is nothing
wrong in this outward manifestations of affection and love.
But, dear readers, if this is the only thing we do for our
deceased. do you think that they are veri much pleased with i1?
Answer this for yourselves: what can a soul in Purgatory do with
flowers, candles, lights and decorations? I all these are not
accompanied by prayers, they are mere expressions of sympathy,"
but no help at all!
It is good bul really not sufficient to let the priest sing or
pray a "responso” for your beloved deceased; Tor if you don't
join and participate in the prayers, yon negleei your duty of personal help lowards the Souls in Purgatory.
The best means to help effectively the Souls in Purgatory
is to offer a Holy Mass for their delivery. Iloly Mass is the most
perfect and most powerful prayer. When you attend lloly Wass.
you participate in prayer, because the priest is only your representative; you do actually offer with the priest.
The Souls in Purgatory wants you to offer a lloly Mass for
them! By doing this, you will express in the most effective way
your love and your affection for them!
Don't forget: our purpose in helping the Souls in Purgatory
is to make their names added as soon as possible to the list of
All Saints!


2


Filipinos, like other Orientals, due to their temperament, tradition, upbringing and atmosphere, are expressive of their faith and
trust in the Lord. They manifest their faith outwardly by means
of religious practices and devotions.
The Perpctual Novena, Processions, Riding on one’s knces to
the front of the church, among many other devotions and religious
practices, have been coldly criticized by "outsiders” nol realizing that there is great beauty in them.
On the following pages, a critique is made on each of the three
and some suggestions are given to make the faithful realize the
full value and the true purpose in engaging in these.


1
PBRIBRCAN 
AN


A thousand faithful flock to the churches on Nednesdays to participate in this popular devotion to Our
Lady. Countless resort to spiritual aid — asking with
great confidence the help of Our Lord through the
intencession of Our Lady — when all human needs
fail. This begging — asking this and asking that —
has been coldly criticized. “Qutsiders say pcople
are too much attached materially so much so that
when they miss one novena they are seared nol to gel
what they want. But there is beauty in asking: is this
not an external manifestation of our dependence on
God?
There might be some superstitions attached to
this bul if this devotion is the only means of contact
with Our Lord, should we condemn the simplivity of
these people in expressing their laith? Ne may attribute such mentality of these devotees to ignorance.
therefore should they not be helped rather than condemned? Say. lor instance, during the novena when
so many people are together, should not instructions
on the AB('s of our faith be given? Should not the
real purpose of the novena be explained so people
would come to realize that in asking they have also
to ask: "Lord, what can I do in return?”
Wany find strength and courage after atiending a
novena for how many cling to Her in moments ol sorrow and despair? But sad to say — people living sinful lives use this devotion merely as a farce They
think they can be saved by this without bothering to
change or amend their sinful lives.


4


AACANG ON ONES ANBED


This is a penance which is an
act of humiliation, moral as well
as physical. But penance may
not only be the intention in doing
this. Many do this to honor the
suffering of Our Lord In Ilis Passion and to have share in His
suffering. Others do it as an act
of thanksgiving because they
have come back to Our Lord. It
can also be an act of atonement.
Fanatics regard this as their
only means and hope of salvation. Some ignorant people — who
deserve no condemnation but
instruction — substitute this for
the Holy Mass. Others use this
to bribe Our Lord: "See Lord, I
am doing this penance, therefore .....
This practice is regarded as
disturbing. To “outsiders” or
foreigners, yes. But to people
who are accustomed to seeing it,
not at all. Some persons suggest
that instead of doing this kind of
penance, why not substitute it
for some other acts of penance
that concern more the human
needs; some acts of charity. This
practice can be upgraded but
a mentality long imbibed and a
practice long done by people for
many a year cannot be changed
just with a snap of a finger.


This is a public profession of our faith; a
part of our Christian life. The faithful who join
in this cannot but have the feeling of strength,
solidarity and unity with the people who have
the same faith. However, there is a great danger
that this is purely a public manifestation without
inner intention. It should be an exercise of piety
but very often it just turns out to be a show-off.
Many think they have fulfilled what is asked of
them or covered up their sins because they have
walked this or that number of kilometers. People
who join the procession should have the right
attitude and disposition. They should have a liltle
examination of conscience before participating:
Do people see Christ in me, in my way of living?
Is my life in accordance with His Laws; in accordance to the life of a follower of Chrisi?


7


IVR NOERONA


Iam proud of it, bul I prefer comics to books, novels to
references, science fiction to religious books. That doesn't mean

that I am not in. In Tact I have a religious book or iwo and
some pamphlets. I didn’t read them completely bul I have them
on my bookrack, somewhat like our family bible — cherished but
unread. Sometimes I read a little thing. You can’t escape it.
Those religion assignments send you running to the library or
-1
the bookstore. Research! "Don’t you have the edition of 196.?
Printers should burn a candle for the Council.
Sometimes I pity lola and even my mother, and all those
people who cross themselves with vinegar in thunderstorms; who
attend mass in blue, brown or green flavored with strings and
ribbons.
I don't go for these things, but please don't ask me to take
a stroll in the cemetery at 12:00 p.m. On November 1 and 2 - all
right. Join the fun. Bul no more of this on November 3 and 4!
Sister Ann of religion is a cute little nun. ‘Windous open.
she says. The windows of the Church she means. "“Let us drop
a good deal of our novenas and medals. Ne have to fight injustice
and discrimination and humbly meet our 'separated brethren' and
turn together to the Lord."
What a fighter! She would be all right on a cemetery at
midnight; the spirits are no maich for her. She is righi I think.
After having dropped a few novenas and medals. I hope she'll
drop a few of her names — our Sor Anna Maria Esperanza de la
Purisima Concepcion: Sister Ann.


8


COVTIEST OF THE MONTH
What’s baby Dolly screaming in this state of delirious joy? Send
in entries not later than November 30, 1966 to   
MAGAZINE. P.O. Box 42. Baguio City.


If you will!


A 17-year-old applied for a summer job with a road construction
gang. lle was rather slightly buili, and the boss eved him critically. "Afraid vou won't do, son, he said. “This is heavy
work, and you can’t keep up with heavier, older men.” The youngster glanced at the crew leaning on their shovels. "PerhapsI
can't do as much as these men can do," he replied, "but I certainly can do as much as they will do.” Ile got the job.


Curry good examples to millions
In a small California town a young Negro. studving to he
a leacher, took a parl-time job at a filling station to help suppori
himself and his wife until he got a degrec. But some nen enstomers objected. They wanted to buy gasoline only from white
men. The owner was about to discharge the bos when a housewife asked him "How many customers nill you lose il yon stand
2
by this fellow?
“About 18. Maybe 20.”
“IIget you new customers will you kecp on?
“You bet I will.”
Not only did this woman bring 20 new customers, bul five
more for good measure. The young man kepl his job. Several
magazines praised this housewife for what she did.


10


Winning one-word
description of the bird.


winner
Renato Astudillo
10 Malvar St., Trancoville
Baguio City
11


God’s Word Today
"


Some years ago, the mother of a large family died. Upon the frail
shoulders of the oldest girl, not yet 17, fell the burden for the
family. Vithout a word she took over the houschold chores, kept
the children clean, well-fed, and in school. One day, when a
friend stopped by and complimented her on her achievement, she
replied: "I can’t take credit for something I have to do.” “But
my dear, you don’t have to. You could get out of it.” The girl
hesitated, and then said: “Yes, that’s true. But what about the

"have to’ that’s inside me?
Too few realize that the true joy of living
comes from living by conscience, even when
it means serving others at great sacrifice.
John "Let as not love in word or speech but in deed and in
says: truth. By this we shall know that we are of the truth, and
reassure our hearts before him whenever our hearts condemn us; for God is greater than our hearts, and he
knows everything.
1 John 3. 18-20


12


Gas, seeping from a big oil refinery near Mexico City, snuffed
out the lives of over 20 workers. The unusual thing about this
case was that the men were not overcome while working. The
fumes did their deadly work while the men were slecping in their
home in and around the refinery area.
Millions today are being spiritually poisoned
by the deadly fumes of godlessness. They
creep up on them in a variety of ways. One of
the best ways for you to protect yourself
against this poison is to strive in a positive
way, to bring the “fresh air” of truth to the
multitudes.
John “For many deceivers have gone out into the world, men
says: who will not acknowledge the coming of Jesus Christ.
Look to yourselves, that you may not lose what you have
worked for, but may win a full reward."


3 John. 7-8


KEEP SMILING


“Brethren, make no mistake about those who have gone to
their resl: you are nol to lament over them, as the rest of
the world does, with no hope to live by. Ne believe, after
all, that Jesus underwent death and rose again: just so.
when Jesus comes back. God will bring back those who
have found rest through Ilim.
(Thes. 1. 13-10n


Rev. H. David. 76
Died: Sepi. 10. 1900


NOPSMDER P


On this day we remember in a
special way the deceased CICM
Pathers. These deparied souls
who have taken up their abode in
heaven are not to be bewailed for
they are infinitely happy and are
waiting for us. They should be
remembered, prayed for and
prayed to.


Rev. Jose Bill
Died: Aug. 12


Rev. G. Vromant, 87
Died: July 12, 1966


Rev. Alberto Billiet, 56
Died: Oct. 14, 1964


Rev. Alois Proost, 71
Died: May 6, 1965


The Adventurous and Drumatie Journey
of the First C.J.C.Y. Vissionaries


It happened in 1865. There were only six
members in the Congregation of the Immaculate
Heart of Mary. Four of them left their humble
headquarters at Scheut, Brussels for China — Tor
the missions.
Among them was Fr. Theophilus Verbist, the
founder of the young Mission Society. Hlis cotravellers were Fathers Aloysius van Segvelt.
Francis Vranckx and Ferdinand Hamer. Paul
Splingard, a young layman, had volunteered to
accompany the missionaries and to serve them
in China.
The journey to their first mission station.
Siwanize, in Norih China, lasted three-and-ahalf months.
When they reached Shanghai a Christian merchant, a certain Francis Chang of Siwantze, offered his services to guide them to their mission.
The long sea voyage ended in Takou, the
harbor of Tientsin. We describe now a part of the
journey Trom Takou to Peking.


19


Our missionaries have arrived at Takou. They are waiting
in the street for their transportation. They want to proceed as
soon as possible to Tientsin and from there to Peking. They
hope to reach Siwantze on December 7. Still nearing their European clothes, they will have their Chinese costumes made in
Peking.
Many Chinese are gaping at those tall, husky forcigners.
They giggle and whisper and enjoy the strange reactions of those
queer western men. The number of onlookers steadily increases.
and before long, the travellers are completely surrounded by the
curious crowd.
Suddenly Fr. Hamer jumps to his feet and yells: “There
they are!” Indeed! The tilt-caris appear in the distanee. The
famous, or rather ill-famed Chinese tilt-carts! They are linle
two-wheeled carts without a seat, covered with a till. They are
just big enough to accommodate one (Chinese) person. Cach vehicle is pulled by two mules. The drivers warmly cladded in fur
clothes and with faces weathered by rain and wind, by sun and
frost, walk beside the mules. Their black hands clasp the reins
and the whips with which they drive the teams in exacily the
same fashion as during the past dynasties.
The travellers are fortunate to have their beddings with
them. Francis helps them to spread their thin maltresses over
the bottom of the cart and shows them the "most comfortable"
way of sitting down: the legs crossed underneath the body! They
wrap themselves in their blankets and try the physical exereise.


20


Everything is ready forthe
trip. There they go. The
small caravan gets moving.
The missionaries become
familiar with the roads of
Northern China. They had
been told that the Chinese
till-cart is an instrument of
torture rather than a means
of transportalion. It had
been told to them in a joking tone however so that
they had not taken it too
seriousli. But now those
caris were moving on Northern Chinese roads! The
long, endless road to Tientsin resembles more an ambuscade rather than a road.
There aremany treacherous
pools and puddles in it: it
is intersected with deep
furrows and strewn with
stones. According to Fr.
Hamer the road is onc
thousand per cenl worse
than the worst short-cut in
his hometown. Fr. Ilamer
and Paul Splingard, the
youngest and most supple
of the group, suffer the
least of this torturing discomfort, Fr. Ilamer manages
to assume the tvpical Chinese sitting position. He
compares himself to a
prince or rather a Chinese
mandarin on his throne.
Paul finds it pleasant in the
beginning; he giggles and


FR. TH. VERBIST


FR. AL. VAN SEGVELT
21


laughs, llowever, the three others who are no longer in their
fresh youth have a hard time. When they risk to neglect their
alertness for a moment and draw away their anxious looks from
the road, ajolt makes their poor heads bump the frame of the tilt.
Fr. van Segvelt cannot stand it even for one mule. Ile
jumps out of the cart and prelers to walk. Bul to walk on such n
road is no joke cither! lt is a job for an acrobal. Mter an hour
of jumping and stumbling, he resumes his place under the tili
and tries to be resigned, Ile attempis to make a historical meditation on the invention of the wheel, on the Egoptian chariots.
the Roman racing teams, the Celtie and Frankish bullock-emris.
and finally on the romantic stagecoaches. Those visions do nol
last very long, however. They are being shaken up and torn asunder until he does not want to think anymore: until he cannol
think any longer.
The supcrior. Fr. Verbist, "sits” in the fourth cart, Hle
suHfers the most of them all. Remember that he is a man of six
feet and iwo inches! Ilis long legs are too long for this too short
and Too narron cart! Every five minutes he changes posilion to
tre to find a little more comfortable one, pulling himself up with
both hands at the frame bars.
The drivers seem not to notice anything musual. They
disregard all moaning and sighing; they do not mind anything or
anybody. They shoul and stir up their old mules, using continually the whip which too often comes down on the poor old backs.
This shouting and whipping makes the travellers nervous.


22


Fr. Verbist, however, has
gone through a great deal
of pain in the course of the
past years. lle does not
allow these new pains to
discourage him. He has
learned from childhood never to complain. lle offers
the discomfort as a sacrifice for the success of
their mission work.
Fr. Vranckx is counting
the jolts. lle discovers
that there is approximately
one jolt per second. He
knows that the only remedy
against unavoidable evils
is to wail patiently until all
is over. And thus he tries
to be patient.
Paul Splingard does not
make fun any longer! The
same joke may not last long
lest it becomes boring.
I is five o'clock in the
afternoon. Their stomachs
are empty: they did not take
any food since seven this
morning! It is with a heavy
sigh of relief that they notice a little inn along the
road. Stop! On the outside
wall is painted in western
letters: Ilotel de France.
They alight from their vehicles and stretch their
stiff and tortured limbs with
complaceney. “Come in.
(Continuodn


FR. F. HAMER


23


The Russian Orthodox Church in the Soviet Union is a captive
Church; it is a captive of the Communist government. The open letter
of the two priests, Father Nikolai Eshliman and Father Gleb Yakunin,
is the voice of the entire captive Church.
"At this time in the Russian Church,” the two priests said, “there
are some bishops and priests who knowingly help in this iniquity.
There are those who are known for diligently covering up the closing
of Orthodox churches, those who honour any order of local authorities
more than the words of the Gospel and the Church canons; those who
excommunicate children from the Holy Sacrament, those who abuse
the sanctity of the holy things, those who used to sell out their brothers, those who, having lost all fear of God, help the anti-religious
workers to destroy the Holy Church.”
The Russian Orthodox Church in the U.S.S.R. does not consist
merely of the bishops and the clergy; it also includes the entire body
of the faithful. At present there are at least 50 million “Orthodox
faithful” who defend the right of the Church to exist.
The faithful are those persons who receive Communion, those
little children who are brought by their parents to the baptismal font,
those persons whom the Church accompanies to the grave, those who
stand in complete awe in the temple of God.
Without these Orthodox faithful (a term used by the Soviet
press) who oppose the Communist regime, neither the hierarchy nor
the clergy would have been able to defend the existence of Church life
in the Soviel Union.


24


“The life of a priest in Poland is hard, but our aged confreres,
prevented by illness and weakness from exercising their office, suffer
most under our present political and economic conditions. They are
truly bearers of the cross.
These words spoken by a Polish priest, indicate the situation in
which retired priests find themselves. Deprived of the subsistence
assured by their parishioners while they were active, retired priests'
financial security is negligible.
Church law on the support of aged priests is followed as well as
possible by bishops, but the huge taxes imposed on the priests’ pension funds make it impossible for the fund to provide adequately for
priests.
Despite difficulties, the bishops and Catholics in general have
tried to alleviate the sufferings of retired priests. The bishops have
diverted some funds from other sources, and have called on the Polish
people to help inactive priests.
Such efforts do little to solve the basic problem of excessive taxation. Unfortunately the government shows no willingness to change
the laws.


Bishop del Pino Gomez of Lerida has made a public new diocesan
decision to give Church-owned lands to the share-croppers who have
worked in it since 1936.
The decision followed a bitter controversy between four Lerida
priests and the bishop. In an open letter published in local newspapers,
the priests criticized the sale as “contrary to the spirit of the Second
Vatican Council.” They also pointed out that the land was originally
donated to the Church, centuries ago, as a stipend for Masses to be
said for the former owners. Since the income from the land amounts
to about USs12,000 a year, the priests, with irrelevant bitterness, called
the Masses “the most expensive in Spain.
Having received permission from the Holy See to sell the land,
the bishop announced that it would be ceded to the workers. At the
same time, the chancery office criticized the four priests for having
"sown discord among the clergy and people, and for having caused
confusion in the souls of many."


25


My dear Heart.
Liza, if you could understand a little more; feel what it is
that fills my heart with pain, you would be more kind. I got
myself to meet you last time, and I wanted to say many things,
but when I was with you, I was dumb. All these many months,
since we first met, I’ve suffered—because of you. I’m ready to
believe that love cannot remain crucified too long, without
an answer. I’ll love you forever, even if you choose not to
have me forever. Don't misunderstand me. My words are
strong, but they are not meant to be unkind. I just want to
be frank. Liza, I love you more than ever; but if I’m not
worthy of you, and I must look for other loves, dismiss me.
I can’t endure any longer the murdering pain you have put
me in: almost eternal suspense. Yet, should you deny me,
how shall I bear it?
The lady we met on the sidewalk was Ellen. I should have
introduced her to you; I’m sorry I didn't. I was just forgetful.
She was my childhood playmate, but she is no closer to me
than an ordinary acquaintance.
Liza, once again, let me speak my heart out. You’ve seen
my dejection slowly settle upon me like a black cloud; but
Ive pretended all was right. Yet how can I laugh longer when
the heart is low and the spirit damp. That is why the last time
we met, I couldn’t say anuthing; I couldn’t stay a second
longer, I wanted to tell you all these which I’m now pouring
on paper, but I felt it safer to have things written. Pardon
everything. Night and day I’m upset. I can’t think clearly, nor
kindly.
I'll love purely. God grant peace and serenity to my love.
May He grant me your heart, too. I know there is no other
test of true love except pain and sacrifice. But must lovers
will to make each other suffer thus?


Lovingly,
Danny


ano Miza


Dear Danny,
I took well the message of your last letter. And there
should be nothing to worry about. I love you, Danny. And
even if you should one day choose to find other loves, perhaps
Pll find no other like you. But a lady’s love, though strong
and fair, is nonetheless delicately tender. It needs a man’s
strong arms to protect it from harm; it needs a man’s pure
heart to keep it warm. Keep my love; it is yours. And if I was
slow, it was not because I hesitated to love you; I just wanted
to be prudent. (And yet, you remain free if one day you
should change your mind.)
I couldn’t have known what pain was hurting you so
much if you hadn’t told me. I was much puzzled by your unusual silence the last time we met. I felt there was something
gravely wrong. But you managed to be polite, nevertheless.
And yet I was so dull-witted not to have imagined what the
matter was. But Danny, you will not love me less for having
given you my love late.
A woman’s heart has numberless tales to tell, a woman’s
heart has strange ways of knowing what men can only dream
of. A woman’s heart may be weaker (perhaps), and yet it
is more tenderly sensitive even to the strange palpitations of
future time: I do not fear you, but I fear for us—we have to
grow up into the light of true and immortal love. Youth is
changeable, and has a thousand fancies, I fear. That is why I
asked you to give enough time to test our DREAM; find out if
it may not end in a nightmare. God forbid.
Time is brief. May every moment to come—for you and
me—be pure as light, and strong as the eternal hills that
heave their clean breasts into the arms of the sun!
Forever,
Liza


Beauty Aids not sold
at the beauty counter
SLEEP — an ample amount of sleep (at least cight hours a night)
is nature's best way of resting your mind and body. It will not
only put a sparkle in your eyes, but also will do more than any
make-up or cream can ever do to remove the dark circles. And,
oh, what it will do to help you have the cheerful disposition
that in itself is priceless beauty.


KATER — you should drink cight glasses of it everyday. The
reward will be found in a much brighter, clearer complexion.


FRESII AIR - 1’s free, really freel Chances are it has been
so long since you have seen evidence of your own natural color
that you have reuson to believe it is no longer red. A nice brisk
walk accompanied by good deep breathing will convince you "y


28


“Do you think you are mature enough to carry
the responsibilities of marriage?” The grace of
God. carned by a humble self-examination, good
motivation and earnest prayer, can always work
miracles in developing character in individuals.
For the sake of those who would like to benefit
by such miracles, we here present ten signs of
adult immaturity, ten signs that an adult has not
yet merged from the uninhibited ouilooks and
habils of a poorly trained child. Not all these
signs need be simultancously present to prove
that a person is immature. The presence of iwo
or three of those listed and described is evidence
that one is still living by the principles and
standards of an unreformed child. Look lor evidence of these signs in yourself and know what
you have to do to grow up.


TEN TESTS OF MATURITY IN MARRIAGE


1. Inability to compromise
The childish husband or wife refuses to make compromises.
You'll do it my way or it won’t be done at all." "If you won't go
where I want to go, we won't go out at all." “There is nothing to be
discussed: the matter is settled; my will must prevail."
Of course there are occasions when no compromise is lawful but
there are hundreds of other occasions in marriage when compromise
is the only way of peace, and the only real proof of love.
20


2. Cruelty, either physical
or mental
One of the clearest signs
of maturity, of having grown
up, is that a person has
acquired a very delicate and
carnest desirc never to give
pain to others without a good
reason. It is not cruelty even
to correct one’s friends and
best loved ones, even though
this causes hurt, as long as it
is done in a kindly manner
and with a desire for the
person’s good. Any husband
who ever strikes his wife is
guilty of cruelty. Any husband who deprives his wife
of necessities, whether for
personal use or for the home
she manages or for the children she loves, is guilty of
physical cruelty. A husband
who contradicts his wife’s
statements in the presence of
others, who disparages her
looks, or her clothes, or her
abilities in any line, who seriously neglects his wife for
the tavern or any private
hobby of his own, is guilty of
cruelty and is the equivalent
of a child.
3. Self-pity defended
Growing up means learning to save pity for others in
distress, not wasting it in
concentration on one’s own
causes for sorrow. It means
learning to hide one’s periods


of depression from others; manfully accepting tough jobs, unfortunate
setbacks, injustices and hurts from others.
4. Compulsive revenge-taking
The long, aggrieved silence, the refusal to show interest in matters
that ordinarily are of great concern, withholding the priviliges of marriage, dredging up past grievances to thrash them out again—all these
are ways of taking childish revenge for some real or fancied slight that
has been received.
5. Readiness with lies of excuse and self-defense
Some adults have never got over the childish trick of lying to
evade blame. The husband who lies to his wife to cover up improper
conduct or neglect of his duties as a husband and father is still the
little boy who stole the cookies, telling his mother he never went near
the pantry.
Wives may also manifest immaturity by resorting to lies. A splitting headache can be alleged to cover up sloth and laziness in keeping
up with essential household tasks. Many other half-truths and fabrications can be used to avoid the fulfillment of wifely duties.
6. Violent quarrelling
This mark of undisciplined childhood usually gets worse instead
of better in one’s adult years. When two immature adults get married,
the results are usually frightful. When a difference arises between
them, they use profanity, curses, obscure language; they throw things
and break things; they lose even all human respect and shout so loudly
at each other that the whole neighborhood can hear them. The question
that comes to mind in such cases is this: "How did such a child get
married?"
7. Lack of a sense of responsibility
A husband whose golf, whose bowling, whose drinking, whose
cronies, whose personal hobbies are far more important than his wife
and children, even though his wife is vastly overburdened by having
to care for the home and the children alone, lacks this sense of responsibility.
The wife who says she “hates work" and hates children and tries
to escape having children, even though she contracted to raise a family when she chose to get married is guilty of the same.
8. Misuse of authority
Immature husbands are especially prone to bullying their wives
and children. They do have authority as head of the family, but they
use their authority not in a reasonable, loving way, but as a means of
forcing others to serve their comfort, to do their will, to pay tribute
to their personal selfish wishes and desires.


9. Scorn for religious motivation
Speaking contemptuously of priests and the advice they give to
the married; running down religion as purely a money-making racket,
refusing with a snort to read anything that might focus the eyes on
one’s faults and inspire the beginnings of repentance, sneering at the
partner for his/her religious activities. In his heart he knows he is all
wrong, but childish defense mechanisms make him run down everything that is good.
10. Dependence on feelings alone
The immature adult has never learned at least to hide, if not to
smother, feelings of antipathy, bitterness, self-pity, sensitiveness, vindictiveness and anger. We say that such persons have to be “babied,"
otherwise they will explode in one way or another. That is simply
saying that those around them must treat them as children, infant
children at that, because that is what they are.


P.O. Box 42, BAGUIO, Philippines
Entered as second class mail matter at
the Baguio City Post Office on
January 3, 1950


Vol XXXVI No. 2


Nov., 1966


EDITOR
C.I.C.M FATHERS
MANAGING EDITOR
MISs ROSALIA S. GALIMBA
BUSINESS MANAGER
REv. Fr. JAMES LEYSSEN, C.I.C.M
SUBSCRIPTION RATES:
Life ..................... P50.00
Foreign .................. $ 3.00
One Year ........ ₱ 4.00
Printer: CATHOLIC SCHOOL PRESS


BAGUIO


Published with Ecclesiastical
Permission


32


REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
Department of Public Works and Communications
BUREAU OF POSTS
Manila
SWORN STATEMENT
(Required by Act No. 2580)
The undersigned Rev. Fr. James Leyssen, C.I.C.M.,
Business Manager of “The Apostle" of the Mountain Province,
published monthly in English at Baguio City, after having been
duly sworn in accordance with law, hereby submits the following
statement of ownership, management, circulation, etc., which is
required by Act 2580, as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 201:


NAME
Post Office Address
C.I.C.M. Fathers ............... . . . . . . . .. P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Editor
Miss Rosalia S. Galimba ................. P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Managing Editor
Rev. Fr. James Leyssen, C.I.C.M......... P.O. BOx 42, Baguio
Business Manager
Owner: Immaculate Heart of Mary
Mission Society
...... .. . . . . . . . . . . P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Publisher: Catholic School Press ........ P.O. BOx 42, Baguio
Printer: Catholic School Press .......... P.O. Box 42, Baguio
Office of Publication: Baguio ........... P.O. Box 42, Baguio
If publication is owned by a corporation, stockholders owning one per cent or more of the total amount of stocks: NONE
Bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders owning
one per cent or more of the total amount of security: NONE
In case of publication other than daily total number of
copies printed and circulated of the last issue dated Oct., 1966.


1. Sent to paid subscribers ...... . . . . . ....... 4,431
2. Sent to others than paid subscribers ........ 150
Total ........................... .. .. 4,581


(s) Rev. Fr. James Leyssen, C.I.C.M. Business Manager
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 26th day of Sept..
1966 at Baguio City, the affiant exhibiting his Residence Certificate No. A-2730432 issued at Baguio on February 5, 1965.
Page No. 12
Doc. No. 553
(s) Antonio Romero
Notary Public
BoOk No. VII Series of 1965
Until Dec. 31, 1967


man's
reach
should
exceed
his
grasp,
for
what's
a
heaven
for?


GRe APOSTLE